Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EE I T FROM M Y P ERSPECTIVE : H OW L ANGUAGE A F -
FECTS C ULTURAL B IAS IN I MAGE U NDERSTANDING

 Amith Ananthram⋄ , Elias Stengel-Eskin† , Mohit Bansal† , Kathleen McKeown⋄
 ⋄
  Columbia University † UNC Chapel Hill
 amith@cs.columbia.edu



                                           A BSTRACT
         Vision-language models (VLMs) can respond to queries about images in many
         languages. However, beyond language, culture affects how we see things. For
         example, individuals from Western cultures focus more on the central figure in
         an image while individuals from East Asian cultures attend more to scene context
         (Nisbett et al., 2001). In this work, we characterize the Western bias of VLMs in
         image understanding and investigate the role that language plays in this disparity.
         We evaluate VLMs across subjective and objective visual tasks with culturally di-
         verse images and annotations. We find that VLMs perform better on the Western
         split than on the East Asian split of each task. Through controlled experimenta-
         tion, we trace one source of this bias in image understanding to the lack of di-
         versity in language model construction. While inference in a language nearer to a
         culture can lead to reductions in bias, we show it is much more effective when that
         language was well-represented during text-only pre-training. Interestingly, this
         yields bias reductions even when prompting in English. Our work highlights the
         importance of richer representation of all languages in building equitable VLMs.
         We make both our code and our models available at https://github.com/
         amith-ananthram/see-it-from-my-perspective.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In Ways of Seeing, the art critic John Berger writes “The way we see things is affected by what we
know and what we believe.” This knowledge and these beliefs are informed by culture (Goldstein,
1957). Research from the cognitive sciences shows that culture mediates aspects of visual perception
like color grouping and attentional focus (Chiao & Harada, 2008). While many studies have found
that language models exhibit a Western worldview in knowledge (e.g. entities) and beliefs (e.g.
values) (Xu et al., 2024), how vision-language models (VLMs) see things remains understudied.
Whose perspective do state-of-the-art VLMs model? And how does language affect this perspective?
Recent progress in image-conditioned NLP has been driven by fusing pre-trained vision encoders
with large language models (LLMs) to build VLMs (Awais et al., 2023). By leveraging the knowl-
edge in their constituent LLMs, VLMs generalize to many image understanding tasks in a zero-shot
fashion (Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021). Moreover, because their LLMs are often multilingual (Blevins
& Zettlemoyer, 2022), some VLMs can respond fluently to queries about images in many languages.
However, while VLMs can generate text in different languages, they should also reflect different
cultures, accurately modeling their imagery and perspectives (see Figure 1). This is not guaranteed
through translation alone. Prior work has shown that vision encoders suffer degraded performance
on non-Western images in objective tasks like object identification (De Vries et al., 2019; Richards
et al., 2023; Nwatu et al., 2023) due to the distribution of images seen during multimodal fusion
(Shankar et al., 2017; Pouget et al., 2024). In contrast, our focus is the effect of language on bias
in both objective and subjective image understanding. In particular, how does using a culturally
closer language (during both text-only pre-training and prompting) affect this bias?
We begin by evaluating off-the-shelf VLMs in multiple languages on tasks with images and la-
bels from representative Western and East Asian cultures: object identification (Rojas et al., 2022),
question answering (Schwenk et al., 2022; Romero et al., 2024), and art emotion classification (Mo-
hamed et al., 2022). Then, to isolate the effect of language on bias in these tasks, we train our own


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Whose perspective do VLMs model? Despite being multilingual, state-of-the-art VLMs
exhibit a bias toward imagery and perspectives from Western culture. A more balanced language
mix during text-only pre-training produces VLMs that are both multilingual and multicultural.


VLMs in a controlled setting. This restricts us to languages with publicly available LLMs that are
comparable and strong enough to adapt to multimodal tasks: English and Chinese (Xu et al., 2024).
We find nearly all off-the-shelf VLMs exhibit a Western bias in every task, performing better on
examples from both the narrow set of English-speaking countries and a broader set spanning North
America / Western Europe (i.e. “the West”, Spielvogel et al. (2012)) than on examples from China
and its neighbors (i.e. East Asia, Choi (2010)). Moreover, this bias is not consistently reduced by
prompting in Chinese instead of English even though Chinese is culturally closer to East Asia.
To understand this, we train comparable LLaVa variants (Liu et al., 2024) by fusing CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) with the 7B-parameter instruction-tuned variants of Llama2 and Baichuan2, which were
pre-trained on 2 trillion (T) tokens of English and English/Chinese respectively (Touvron et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2023). We find that using a more representative language mix during LLM pre-
training reduces model bias in visual tasks in both the narrow set of Chinese-speaking countries
and the broader set of its East Asian neighbors, even when prompting in English. Moreover, while
prompting in Chinese leads to reductions in bias, these reductions are much larger when Chinese
is well represented during pre-training. These findings are more pronounced in subjective tasks
like art emotion classification, but surprisingly, they hold for objective tasks such as visual question
answering where we might otherwise expect the pre-training language mix to have no effect. Finally,
while we might hope to see similar reductions by simply using a smaller-scale multilingual fusion
corpus, we show this is no replacement for an LLM pre-trained on large quantities of Chinese text.
These results have important implications for the development of VLMs. Though we might hope that
models leverage culturally-relevant associations when prompted in a language closer to a target cul-
ture, they do so much more effectively when that language was common during LLM pre-training.
AI risks perpetuating hegemonies online, resulting in algorithmic monoculture (Bender et al., 2021).
In fact, Western bias in VLMs is being exacerbated as models scale (Richards et al., 2023). Truly
representative multimodal AI requires investment in multilingual foundation models.


  Note: To measure Western / East Asian bias, we evaluate VLMs on examples with images and
  annotations from as many Western / East Asian countries as exist in published benchmarks (see
  Table 1). This includes both English / Chinese-speaking countries and their geographical and
  cultural neighbors (Spielvogel et al. (2012), Choi (2010)). While our controlled study of how
  language affects this bias is limited to only English and Chinese due to a lack of comparable
  multilingual LLMs, our evaluation examples span this more representative set of countries.
  Thus, we refer to our objects of study as Western and East Asian bias as a convenient shorthand.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Our approach. Step 1: We measure the Western bias of off-the-shelf (OTSi ) VLMs on
culturally diverse image understanding tasks by comparing their performance on each task’s Western
and East Asian splits. Step 2: We train comparable multilingual VLMs (mLLaVA). We explore three
model design choices focused on language: (A) the language mix in the pre-training corpus of the
base LLM; (B) the prompting language; and (C) the language mix in the multimodal fusion corpus.
We test each mLLaVA variant, measuring the effects of (A), (B), and (C) on Western bias.

In summary, our contributions are:

      1. We show that VLMs exhibit a Western bias on both subjective and objective visual tasks.
      2. We trace this Western bias to the language mix seen by VLMs during text-only pre-training;
         a more balanced mix reduces VLM bias, even when prompting in English.
      3. While prompting in a culturally closer language can reduce Western bias in some VLMs, it
         is much more effective when that language is well represented during pre-training.
      4. Both a balanced pre-training language mix and prompting in a culturally related language
         yield significant reductions in bias for both objective and subjective visual tasks.
      5. A multilingual fusion corpus is not a substitute for pre-training with large amounts of mul-
         tilingual text; addressing VLM bias requires intervention early in model development.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Cognitive science has shown that individuals from Western and East Asian cultures exhibit regu-
lar differences in perception when categorizing colors, grouping objects and attending to images
(Bornstein, 1975; Goh et al., 2007; Nisbett et al., 2001).
In the language only setting, prior work has probed models for such cultural alignment, finding that
they exhibit a Western bias in the world knowledge (Naous et al., 2023) and values (AlKhamissi
et al., 2024) they encode. In the multimodal setting, the focus has been on characterizing Western
bias in object detection and scene understanding (De Vries et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021; Richards
et al., 2023; Nwatu et al., 2023), tracing it to the distribution of images used for multimodal fusion
(Shankar et al., 2017; Pouget et al., 2024). Proposed methods for reducing this bias rely on painstak-
ingly constructing static knowledge bases (Yin et al., 2023) from Wikipedia (which can reflect this
same Western lens, Naous et al. (2023)) or complicated prompting pipelines tightly coupled to a
single task (Song et al., 2024). Moreover, many methods assume that diverse concepts from dif-
ferent cultures are interchangeable (for example the Chinese erhu, a string instrument, and Western
drums), potentially stripping away culturally specific nuance (Zeng et al., 2023; Li & Zhang, 2023).
In contrast, we measure Western bias in both objective and subjective tasks where we want to pre-
serve cultural differences. Moreover, while prior work has emphasized the effect of the pre-training
image distribution on image understanding, we investigate the effects of the pre-training language
distribution. Language reflects the lived experience of the people who use it (Andreas, 2022). Ye
et al. (2023) find that human and machine captions exhibit language-specific regularities. We extend
their work to other image understanding tasks, focusing on cultural regularities and the language
modeling choices that produce them. As most text online is unimodal (Villalobos et al., 2022), this
understanding allows us to better leverage this valuable resource to build more representative VLMs.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     M ETHODS
We illustrate our approach in Figure 2. In step 1, Bias Characterization, we evaluate off-the-shelf
(OTS) VLMs on culturally diverse visual tasks. We measure Western bias by comparing their per-
formance on each task’s Western and East Asian splits. In step 2, Bias Sourcing, we train comparable
multilingual VLMs (mLLaVA), isolating the effects of language modeling choices on Western bias.

Tasks We select three tasks to evaluate Western bias in image understanding (Figure 3): the objec-
tive object identification and question answering and the subjective art emotion classification. Each
task exhibits image diversity (from diverse places) or label diversity (from diverse annotators).
For each task T , we use images and annotations from North America and Western Europe as our
Western split, Xwest , Ywest ; and we use images and annotations from East Asia as our East Asian
split, Xeast , Yeast . For each split, we include as many countries as are available across published
benchmarks. Moreover, we assume that both the place an image was taken and the language spoken
by an annotator are reasonable proxies for culture, a simplification made in other work as it is
otherwise difficult to stratify evaluation tasks by culture (Goldstein, 1957; Ye et al., 2023).
In the non-Western setting, we focus on the culture of East Asia for several reasons. First, due to its
inclusion of China, it is the highest resourced of all non-Western cultures. Thus, the bias we measure
here should be a floor for the bias relative to other cultures; as other cultures are less resourced, the
problem should be worse. Second, our goal is to identify the effect of language on any Western bias
we measure. This requires controlled experimentation with LLMs pre-trained on equivalently large
quantities of non-Western language. This restricts us to Chinese and East Asia (Xu et al., 2024).

Defining Bias Our focus is error disparity – given an evaluation metric M and a task T with two
disjoint sets XA , YA and XB , YB (where X are inputs, Y are their labels and A, B are values of
attribute R), a model fθ that is unbiased with respect to R should perform similarly on XA and XB
(Dwork et al., 2012; Shah et al., 2019; Czarnowska et al., 2021). That is, we expect:
                                M (fθ (XA ), YA ) = M (fθ (XB ), YB )                                (1)
Their ratio is the bias of fθ with respect to R. Here, R is culture, and our metric for Western bias is:
                                              M (fθ (XWest ), YWest )
                                biasfθ =                                                             (2)
                                           M (fθ (XEast Asia ), YEast Asia )
which measures how many times as good fθ is on the Western split of T as on its East Asian
split. For example, if fθ were unbiased at task T , its accuracy should be similar on both splits so
biasfθ = 1. However, if its accuracy were twice as high on T ’s Western split, biasfθ = 2.

3.1   S TEP 1: B IAS C HARACTERIZATION

We choose a representative set of n off-the-shelf VLMs, {OTSi : 1 ≤ i ≤ n} and evaluate each one
on our selected tasks. Then, we measure the Western bias of each OTSi (“Step 1” in Figure 2).
We evaluate each OTSi in a zero-shot setting as most datasets for these tasks skew Western (i.e.,
images from Western countries annotated by English speakers). Fine-tuning on such a dataset would
complicate our evaluation of the underlying VLM’s bias. Additionally, given the broader trend
toward large general purpose VLMs we believe that the zero-shot setting is also the most realistic.
We evaluate each OTSi twice, with English and Chinese prompts. This allows us to test whether
VLMs model the perspective of a culture more effectively when queried in a related language.

3.2   S TEP 2: B IAS S OURCING

While we can characterize Western bias in existing VLMs, this does not allow us to make causal
claims regarding its source. Each of the VLMs we evaluate differ from one another across many
different axes: parameters, pre-training corpora and task-specific fine-tuning.
Thus, to disentangle the effects of language modeling choices, we train our own comparable VLMs
(mLLaVA). We follow the training recipe of LLaVa: we fuse a pre-trained image encoder to a pre-
trained base LLM by training on a multimodal fusion corpus of paired images and text (Liu et al.,


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Examples from our culturally diverse image understanding tasks which range from the
objective to the subjective: object identification, question answering and art emotion classification.


2024). To allow direct comparison, we keep everything fixed and systematically explore three axes
of variation (the letters below correspond to mLLaVA elements in “Step 2” of Figure 2):

      A) the language composition during pre-training of the base LLM (for the same # of tokens)
      B) the prompting language during inference (for semantically equivalent prompts)
      C) and, the language composition (monolingual/bilingual) during multimodal fusion (for the
         same images and semantic content).

Measuring Reductions in Bias Models have different strengths – one might be better than another
at both the Western and East Asian split of a particular task. This task-specific strength stems from
the genres represented in their pre-training (Tiong et al., 2024) and is orthogonal to bias reduction.
Model A could be much better on the Western split of a task and only slightly better on the East
Asian split when compared to another model B. Even though A performs better than B on the East
Asian split due to its strength in that task, it is more biased than B. Therefore, when evaluating the
effects of modeling choices, we measure the resultant reduction in bias.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   TASKS

For each of our tasks, we select relevant portions of standard benchmarks to be our Western and
East Asian splits (Table 1). For object identification and question answering, each split is broken
into a narrow language-focused subset of only English and Chinese speaking countries (“en/zh”)
and an expansive regional subset (“region”) of every available country from North America/Western
Europe and East Asia. For examples, see Figure 3. Further details can be found in Section A.1.

Object Identification: Dollar Street To measure Western bias in object identification, we use
Dollar Street (Rojas et al., 2022). It contains images of 289 types of everyday objects manually
labeled and uploaded by individuals from around the world (exhibiting image diversity and label
diversity). As the labels include “toothbrush”, “toilet” and “tv”, we consider this task to be objective.
Chinese prompts and labels were hand-translated by native speakers. We evaluate VLMs in an open
generation setting. As some images have multiple labels, we judge generations permissively using
an LLM, granting credit for matching any correct label. Details can be found in Section A.1.1.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Our tasks: object identification (Obj. Id.), visual question answering (VQA) and art emotion
classification (Art). ID and LD specify image and label diversity (↓: low, ↑: high). “Prompts”, the
source of English and Chinese prompts (HW: hand-written, MT: machine translated). “Eval”, how
each task is evaluated (LM: LLM-as-a-Judge, MC: multiple choice). “Western” and “East Asian”,
the countries/languages in each task’s splits. For examples from each task, see Figure 3.

                          Prompts
              ID / LD                  Eval    Subset               Western               East Asian
                          en   zh
                                                en/zh          US, Canada, UK                 China
 Obj. Id.


                                                             + France, Spain, Italy,      + Mongolia,
                ↑   ↑    HW     HW      LM
                                               region        Switzerland, Denmark,     S. Korea, Vietnam,
                                                              Netherlands, Sweden      Cambodia, Thailand
                                                en/zh              A-OKVQA                    China
 Art VQA


                ↑   ↑    HW     MT      MC                      + Spain, France           + Mongolia,
                                               region
                                                                Ireland, Norway          S. Korea, Japan
                                               opp val         English speaking         Chinese speaking
                ↓   ↑    HW     HW      MC
                                                 all               annotators               annotators

Question Answering: AOKVQA & CVQA To measure Western bias in question answering,
we use A-OKVQA and CVQA (Schwenk et al., 2022; Romero et al., 2024). A-OKVQA contains
images from MSCOCO queried from websites like Flickr for Western concepts from ImageNet
(Lin et al., 2014). 80%+ of the images are from North America or Europe (Kirillov et al., 2023).
Questions and 4 candidate answers (1 correct, 3 distractors) were written by English speakers on
Mechanical Turk. CVQA is a complementary benchmark whose images and annotations are drawn
from around the world. Annotators from 28 countries identified culturally relevant images and then
annotated those images with questions and 4 candidate answers in both their native language and in
English. Thus, the images, questions and answers in these benchmarks exhibit image diversity and
label diversity. As these questions have globally correct answers, we consider VQA to be objective.
As our questions and answers are in English, to allow inference in Chinese, we translate questions
and candidate answers with the Google Translate API. A native Chinese speaker evaluated 50 of
these translations, assigning them an average score of 3.82 on a 4-point Likert scale, indicating high
quality. We evaluate VLMs in a multiple-choice setting, using another LLM to select the closest
candidate answer from each generation to calculate accuracy. Details can be found in Section A.1.2.

Emotions in Artwork: ArtELingo To measure Western bias in art emotion classification, we use
the ArtELingo corpus (Achlioptas et al., 2021; Mohamed et al., 2022). ArtELingo contains emotion
labels and textual rationales from English and Chinese speaking annotators for 80, 000 works from
WikiArt. It covers 9 emotions: 4 positive (amusement, awe, contentment, excitement), 4 negative
(anger, disgust, fear, sadness) and a catch-all, “something else”. Each work of art receives 5 an-
notations for each language. While this task is subjective, we consider only the works of art with
moderately high agreement in a language (≥ 3 annotators) to ensure cultural consensus. Addition-
ally, we ignore all cases where the majority label was “something else”. The artwork in ArtELingo
was mostly created by Western artists so it exhibits low image diversity but high label diversity.
Of particular interest is art assigned a positive emotion by English annotators and a negative emotion
by Chinese annotators (or vice versa). For this opposite valence subset, we know the disagreement
extends beyond imperfect translation of emotion labels. Annotators perceived the art differently.
We evaluate VLMs on this task in an open-generation setting and select the candidate emotion
closest to each generation using another LLM. Details can be found in Section A.1.3.

4.2          S TEP 1: B IAS C HARACTERIZATION

Off-the-Shelf Models: OTSi We select VLMs that differ along multiples axes (pre-training cor-
pus, parameter count, etc.): the English BLIP2 (Flan-T5-XXL) (Li et al., 2023), LLaVA-1.5 (Llama-
7B & Mistral-7B)1 (Liu et al., 2023); the bilingual English/Chinese Qwen-VL (7B & 7B-Chat) (Bai
et al., 2023); and the multilingual mBLIP (Bloomz-7B) (Geigle et al., 2023).
      1
            https://huggingface.co/SkunkworksAI/BakLLaVA-1


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evaluating Generations: M As we generate open-ended text from our off-the-shelf models OTSi
and our mLLaVA variants for Object Identification, we evaluate this particular task using an LLM-
as-a-Judge, specifically Prometheus-2-8x7B (Kim et al., 2024). Recent work has shown that
LLM judgments are highly correlated with human ratings, especially for the short texts compared in
image understanding tasks (Zheng et al., 2024; Ging et al., 2023). We use Prometheus-2 instead of
GPT-4 as it is significantly cheaper and perfectly reproducible (the weights are fixed and published).
We validate its effectiveness by comparing its judgments to those from native English and Chinese
speakers for a sample of our generations. We find that our judge LLM agrees with our human raters
between 88 − 89% of the time in English and Chinese with Cohen’s κ values between 0.65 − 0.66
indicating substantial agreement (Cohen, 1960). Additional details can be found in Section A.2.1.
For VQA and Art Emotion Classification, which are both multiple choice tasks, we use
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 to extract the candidate answer closest to the one described in
each generation rather than using an LLM-as-a-Judge (Jiang et al., 2023). This extracted answer is
used to calculate accuracy/F1. Additional details for these tasks are in Sections A.2.2 and A.2.3.

4.3       S TEP 2: B IAS S OURCING

Base LLMs To measure the effect of a base LLM’s pre-training language mix on bias in image un-
derstanding, we choose two LLMs with different mixes but that are otherwise comparable: Llama2
and Baichuan2 (Touvron et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). We use their 7B parameter, instruction-
tuned (“Chat”) variants, each pre-trained on 2T tokens. Their most significant difference is the
language mix during pre-training: Llama2 was trained on mostly English while Baichuan2 was
trained on a balanced mix of English and Chinese. Additional details can be found in A.3.1.

Fusion Corpus Construction For each of our base LLMs, we train English, Chinese and bilingual
(English/Chinese) variants, requiring 3 comparable multimodal fusion corpora. For English, we
use the fusion corpus constructed for the original LLaVA models: 595, 375 image-text pre-training
examples from CC3M and 157, 712 synthetic visual instructions for images from MS-COCO (Lin
et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2024). For Chinese, we use a publicly available machine translation2 of this
corpus which we ask a native speaker to evaluate. They assigned a random sample of 50 translations
an average score of 3.76 on a 4-point Likert scale, indicating high quality. For our bilingual corpus,
we randomly sample half of each monolingual corpus, ensuring no image overlap. This results in 3
fusion corpora with semantically equivalent captions in English or Chinese for the same images.

Training Details We train 6 mLLaVA variants (2 base LLMs × 3 fusion corpora) using the pub-
licly released LLaVA recipe (Liu et al., 2024). Additional details can be found in Section A.3.


5       R ESULTS

5.1       D O STATE - OF - THE - ART VLM S EXHIBIT A W ESTERN BIAS IN IMAGE UNDERSTANDING ?

In Figure 4, we plot the Western bias (Western performance divided by East Asian) of our off-the-
shelf VLMs when prompted in English ( ) and Chinese ( ) (full results are in the Appendix, Table
5). 90%+ of these VLMs exhibit a Western bias on each task – they lie in the gold region. This
holds for objective (object identification, VQA) and subjective tasks (art emotion classification).
Moreover, in only 15/30 model task evaluations, Western bias is reduced when prompting in
Chinese (the Chinese appears to the left of the English ). 3 models have reduced bias on Dollar
Street, 3 have reduced bias on VQA, and 2 have reduced bias on ArtELingo. While some VLMs
are less biased when prompted in Chinese, this is not consistently true for all.
Models like Qwen-VL that benefit from Chinese prompting in one task tend to see benefits in other
tasks as well. This suggests that leveraging Chinese for better East Asian image understanding is
a model-specific quality. It is also instructive to consider which models exhibit the least bias in
English (i.e., with leftmost ). mBLIP is one such example (Geigle et al., 2023). One defining
characteristic of this VLM is that its base LLM is the multilingual Bloomz (Muennighoff et al.,
    2
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/LinkSoul/Chinese-LLaVA-Vision-Instructions


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: The bias (Western performance divided by East Asian performance) of each of our OTSi
VLMs when prompted in English ( ) and Chinese ( ). Markers that fall in the gold / purple regions
indicate Western and East Asian biases respectively. While Western bias reductions are seen
across all tasks when prompting in Chinese, they are not seen consistently (in only 15/30 cases).


2022). It is possible it uses more diverse associations from its multilingual pre-training corpus
during multimodal inference, even in English. We investigate this further in the next section.

5.2     S TEP 2: B IAS S OURCING

First, we note that base LLMs endow their VLMs with strengths in different tasks. When a Llama2-
based model is better than the Baichuan2-based model in one split (West or East) for a particular task,
it is generally better at the other split too. For example, in English, the Llama2-based models are
better at object identification while Baichuan2-based models are better at art emotion classification.
However, our focus is bias as measured by the ratio between each model’s scores on a task’s Western
and East Asian splits (Equation 2). A model with a bias of 1 is unbiased while 2 means it performs
twice as well on the Western split. To study how bias changes with our three language modeling
choices, we measure the difference in bias between two comparable mLLaVA variants, calculating
significance using a two-factor design (Krzywinski, 2014). We plot these reductions along the x-axis
in Figures 5a, 5b and 5c. Absolute scores (with p values) are in the Appendix, Table 6.

5.2.1    H OW DOES THE LLM LANGUAGE MIX AFFECT BIAS IN IMAGE UNDERSTANDING ?
We find that pre-training the base LLM on a more balanced mix of languages (that is, more
Chinese as for Baichuan2) reduces Western bias in image understanding (Figure 5a).
We observe significant reductions in bias for both objective and subjective tasks when prompt-
ing in Chinese. For VQA, we see significant reductions in Western bias from 1.50 to 1.17 (West-
ern accuracy went from 1.50 times the East Asian accuracy to 1.17 times) on the fine-grained
English/Chinese-speaking country subset and reductions of 1.29 → 1.16 on the coarse-grained
regional subset. On the subjective ArtELingo, we see significant reductions in Western bias of
2.47 → 1.23 on the subset where English and Chinese speakers disagree on the valence of the
emotion (“opposite valence”) and 1.82 → 1.16 on the full benchmark (“indicated by all”).
We also see that more Chinese during text-only pre-training significantly reduces bias for subjec-
tive tasks even when prompting in English. On ArtELingo, we see reductions of 3.45 → 2.71 and
2.20 → 1.98 on the “opposite valence” and “all” subsets respectively.

5.2.2    H OW DOES THE PROMPTING LANGUAGE AFFECT BIAS IN IMAGE UNDERSTANDING ?
Prompting in a culturally closer language reduces Western bias on objective & subjective vi-
sual tasks, especially if the language was common during LLM pre-training (Figure 5b).
With the mostly English Llama2 as our base LLM, we see minimal reductions in Western bias on
VQA when prompting in Chinese. In contrast, using the bilingual Baichuan2 as our base LLM, we
see a significant reduction in bias for VQA of 1.45 → 1.17 on the “en/zh” subset and a reduction


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) indicates that the base LLM is the mostly English Llama2, the bilingual (English/Chinese) Baichuan2.
More Chinese during text-only pre-training reduces Western bias on objective and subjective tasks when
prompting in Chinese; it also reduces Western bias on subjective tasks when prompting in English.


(b) indicates prompting in English, in Chinese. While prompting in Chinese reduces Western bias, the
reductions are larger when Chinese was well-represented during text-only pre-training.


(c) indicates a monolingual fusion corpus, bilingual (English and Chinese). On subjective tasks, a bilin-
gual fusion corpus ties a prompt language to the visual perspective of its speakers, especially for English.

Figure 5: The change in bias (Western performance divided by East Asian performance) of each our
mLLaVA variants. Markers that fall in the gold region indicate a Western bias; in the purple region,
an East Asian bias. Unbroken lines indicate bias reductions that are significant at the α = 0.05 level.


of 1.27 → 1.16 on the “broader region” subset. On the subjective ArtELingo, our Llama2-based
VLM sees significant bias reductions of 3.45 → 2.47 and 2.20 → 1.82 on the “opposite valence”
and “all” subsets when prompting in Chinese. However, for our Baichuan2-based VLM, reductions
are even larger: 2.72 → 1.23 and 1.98 → 1.16 on “opposite valence” and “all” respectively.

5.2.3   H OW DOES THE FUSION LANGUAGE MIX AFFECT BIAS IN IMAGE UNDERSTANDING ?
Finally, our results show that training on a balanced language mix during multimodal fusion
yields no consistent change in Western bias in objective tasks. However, on subjective tasks, a
bilingual fusion corpus results in a stronger alignment between the prompting language and the
perspective of its speakers, especially for English and the Western perspective (Figure 5c).


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: We map hidden states from our mLLaVA VLMs for images in ArtELingo’s opp val subset
to their nearest tokens (Nostalgebraist, 2020). Despite generating fluent Chinese, our Llama2 VLM
hidden states map to English; in our Baichuan2 VLM, they map to both English and Chinese. More-
over, in both Baichuan2 VLMs, mapped tokens are more similar to ArtELingo’s Chinese rationales.


With Llama2, including Chinese during multimodal fusion increases Western bias on ArtELingo
(“all”) when prompting in English (from 2.19 → 2.65) but including English decreases bias on
the “opposite valence” and “all” subsets when prompting in Chinese (2.47 → 2.12, 1.82 → 1.40).
With the bilingual Baichuan2, including Chinese during multimodal fusion increases Western bias
on both subsets of ArtELingo when prompting in English (2.71 → 5.50, 1.98 → 3.40) but including
English leaves Western bias unchanged when prompting in Chinese.

5.2.4   W HY DO BAICHUAN 2 VARIANTS GENERATE MORE CULTURALLY ALIGNED C HINESE ?
The much larger reductions in bias we see from using Chinese to prompt Baichuan2 suggests that
while Llama2 generates fluent Chinese, it is not effectively modeling the visual perspective of a Chi-
nese language speaker. In Figure 6, we explore this mechanistically by decoding hidden states from
our Llama2 and Baichuan2 mLLaVA variants for images in ArtELingo’s opposite valence subset
using the logit lens (Nostalgebraist, 2020). For Llama2, hidden states only decode to English, even
when trained to generate Chinese, while for Baichuan2, they decode to both English and Chinese.
Moreover, the decoded hidden states from Baichuan2 are more similar to the rationales provided by
Chinese language annotators for their annotations than the decoded hidden states from their Llama2
counterparts; unlike Llama2, Baichuan2 actually leverages associations that are culturally Chinese.
Thus, our work provides corroborating evidence in image understanding (both intrinsic, via prob-
ing, and extrinsic, via task evaluation) for a prior study that showed that Llama2 “works” in English
(Wendler et al., 2024). Technical details of this probing are in Section A.4 of the Appendix.

6   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
Our work shows that VLMs exhibit a Western bias in image understanding that stems in part from
the language mix in their text-only pre-training. While we focus on Chinese because it is resourced
enough for controlled experimentation, this also lends greater weight to our results: it is a floor for
Western bias. We should expect the bias relative to other less-resourced cultures to be even greater.
Prior work has shown that LLMs encode cultural knowledge from their pre-training in their weights
(Kassner et al., 2021). We extend this analysis to VLMs. Including more Chinese in language pre-
training results in a VLM with reduced Western bias in image understanding. On objective tasks,
these VLMs leverage pre-training knowledge to make sense of diverse images. And on subjective
tasks, they are better models of non-Western perspectives, even when prompted in English.
Finally, while multilingual image-text retrieval (Ramos et al., 2024) and machine translation (Zhou
et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2022; Geigle et al., 2023) can both produce multilingual VLMs, our results
suggest limitations to these methods. LLMs trained on naturally occurring non-English language
learn cultural associations relevant to diverse image understanding. The short texts in multimodal
corpora likely contain little cultural knowledge. And if machine translation is employed, we should
expect even less. The Western bias of these models cannot be fixed in the final stages of VLM
development – its remediation requires consideration from the start (Santy et al., 2023).


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7    E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work relies on the simplifying assumption that both the country where an image was taken and
the language in which it was annotated are reliable indicators of a fixed, underlying culture. Though
this reduction is unfortunately necessary in AI research due to the lack of datasets with rich cultural
annotations, it runs the risk of reinforcing stereotypes by stripping away important nuance.
Moreover, while we draw images from a variety of representative countries when constructing our
Western and East Asian task subsets, our study of the role that language plays in VLM bias is limited
to English and Chinese. This is due to the unavailability of comparable LLMs for other East Asian
languages. While the assumption that English is closer to Western culture than Chinese (and that
Chinese is closer to East Asian culture than English) helps explain the bias reductions we see in
our results, we emphasize here that neither English nor Chinese perfectly reflects Western and East
Asian cultures in their entirety. Both languages are widely spoken in countries around the world and
both the West and East Asia are home to millions of people that speak neither.
While we are sensitive to these dimensions of our work, we still believe that studies like ours are an
important first step toward addressing cultural bias in AI by providing insights regarding its source.
It is our hope that future work will build on ours and bridge these remaining gaps.
Finally, all vision-language models have the potential for harmful use including but not limited to
surveillance. As our focus is on understanding the modeling decisions behind bias in existing VLMs,
we have no additional concerns regarding harmful use beyond those relevant to the broader field.

8    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To facilitate full reproducibility of our results, we have:

      1. included comprehensive technical details in the Appendix
      2. when relying on an LLM-as-a-Judge, chosen a model with publicly available, fixed weights
      3. published    both    our    code     and     models   at   https://github.com/
         amith-ananthram/see-it-from-my-perspective with thorough docu-
         mentation
      4. made our models available to the broader research community on HuggingFace

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is being developed in part with funding from the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) Cross-Cultural Understanding (CCU) program under Contract No
HR001122C0034 and the ECOLE program under Contract No HR00112390060, the National Sci-
ence Foundation and by DoD OUSD (R&E) under Cooperative Agreement PHY-2229929 (The NSF
AI Institute for Artificial and Natural Intelligence) and DRL-2112635 (the NSF AI Engage Institute),
the Columbia Center for Artificial Intelligence and Technology (CAIT) and ONR Grant N00014-
23-1-2356. The views, opinions and/or findings expressed are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the official views or policies of the Department of Defense, the National
Science Foundation or the U.S. Government.
Additionally, we’d like to thank Fei-Tzin Lee and our ICLR reviewers for their thoughtful feedback
on earlier versions of this work.

R EFERENCES
Panos Achlioptas, Maks Ovsjanikov, Kilichbek Haydarov, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Leonidas J
  Guibas. Artemis: Affective language for visual art. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11569–11579, 2021.
Badr AlKhamissi, Muhammad ElNokrashy, Mai AlKhamissi, and Mona Diab. Investigating cultural
  alignment of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13231, 2024.
Jacob Andreas. Language models as agent models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01681, 2022.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Muhammad Awais, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, Rao Muhammad Anwer, Hisham Cholakkal,
 Mubarak Shah, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Foundational models defining a
 new era in vision: A survey and outlook. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13721, 2023.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language model with versatile abilities.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
  dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
  conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 610–623, 2021.
Terra Blevins and Luke Zettlemoyer. Language contamination helps explain the cross-lingual capa-
  bilities of english pretrained models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08110, 2022.
Marc H Bornstein. The influence of visual perception on culture 1. American Anthropologist, 77
 (4):774–798, 1975.
Joan Chiao and T Harada. Cultural neuroscience of consciousness: From visual perception to self-
  awareness. Journal of Consciousness studies, 15(10-11):58–69, 2008.
JungBong Choi. Of the east asian cultural sphere: Theorizing cultural regionalization. China Re-
  view, pp. 109–136, 2010.
Jacob Cohen. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and psychological mea-
  surement, 20(1):37–46, 1960.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek,
  Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Un-
  supervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.
Paula Czarnowska, Yogarshi Vyas, and Kashif Shah. Quantifying social biases in nlp: A general-
  ization and empirical comparison of extrinsic fairness metrics. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 9:1249–1267, 2021.
Terrance De Vries, Ishan Misra, Changhan Wang, and Laurens Van der Maaten. Does object recog-
  nition work for everyone? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition workshops, pp. 52–59, 2019.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Gregor Geigle, Abhay Jain, Radu Timofte, and Goran Glavaš. mblip: Efficient bootstrapping of
  multilingual vision-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06930, 2023.
Simon Ging, Maria Alejandra Bravo, and Thomas Brox. Open-ended vqa benchmarking of vision-
  language models by exploiting classification datasets and their semantic hierarchy. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Joshua O Goh, Michael W Chee, Jiat Chow Tan, Vinod Venkatraman, Andrew Hebrank, Eric D
  Leshikar, Lucas Jenkins, Bradley P Sutton, Angela H Gutchess, and Denise C Park. Age and cul-
  ture modulate object processing and object—scene binding in the ventral visual area. Cognitive,
  Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(1):44–52, 2007.
Leon J Goldstein. On defining culture. American Anthropologist, 59(6):1075–1081, 1957.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nora Kassner, Philipp Dufter, and Hinrich Schütze. Multilingual lama: Investigating knowledge in
  multilingual pretrained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.00894, 2021.
Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Shayne Longpre, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jamin Shin, Sean Welleck, Graham
  Neubig, Moontae Lee, Kyungjae Lee, and Minjoon Seo. Prometheus 2: An open source language
  model specialized in evaluating other language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01535, 2024.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Martin Krzywinski. Two-factor designs: when multiple factors can affect a system, allowing for
 interaction can increase sensitivity. Nature Methods, 11(12):1187–1189, 2014.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023.
Zhi Li and Yin Zhang. Cultural concept adaptation on multimodal reasoning. In Proceedings of the
  2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 262–276, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Fangyu Liu, Emanuele Bugliarello, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Siva Reddy, Nigel Collier, and
  Desmond Elliott. Visually grounded reasoning across languages and cultures. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.13238, 2021.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03744, 2023.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.
Youssef Mohamed, Mohamed Abdelfattah, Shyma Alhuwaider, Feifan Li, Xiangliang Zhang, Ken-
  neth Church, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Artelingo: A million emotion annotations of wikiart with
  emphasis on diversity over language and culture. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8770–8785, 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Crosslingual gen-
  eralization through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
Tarek Naous, Michael J Ryan, Alan Ritter, and Wei Xu. Having beer after prayer? measuring
  cultural bias in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14456, 2023.
Richard E Nisbett, Kaiping Peng, Incheol Choi, and Ara Norenzayan. Culture and systems of
  thought: holistic versus analytic cognition. Psychological review, 108(2):291, 2001.
Nostalgebraist. Interpreting gpt: The logit lens.   LessWrong, 2020.
  URL           https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/nznrsryHc3kJ6vDxZ/
  interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Joan Nwatu, Oana Ignat, and Rada Mihalcea. Bridging the digital divide: Performance varia-
  tion across socio-economic factors in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05746,
  2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Angéline Pouget, Lucas Beyer, Emanuele Bugliarello, Xiao Wang, Andreas Peter Steiner, Xiaohua
  Zhai, and Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin. No filter: Cultural and socioeconomic diversityin contrastive
  vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13777, 2024.
Chen Qiu, Dan Oneata, Emanuele Bugliarello, Stella Frank, and Desmond Elliott. Multilingual
  multimodal learning with machine translated text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13134, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Rita Ramos, Emanuele Bugliarello, Bruno Martins, and Desmond Elliott. Paella: Parameter-efficient
  lightweight language-agnostic captioning model. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 3549–3564, 2024.
Megan Richards, Polina Kirichenko, Diane Bouchacourt, and Mark Ibrahim. Does progress
 on object recognition benchmarks improve real-world generalization?    arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.13136, 2023.
William A Gaviria Rojas, Sudnya Diamos, Keertan Ranjan Kini, David Kanter, Vijay Janapa Reddi,
 and Cody Coleman. The dollar street dataset: Images representing the geographic and socioe-
 conomic diversity of the world. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.
David Romero, Chenyang Lyu, Haryo Akbarianto Wibowo, Teresa Lynn, Injy Hamed, Aditya Nanda
  Kishore, Aishik Mandal, Alina Dragonetti, Artem Abzaliev, Atnafu Lambebo Tonja, et al.
  Cvqa: Culturally-diverse multilingual visual question answering benchmark. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.05967, 2024.
Sebastin Santy, Jenny T Liang, Ronan Le Bras, Katharina Reinecke, and Maarten Sap. Nlposition-
  ality: Characterizing design biases of datasets and models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01943,
  2023.
Dustin Schwenk, Apoorv Khandelwal, Christopher Clark, Kenneth Marino, and Roozbeh Mottaghi.
  A-okvqa: A benchmark for visual question answering using world knowledge. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 146–162. Springer, 2022.
Deven Shah, H Andrew Schwartz, and Dirk Hovy. Predictive biases in natural language processing
  models: A conceptual framework and overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11078, 2019.
Shreya Shankar, Yoni Halpern, Eric Breck, James Atwood, Jimbo Wilson, and D Sculley. No classi-
  fication without representation: Assessing geodiversity issues in open data sets for the developing
  world. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08536, 2017.
Yueqi Song, Simran Khanuja, and Graham Neubig. What is missing in multilingual visual reasoning
  and how to fix it. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01404, 2024.
Jackson J Spielvogel, James T Baker, and Joseph T Robertson. Western civilization. Wadsworth,
  Cengage Learning Boston, MA, 2012.
Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Boyang Li, Junnan Li, Steven CH Hoi, and Caiming Xiong.
  What are we measuring when we evaluate large vision-language models? an analysis of latent
  factors and biases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02415, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob L Menick, Serkan Cabi, SM Eslami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill. Mul-
 timodal few-shot learning with frozen language models. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, 34:200–212, 2021.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pablo Villalobos, Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius Hobbhahn, and Anson Ho.
  Will we run out of data? an analysis of the limits of scaling datasets in machine learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.04325, 2022.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. Do llamas work in en-
  glish? on the latent language of multilingual transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10588,
  2024.
Yuemei Xu, Ling Hu, Jiayi Zhao, Zihan Qiu, Yuqi Ye, and Hanwen Gu. A survey on multilingual
  large language models: Corpora, alignment, and bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00929, 2024.
Aiyuan Yang, Bin Xiao, Bingning Wang, Borong Zhang, Ce Bian, Chao Yin, Chenxu Lv, Da Pan,
  Dian Wang, Dong Yan, et al. Baichuan 2: Open large-scale language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.10305, 2023.
Andre Ye, Sebastin Santy, Jena D Hwang, Amy X Zhang, and Ranjay Krishna. Cultural and linguis-
  tic diversity improves visual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14356, 2023.
Da Yin, Feng Gao, Govind Thattai, Michael Johnston, and Kai-Wei Chang. Givl: Improving geo-
  graphical inclusivity of vision-language models with pre-training methods. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10951–10961, 2023.
Yan Zeng, Wangchunshu Zhou, Ao Luo, Ziming Cheng, and Xinsong Zhang. Cross-view language
  modeling: Towards unified cross-lingual cross-modal pre-training. In Proceedings of the 61st
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  5731–5746, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Mingyang Zhou, Luowei Zhou, Shuohang Wang, Yu Cheng, Linjie Li, Zhou Yu, and Jingjing Liu.
 Uc2: Universal cross-lingual cross-modal vision-and-language pre-training. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4155–4165, 2021.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     TASK D ETAILS

A.1.1    O BJECT I DENTIFICATION
      1. English: What object is in this image?
      2. Chinese: 这张图片中是什么物体？

These two prompts, in English and Chinese, were hand-written by NLP graduate students who
are native English and Chinese speakers. Additionally, Dollar Street’s class set of 289 labels was
manually translated into Chinese by a native Chinese NLP graduate student.

A.1.2    V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING
For visual question answering, questions and candidate answers from A-OKVQA and CVQA were
concatenated together and used as prompts, for example:

      1. English: What is the dog trying to catch? Choose exactly one from person, frisbee, kite,
         ball.
      2. Chinese: 狗想抓什么？从人、飞盘、风筝、球中选择一个。


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


English prompts were drawn directly from both corpora. Chinese prompts were produced from
the English prompts through the Google Translate API. We asked a native Chinese NLP graduate
student to rate whether or not each of random sample of 50 of these machine translations were
“a good translation of the English” on a 4-point Likert scale (with 1 indicating strongly disagree,
2 indicating disagree, 3 indicating agree and and 4 indicating strongly agree). They received an
average rating of 3.82 indicating high quality.


A.1.3    A RT E MOTION C LASSIFICATION

      1. English: What emotion does this work of art evoke?

      2. Chinese: 这件艺术作品唤起了什么样的情感?

These two prompts, in English and Chinese, were hand-written by NLP graduate students who are
native English and Chinese speakers.


A.2     TASK E VALUATION D ETAILS

A.2.1    O BJECT I DENTIFICATION

We judge our English and Chinese language generations for our Object Identification task against
their correct labels in a text-only setting using Prometheus-2-8x7B (Kim et al., 2024). We use
the following rubric in Prometheus to produce numerical scores for each generation.

instruction = Identify the object(s) in this image.

criterion = Does the model’s answer describe the same object (or
    kind of object) as the reference?

score1_description = The model’s answer describes an object that
    is completely unrelated to the reference answer.
score2_description = The model’s answer describes an object that
    is very different from the reference answer.
score3_description = The model’s answer describes an object
    similar to the reference answer.
score4_description = The model’s answer describes a specific
    instance of the reference answer.
score5_description = The model’s answer describes the same object
    as the reference answer

To improve the quality of these judgments, we apply self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022): each
model generation is judged 5 times (with a temperature of 1.0 and a nucleus sampling threshold of
0.9). We consider the mean score and assign a model credit if it is greater than or equal to 3.0.
We validate the effectiveness of Prometheus-2-8x7B as judge for object identification through
a comparative human evaluation. We ask two native English speakers and two native Chinese speak-
ers, all of whom are graduate students in NLP, to manually judge a random sample 100 English and
100 Chinese model generations respectively. Specifically, we ask them to assign a generation credit
if “the generation describes an object listed in the label”. They complete these annotations without
access to the source image and consider a concatenation of all correct labels for each image.
In the Table 2, we present human-human and human-machine agreement numbers in English and
Chinese across representative samples from our Western (the United States) and East Asian (China)
splits. For English generations, we find that Prometheus exceeds human-human agreement with a
mean agreement of 89% and a mean Cohen’s κ of 0.65 when compared to each human annotator
individually. We observe similar mean agreement / mean Cohen’s κ for Chinese generations though
in this case these values are lower than the human-human setting (95% and 0.85).


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Human-human and mean human-machine agreement (percent agreement and Cohen’s κ)
judging 200 open-ended generations on the Object Identification task where images are sampled
from the United States and China subsets of Dollar Street (Rojas et al., 2022).

           Prompt Language        Image Country           Human      Prometheus-2 8x7B
                                                         %    κ       %         κ
                 English                                0.83 0.51    0.89     0.65
                 English           United States        0.82 0.36    0.91     0.65
                 English              China             0.84 0.61    0.86     0.63
                 Chinese                                0.95 0.85    0.88     0.66
                 Chinese           United States        0.92 0.77    0.82     0.55
                 Chinese              China             0.98 0.94    0.92     0.80


A.2.2    V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING
We first translate all Chinese generations into English using the Google Translate API. Then, for
each question-generation pair, we use Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023) to
extract the nearest candidate answer using the following prompt:

"Question: [QUESTION], Answer: [GENERATION in ENGLISH]" Which of
the following answers is closest to the one in the previous text?
1) [CANDIDATE\_1 in ENGLISH] 2) [CANDIDATE\_2 in ENGLISH]
3) [CANDIDATE\_3 in ENGLISH] or 4) [CANDIDATE\_4 in ENGLISH].
Respond concisely with a single number.

If a model’s response contains multiple answers, we choose the first that occurs in the generation. If
it contains no answers, a candidate is chosen at random.

A.2.3    A RT E MOTION C LASSIFICATION
For each model generation in English and in Chinese, we use Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
(Jiang et al., 2023) to extract the most similar emotion using the following prompt:

"[GENERATION]" Which of the following emotions is closest to
the one described in the previous text: amusement, anger,
awe, contentment, disgust, excitement, fear, sadness. Answer
in a single word.

If a model’s response contains multiple answers, we choose the first that occurs in the generation. If
it contains no answers, a candidate is chosen at random.

A.2.4    M ODEL R EFUSALS
For our mLLaVA variants, we measured the fraction of generations that were refusals. To identify
such cases, we counted all generations that were 1) an empty string or 2) judged to be a refusal by
another LLM, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3, using the following prompt:

"[GENERATION]" Does the quoted text contain a refusal to answer?
Please respond in a single word, \"yes\" or \"no\".

We found that less than 0.1% of our generations met either of these refusal criteria.

A.3     M LL AVA T RAINING

A.3.1    L LAMA 2 VS BAICHUAN 2
In training our mLLAVA variants, we strove to select base LLMs that were as close to each other as
possible except along our axis of inquiry, the language mix of their pre-training corpora. This led


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


us to Llama2 and Baichuan2, 7 billion parameter LLMs pre-trained on around 2T tokens and then
subsequently alignment tuned. While their most significant difference is the language mix of their
pre-training corpora (90% English, 0.13% Chinese for Llama2 and bilingual English & Chinese for
Baichuan2), in Table 3, we compare their architectural features.

                     Table 3: Architectural features of Llama2 and Baichuan2.

                         Feature                      Llama2   Baichuan2
                         BPE?                         yes          yes
                         Split Digits?                yes          yes
                         Context Length                4K          4K
                         Vocabulary Size              32K        125K
                         Positional Embeddings       rotary      rotary
                         Activation                SwiGLU       SwiGLU
                         Layers                        32          32
                         Attention Heads               32          32
                         Precision                  float16     bfloat16


Architecturally, the two models are very close. Their most significant difference is the vocabulary
size of their tokenizers. These tokenizers were learned to accomodate each model’s pre-training
corpus (mostly English for Llama2 and bilingual English / Chinese for Baichuan2). While we know
that the size of these pre-training corpora were similar, neither technical report provides detail on
their composition beyond language mix. Moreover, both models were alignment tuned through su-
pervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). While the
SFT corpora for both models are similarly sized (between 50k and 100k), the Baichuan2 paper does
not provide details on their preference tuning beyond saying that their reward model “has a perfor-
mance consistent with that of Llama2” (Yang et al., 2023). Given what has been published about
both models (and other English and Chinese LLMs), we felt that Llama2 and Baichuan2 were the
most comparable open weight LLMs for investigating the role of language in image understanding.

A.3.2    C HINESE F USION C ORPUS
We use the pre-training and visual instruction tuning corpora from the original LLaVA pa-
per as our English multimodal fusion corpus. For Chinese, we use a publicly available ma-
chine translation of this corpus from: https://huggingface.co/datasets/LinkSoul/
Chinese-LLaVA-Vision-Instructions.
To validate the quality of this machine translation, we asked an NLP graduate student and native
Chinese speaker to rate whether or not each of random sample of 25 pre-training examples and 25
visual instruction tuning examples were “a good translation of the English” on a 4-point Likert scale
(with 1 indicating strongly disagree, 2 indicating disagree, 3 indicating agree and and 4 indicating
strongly agree). They received an average rating of 3.76 indicating high quality.

A.3.3    T RAINING D ETAILS
We use the LORA (Hu et al., 2021) training recipe published in the LLaVA repository to train each
mLLaVA variant in 2 phases: multimodal pre-training and visual instruction tuning. This allows us
to freeze our base LLMs, mitigating catastrophic forgetting of pre-trained knowledge (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017) and enabling training each variant on 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs in a single day.

A.4     M LL AVA P ROBING

A.4.1    T HE L OGIT L ENS
The logit lens is a tool from mechanistic interpretability used to probe LMs (Nostalgebraist, 2020).
It works by applying the LM’s “unembedding matrix” directly to hidden states from each layer of
the model, projecting each hidden state to a distribution over the model’s output vocabulary. By
decoding an LM’s hidden states in this manner, we get intrinsic insight into how a model converges


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to its final output distribution through iterative updates to token probabilities. Wendler et al. (2024)
make us of this technique in probing the internals of Llama2 when generating non-English text to
make the case that the model is “operating” in English. Here, we perform a similar analysis of our
Baichuan2 and Llama2-based VLMs to probe how each VLM handles the same input images.

A.4.2    P ROBING D ETAILS
To create Figure 6, for a particular mLLaVA variant, we embed every image in ArtELingo’s opposite
valence subset, extracting hidden states from each layer of its base LLM. Then, we decode these
hidden states using the logit lens (Nostalgebraist, 2020); we consider only the tokens with decoded
probability greater than 40%. This results in a set of subword tokens for each image & layer. We
map these tokens to the most frequent word on Wikipedia that contains that token3 , producing a list
of words (in English and Chinese) for each layer. For a given layer, we count the number of English
and Chinese words across all images to produce the “Lang Token Counts” in Figure 6.
Then, for each image, we use XLM-R (Conneau et al., 2019) to compute similarities between each
of its decoded words at a particular layer and its English and Chinese language annotation rationales
(included in ArtELingo). We take the mean of its similarities with English rationales and the mean
of its similarities with Chinese rationales to produce per-layer, per-language similarity scores for
each image. We average the per-language scores across all images for every layer, computing the
ratio between the two. This value is depicted by the “Rationale Similarity” coloring in Figure 6.
We include the raw English and Chinese token counts and rationale similarity ratios at each layer in
Table 4. A similarity greater than 1 indicates that the tokens at that layer were more similar to the
English rationales (and less than 1, more similar to the Chinese rationales).


  3
    Using    frequency   lists                 from         https://github.com/IlyaSemenov/
wikipedia-word-frequency


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Probing results. For each layer and model, “en” indicates the number of decoded English
tokens, “zh” indicates the number of decoded Chinese tokens and “sim” indicates the average token
similarity with English rationales divided by the average token similarity with Chinese rationales.

             llama2 (en)            llama2 (zh)         baichuan2 (en)          baichuan2 (zh)
 Layer
            en    zh sim          en     zh sim         en    zh sim          en       zh    sim
   1        72     0 2.45        52      0 1.34          0     0     −         0        0      −
   2        69     0 2.65        107      0 1.61         0     0     −         0        0      −
   3        74     0 2.87        59      0 1.54          0     0     −         0        0      −
   4        51     0 3.55        66      0 1.33          0     0     −         0        0      −
   5        83     0 1.87        59      0 1.27          0     0     −         0        0      −
   6       148     0 1.67        98      0 1.28          0     0     −         0        0      −
   7       162     0 1.23        157      0 1.39         0     0     −         0        0      −
   8       298     0 0.96        308      0 1.36         0     0     −         0        0      −
   9       364     0 1.11       2671      0 1.44         0     0     −         0        0      −
  10       542     0 1.21       3743      0 1.24         0     0     −         0        0      −
  11       704     0 1.15       4387      0 1.34         1     0 5.16          0        0      −
  12       982     0 1.27       3969      0 1.27         4     0 1.67          0        0      −
  13       1645    0 2.50       3906      0 1.22       15      0 2.58          0        0      −
  14       2352    0 1.16       3536      0 1.15         7     0 2.26          7        0    0.88
  15       2472    0 1.31       5721      0 1.50         6     0 1.09          3        0    0.89
  16       4613    0 1.72       6798      0 1.43       111     0 1.68        33        0     1.55
  17       7541    0 1.93       9277      0 1.78       136     0 1.67        68        0     1.89
  18      11298    0 1.58      11424 0 1.55            382     0 1.35        218        1    2.02
  19      19579    0 1.55      17552 0 1.46            590     0 1.42        361        2    1.61
  20      32499    0 1.51      25341 0 1.34           1641 21 1.10           983       14    1.40
  21      44263 11 1.49        27854 5 1.33           5782 120 1.23         4811      237 1.50
  22      64210    7 1.44      42098 0 1.37          13039 80 1.29          8514 1155 1.39
  23      73047 10 1.44        45719 1 1.32          19733 50 1.23         10185 1833 1.34
  24      76269    1 1.42      44809 0 1.30          26892 19 1.22         11361 4925 1.29
  25      79960    0 1.41      49209 0 1.35          37796 5 1.21          16173 6569 1.26
  26      75188    0 1.36      46590 0 1.32          46871 1 1.21          17342 10140 1.23
  27      76809    1 1.39      48820 3 1.36          44590 0 1.20          15195 8659 1.23
  28      73872    0 1.35      42260 4 1.27          47456 0 1.20          15377 9684 1.22
  29      77020    0 1.39      41425 3 1.28          39814 0 1.16          12220 7421 1.22
  30      77346    0 1.48      45040 3 1.46          34484 0 1.14           7454 4578 1.13
  31      84294    1 1.57      46830 0 1.51          28616 0 1.16           3838 2328 1.11
  32     100456 0 1.80         41390 1 1.62          32156 0 1.18           3378 2591 1.13
  33      74435    0 1.78      51387 135 1.76        70039 0 1.51          22363 12905 1.30


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: The scores, biases and bias reductions of our off-the-shelf (OTS) VLMs on the Western
(W ) and East Asian (E) splits of our selected Dollar Street (DS), VQA and ArtELingo (Art) subsets.
Note that as blip2-flan-t5-xxl does not generate fluent Chinese, we do not evaluate it in that setting.

                                               Prompt in en           Prompt in zh
                          Model                                                          Bias Reduction
                                            W      E       Bias    W      E       Bias
                      blip2-flan-t5-xxl    0.716 0.654 1.094        −     −        −          −
                        llava-1.5-7b       0.728 0.612 1.189      0.541 0.492 1.101         0.088
    DS: en/zh


                    llava-1.5-mistral-7b   0.824 0.729 1.130      0.007 0.006 1.156         −0.026
                      mblip-bloomz-7b      0.638 0.578 1.103      0.513 0.479 1.071         0.032
                         qwen-vl-7b        0.700 0.608 1.151      0.516 0.541 0.953         0.198
                      qwen-vl-chat-7b      0.700 0.624 1.122      0.616 0.533 1.155         −0.034
                      blip2-flan-t5-xxl    0.681 0.620 1.097        −     −        −          −
   DS: region


                        llava-1.5-7b       0.692 0.602 1.149      0.528 0.470 1.123         0.026
                    llava-1.5-mistral-7b   0.803 0.701 1.147      0.004 0.004 0.897         0.250
                      mblip-bloomz-7b      0.615 0.551 1.116      0.494 0.451 1.095         0.021
                         qwen-vl-7b        0.666 0.577 1.154      0.494 0.497 0.993         0.162
                      qwen-vl-chat-7b      0.656 0.591 1.111      0.605 0.499 1.214         −0.104
                      blip2-flan-t5-xxl    0.686 0.553 1.240        −     −        −          −
   VQA: en/zh


                        llava-1.5-7b       0.371 0.367 1.013      0.507 0.383 1.324         −0.311
                    llava-1.5-mistral-7b   0.491 0.463 1.060      0.521 0.392 1.329         −0.269
                      mblip-bloomz-7b      0.605 0.402 1.506      0.536 0.424 1.263         0.242
                         qwen-vl-7b        0.762 0.621 1.227      0.632 0.592 1.069         0.158
                      qwen-vl-chat-7b      0.774 0.611 1.267      0.631 0.566 1.116         0.151
                      blip2-flan-t5-xxl    0.580 0.488 1.187        −     −        −          −
   VQA: region


                        llava-1.5-7b       0.361 0.337 1.073      0.412 0.312 1.321         −0.248
                    llava-1.5-mistral-7b   0.448 0.410 1.092      0.436 0.356 1.226         −0.134
                      mblip-bloomz-7b      0.485 0.346 1.402      0.450 0.358 1.260         0.142
                         qwen-vl-7b        0.655 0.527 1.244      0.533 0.473 1.126         0.118
                      qwen-vl-chat-7b      0.648 0.521 1.245      0.514 0.444 1.158         0.087
                      blip2-flan-t5-xxl    0.220 0.111 1.983        −     −        −          −
   Art: opp. val.


                        llava-1.5-7b       0.182 0.145 1.252      0.081 0.064 1.270         −0.018
                    llava-1.5-mistral-7b   0.193 0.152 1.272      0.082 0.073 1.114         0.158
                      mblip-bloomz-7b      0.098 0.100 0.980      0.074 0.071 1.049         −0.068
                         qwen-vl-7b        0.179 0.160 1.118      0.089 0.079 1.131         −0.013
                      qwen-vl-chat-7b      0.217 0.152 1.426      0.083 0.084 0.998         0.428
                      blip2-flan-t5-xxl    0.268 0.261 1.027        −     −        −          −
                        llava-1.5-7b       0.269 0.262 1.025      0.036 0.033 1.087         −0.062
    Art: all


                    llava-1.5-mistral-7b   0.312 0.257 1.213      0.044 0.036 1.229         −0.016
                      mblip-bloomz-7b      0.160 0.166 0.962      0.059 0.035 1.696         −0.734
                         qwen-vl-7b        0.267 0.255 1.048      0.054 0.042 1.285         −0.236
                      qwen-vl-chat-7b      0.266 0.247 1.079      0.059 0.031 1.914         −0.835


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: The accuracy, Western bias and bias reductions of our mLLaVA variants. M indicates
the base LLM (L: the mostly English Llama2, B: the English/Chinese Baichuan2); its subscript
indicates the fusion corpus (m: monolingual, bi: bilingual). L, the prompting language. W and E,
the accuracy on the Western and East Asian splits. Bias, the Western bias (West / East Asian). ∆llm ,
∆lang and ∆f us indicate the change in Western bias when changing the base LLM to Baichuan2,
the prompting language to Chinese or the fusion corpus to bilingual. p lists p-values calculated using
a two-factor design (Krzywinski, 2014). Bolded entries are significant at the α = 0.05 level.

                                              M     L     W        E     Bias    ∆llm          p     ∆lang      p      ∆f us     p
                                                    en   0.812   0.721   1.126
 Dollar Street: region Dollar Street: en/zh


                                              Lm
                                                    zh   0.608   0.529   1.149                       −0.023   0.676
                                                    en   0.757   0.705   1.074   0.052       0.143
                                              Bm
                                                    zh   0.697   0.585   1.190   −0.041      0.274   −0.116   0.035
                                                    en   0.825   0.743   1.110                                        0.016    0.722
                                              Lbi
                                                    zh   0.594   0.538   1.103                                        0.046    0.433
                                                    en   0.739   0.657   1.125                                        −0.051   0.278
                                              Bbi
                                                    zh   0.652   0.590   1.106                                        0.085    0.094
                                                    en   0.782   0.702   1.114
                                              Lm
                                                    zh   0.597   0.523   1.142                       −0.028   0.740
                                                    en   0.743   0.688   1.080   0.034       0.147
                                              Bm
                                                    zh   0.654   0.564   1.159   −0.017      0.416   −0.079   0.059
                                                    en   0.802   0.715   1.121                                        −0.006   0.715
                                              Lbi
                                                    zh   0.595   0.527   1.130                                        0.012    0.751
                                                    en   0.728   0.640   1.138                                        −0.057   0.067
                                              Bbi
                                                    zh   0.646   0.555   1.163                                        −0.004   0.975
                                                    en   0.644   0.434   1.483
                                              Lm
                                                    zh   0.510   0.341   1.496                       −0.013   0.361
 VQA: en/zh


                                                    en   0.620   0.428   1.450   0.033       0.696
                                              Bm
                                                    zh   0.555   0.476   1.165   0.331       0.044   0.285    0.011
                                                    en   0.521   0.363   1.435                                        0.048    0.244
                                              Lbi
                                                    zh   0.485   0.305   1.587                                        −0.090   0.822
                                                    en   0.565   0.383   1.477                                        −0.027   0.822
                                              Bbi
                                                    zh   0.519   0.434   1.195                                        −0.030   0.894
                                                    en   0.515   0.407   1.266
                                              Lm
                                                    zh   0.412   0.320   1.288                       −0.022   0.518
 VQA: region


                                                    en   0.494   0.389   1.270   −0.005      0.908
                                              Bm
                                                    zh   0.448   0.387   1.159   0.129       0.218   0.112    0.082
                                                    en   0.440   0.350   1.256                                        0.010    0.461
                                              Lbi
                                                    zh   0.390   0.304   1.284                                        0.004    0.809
                                                    en   0.472   0.383   1.234                                        0.037    0.532
                                              Bbi
                                                    zh   0.432   0.379   1.139                                        0.012    0.727
                                                    en   0.249   0.072   3.448
 ArtELingo: opp. val.


                                              Lm
                                                    zh   0.207   0.084   2.472                       0.976    0.000
                                                    en   0.241   0.089   2.715   0.733       0.081
                                              Bm
                                                    zh   0.306   0.249   1.228   1.244       0.000   1.487    0.000
                                                    en   0.220   0.050   4.389                                        −0.941   0.625
                                              Lbi
                                                    zh   0.185   0.087   2.124                                         0.349   0.055
                                                    en   0.221   0.040   5.505                                        −2.790   0.032
                                              Bbi
                                                    zh   0.288   0.242   1.190                                         0.039   0.526
                                                    en   0.292   0.133   2.195
                                              Lm
                                                    zh   0.233   0.128   1.822                       0.373    0.000
 ArtELingo: all


                                                    en   0.291   0.147   1.981   0.213       0.000
                                              Bm
                                                    zh   0.367   0.318   1.156   0.666       0.000   0.825    0.000
                                                    en   0.245   0.092   2.647                                        −0.452   0.076
                                              Lbi
                                                    zh   0.240   0.171   1.401                                        0.421    0.000
                                                    en   0.219   0.065   3.393                                        −1.411   0.004
                                              Bbi
                                                    zh   0.267   0.227   1.178                                        −0.022   0.053



                                                                                        22
