Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B ETTER AUTOREGRESSIVE REGRESSION WITH LLM S
VIA REGRESSION - AWARE FINE - TUNING

 Michal Lukasik, Zhao Meng, Harikrishna Narasimhan, Yin-Wen Chang,
 Aditya Krishna Menon, Felix X. Yu, Sanjiv Kumar
 {mlukasik,mengzhao,hnarasimhan,yinwen,adityakmenon,felixyu,sanjivk}@google.com
 Google Research



                                           A BSTRACT

         Decoder-based large language models (LLMs) have proven highly versatile, with
         remarkable successes even on problems ostensibly removed from traditional lan-
         guage generation. One such example is solving regression problems, where the
         targets are real numbers rather than textual tokens. A common approach to use
         LLMs on such problems is to perform fine-tuning based on the cross-entropy loss,
         and use autoregressive sampling at inference time. Another approach relies on fine-
         tuning a separate predictive head with a suitable loss such as squared error. While
         each approach has had success, there has been limited study on principled ways of
         using decoder LLMs for regression. In this work, we compare different prior works
         under a unified view, and introduce regression-aware fine-tuning (RAFT), a novel
         approach based on the Bayes-optimal decision rule. We demonstrate how RAFT
         improves over established baselines on several benchmarks and model families.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Decoder-based large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI et al., 2023; Anil et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Gemini Team et al., 2024; Grattafiori et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2024) have set new benchmarks in challenging generative tasks (e.g., summarization, translation,
open-ended dialogue). Such models’ versatility has further prompted their exploration for classic
predictive tasks (e.g., classification, regression, ranking) (Liu & Low, 2023; Fernandes et al., 2023;
Qin et al., 2023; Vacareanu et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2023; Dukić & Snajder, 2024; Lukasik et al.,
2024; Vacareanu et al., 2024a), once the purview of encoder-only models such as BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019). Such exploration is expected to increase given the sustained efforts towards building
ever-larger decoder-based LLMs, with limited parallels in scaling encoder-based models.
Our interest is in the predictive task of natural language regression, where the goal is to predict
a real-valued target given a textual input. This covers important practical applications such as
semantic similarity prediction (Cer et al., 2017), automatic quality assessment of translation (Kocmi
& Federmann, 2023) or written text (Chiang & Lee, 2023), and sentiment analysis (Zhang et al.,
2024). At first glance, it is not apparent how to perform numeric prediction via a model operating
on textual tokens. Existing works have successfully followed two broad approaches. Autoregressive
regression approaches directly predict as text the numeric targets (e.g., predict 12.34 by iteratively
predicting tokens: ’1’, ’2’, ’.’, ’3’, ’4’) or corresponding discretized categories (e.g., predict one
of { "bad", "ok", "good" }) (Fernandes et al., 2023), via either standard autoregressive decoding (Liu
& Low, 2023; Yang et al., 2023) or suitable modifications (Gruver et al., 2023; Lukasik et al., 2024;
Requeima et al., 2024). Such approaches have been explored for both in-context learning, as well
as standard cross-entropy loss fine-tuning (c.f. Figure 1(a)). Predictive head approaches side-step
autoregressive decoding entirely, and instead learn a separate head on representations derived from
the inputs. Common representations include mean-pooled output embeddings (Zhuang et al., 2023),
and the final-position logit for a special token (e.g., <extra_id_0> in T5) (Fernandes et al., 2023).
Both autoregressive and predictive head approaches have proven successful for natural language
regression tasks. However, there has been (to our knowledge) no systematic comparison between
these methods; further, each of them has a conceptual shortcoming. The autoregressive regression
approach does not exploit the numerical nature of the regression targets, and thus does not consider


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                       P                               2                    P                            2
                                y∗ −    − log
                                       y∈Y            | x) | x) · y
                                                p(str(y)
                                           grid p(y
                                                    ∗                                y∗ −   y∈Ygrid p(str(y) | x) · y


                 ...          score             is                         ...   score              is
                       (a) Standard fine-tuning (§2.4)                           (b) RAFT (§4.1)

Figure 1: Illustrative example contrasting approaches to autoregressive regression fine-tuning for a
decoder-only Transformer. We consider an input string x ending with tokens { ‘score’, ‘is’ }, and
a numerical target y ∗ , which for simplicity we assume to comprise a single string token. With abuse
of notation, we use y ∗ as both its numerical value and the corresponding string token. (a) Standard
(CE) fine-tuning optimizes the likelihood − log p(y ∗ | x) of individual tokens in the numerical string
representation, essentially treating numeric generation as a classification task. In general, y ∗ can have
a multi-digit representation (i.e., y1∗ y2∗ · · · yk∗ ), in which case the CE loss is applied over each token.
(b) RAFT leverages the LLM’s predictive distribution over the next numerical token (from some grid
Ygrid ) to compute an expected numerical value, and minimizes the squared difference to the target.


the fact that for a target of 1, predicting 11 is worse than predicting 1.1. On the other hand, the
predictive head approach deviates from the pre-training objective typically used in decoder-based
LLMs, viz. next-token prediction (Radford et al., 2018), and thus may not use the model in an optimal
manner. This prompts us to ask: how can we respect both the LLM pre-training objective and the
numerical nature of targets for natural language regression tasks?
In this work, we introduce regression-aware fine-tuning (RAFT), a novel approach to autoregressive
regression which makes use of the numerical nature of the targets. We prove theoretical limitations
of established alternative approaches to autoregressive regression, and prove that RAFT mitigates
them. We systematically compare RAFT against autoregressive and predictive head baselines, and
consider several ablations for understanding the crucial design decisions for making a decoder-based
LLM work under different settings. See Table 1 for an overview of both the previous works and the
approach introduced in this work. Overall, our contributions are as follows:
  (i) We identify theoretical limitations of standard approaches to LLM-based regression (§3).
 (ii) We propose regression-aware fine-tuning (RAFT), a novel approach to autoregressive regression,
      and prove that it mitigates the theoretical limitations of prior works (§4.1). We further present a
      unified view of decoder-based LLM regression approaches, capturing both the autoregressive
      and the prediction head approaches (§4.2).
(iii) We systematically compare autoregressive regression, predictive head and RAFT approaches
      across multiple datasets and LLMs, and consistently find RAFT to be the most performant.
      We further attempt to pinpoint the sources of differences in the performance between different
      approaches, explicating the design choices behind the effectiveness of RAFT (§5).


2     BACKGROUND

We first introduce notation and review previous works on applying decoder-based LLMs to regression.

2.1   N OTATION AND PROBLEM SETTING

For a finite vocabulary V of tokens (e.g., words in English), let X ⊂ V∗ be a set of inputs comprising
strings of tokens, and Y ⊂ R be a set of real-valued targets. We restrict our consideration to targets
with finite (base-10) bit representations, thus excluding irrational numbers. We further assume that
each y ∈ Y has a unique string representation str(y) ∈ V∗ ; for example, the integer 1 has the
string encoding "1". Let P denote a ground-truth distribution over X × Y, with the decomposition


                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Approach                   Autoregressive    Fine-tuning     Inference                   References
 Zero-shot decoding         X                 None            Standard decoding           Kocmi & Federmann (2023)
 Fine-tuning and decoding   X                 Cross-entropy   Standard decoding           Fernandes et al. (2023)
 Zero-shot RAIL             X                 None            Regression-aware decoding   Lukasik et al. (2024)
 Fine-tuning and RAIL       X                 Cross-entropy   Regression-aware decoding   this work
 Predictive head            7                 Target metric   Point estimate              Fernandes et al. (2023)
 RAFT                       X                 Target metric   Regression-aware decoding   this work


Table 1: Summary of the approaches to applying decoder-based LLMs to natural language regression
tasks. Previous works rely either on using the model autoregressively (i.e., analogously to how it was
pre-trained) or as an encoder (i.e., an output is constructed based on embeddings or logits obtained for
the inputs). Different training and inference approaches have been considered for both approaches.


P(x, y) = P(x) · P(y | x). The natural language regression problem involves learning a predictor
ŷ : X → R that minimises the mean squared error over (input, target) pairs drawn from P:

                               L(ŷ) = E(x,y∗ )∼P (y ∗ − ŷ(x))2 .
The mean squared error is a canonical choice in regression problems (Fernandes et al., 2023). The
Bayes-optimal predictor minimizing the above is ŷ(x) = Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ]. Classical natural language
regression problems include sentiment analysis and semantic similarity prediction. More broadly,
many problems can be framed as natural language regression tasks, e.g., by crafting a suitable prompt
that summarizes a raw feature vector into a natural language description (Requeima et al., 2025).
We seek to employ large language models (LLMs) for such regression tasks. An LLM specifies
a distribution p over strings in V∗ . Given an input x ∈ X, let p(· | x) denote the corresponding
conditional distribution over possible continuations. Note that it may be possible for p(z | x) > 0
where z ∈ V∗ does not have a numerical representation; we discuss this issue more in Section 2.2.
LLMs are typically pre-trained on large corpora via self-supervised objectives (Radford et al., 2018),
and can perform few-shot or in-context learning given suitably crafted prompts (Brown et al., 2020).
For example, if the goal is to predict the probability that a user will enjoy a movie titled “Cure”, we
may construct an input x = “Hereditary: 0.7 | Ringu: 0.9 | Cure: ”, and probe the LLM’s
estimate of plausible continuations via p(· | x). We next discuss inference (or decoding) procedures
for deriving a predictor ŷ given a pre-trained LLM.

2.2    S TANDARD LLM INFERENCE FOR REGRESSION

Standard LLM inference involves predicting numerical targets in a generative manner, by performing
autoregressive decoding to draw a sample from the distribution p(· | x):
                                                              .
                                                  ŷAR (x) = float(z)
                                                                                                                     (1)
                                                         z ∼ p(· | x).
Here, z ∈ V∗ is generated autoregressively on a token-by-token basis. Further, float(z) denotes an
operator that converts a given string z (e.g., “12.34”) to a corresponding numeric value (e.g., 12.34);
if z does not have a numeric representation (e.g., “banana”), then we assume that a suitable default
value is returned. Unless otherwise stated, we assume float(z) = 0.0 for z 6∈ Y.
Different algorithms may be used for the autoregressive generation of z, e.g., greedy decoding and
temperature sampling (Naseh et al., 2023). Many such algorithms seek to approximate the mode:
                                             ŷmode (x) := arg max p(y | x).                                         (2)
                                                                  y∈Y

Note that one may also forcibly restrict the decoding output to comprise numerical targets, e.g., by
employing a form of constrained decoding (Geng et al., 2023). However, in practice, the targets from
high-quality LLMs tend to be numerical even under zero-shot settings (Lukasik et al., 2024).

2.3    RAIL: REGRESSION - AWARE LLM INFERENCE

Recently, Lukasik et al. (2024) pointed out a limitation of decoding the most likely target when
employing autoregressive models for regression. Decoding of the most likely targets can be shown


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to minimize the 0-1 loss `(y, ŷ) = 1(y 6= ŷ), which may not be well aligned with the square loss
of interest in regression. As a remedy, instead of autoregressive decoding per Equation 1, Lukasik
et al. (2024) proposed the regression-aware inference (RAIL) method, which given a loss ` and model
prediction p(· | x) estimates the Bayes-optimal minimizer of the expected loss: i.e.,
                           ŷRAIL (x) = arg min Ey∼p(·|x) [`(float(y), v)] ,                            (3)
                                            v∈R

where float(·) is as per the previous section. For the squared loss `(y, ŷ) = (y − ŷ)2 , the optimal
decision rule can be shown to take the following closed-form solution:
                                   ŷRAIL (x) = Ey∼p(·|x) [float(y)] .                                  (4)
Since p(· | x) is a distribution over all possible strings, it is typically intractable to compute the above
expectation exactly; this remains true even if we restrict attention to those strings corresponding to a
valid numerical value (of which there are infinitely many). In practice, Equation 4 can be estimated
either via sampling a finite number of y values, or via scoring of targets. In the latter, suppose we
have some restricted target grid Ygrid ⊂ Y. Then, the RAIL predictor is averaged over Ygrid , yielding:
                                                     X
                               ŷRAIL (x; Ygrid ) =         p(str(y) | x) · y.                           (5)
                                                   y∈Ygrid
           P
Note that y∈Ygrid p(str(y) | x) 6= 1 is possible, so the above is technically not an expectation;
however, in practice, high-quality LLMs tend to concentrate most mass on numerical targets.
There are several choices of Ygrid available to the practitioner. For discrete targets Y of moderate size,
one may simply choose Ygrid = Y. For bounded Y, one choice is equally spaced targets covering the
range of Y, e.g. integers or fixed-precision numbers (e.g. 2 decimal points) (Lukasik et al., 2024).

2.4   S TANDARD FINE - TUNING FOR REGRESSION

The above approaches operate on a pre-trained LLM via few-shot prompting. However, it has been
consistently observed that direct fine-tuning of LLMs on the task of interest can be beneficial (Liu
et al., 2022). Fine-tuning seeks to adapt an LLM to the target distribution P by minimizing
                                   L(p) = E(x,y∗ )∼P [`(y ∗ , p(· | x))]                                (6)
for a suitable loss function ` : Y × ∆V∗ → R, where ∆S denotes the set of distributions over a set S.
Given a sample S ∈ (X × Y)N of N (input, target) pairs drawn from P, the empirical loss is
                                           1 X
                                   L̂(p) =          `(y ∗ , p(· | x)).                           (7)
                                           N   ∗
                                               (x,y )∈S


A standard choice of ` is the log-loss (also referred to as cross-entropy):
                                 `(y ∗ , p(· | x)) = − log p(str(y ∗ ) | x),                            (8)
recalling that str(y ∗ ) denotes the string representation of a numeric target y ∗ ∈ R. More generally,
one may use categorical descriptions of the target after discretising to some finite grid Ygrid ⊂ Y;
e.g., { "very bad", "bad", "ok", "good", "very good" } (Fernandes et al., 2023).
A model obtained from standard fine-tuning can rely on either of the above decoding procedures
(standard decoding §2.2 or RAIL §2.3) at inference time.

2.5   P REDICTIVE HEAD APPROACHES TO REGRESSION

Predictive head approaches are an alternative to standard fine-tuning. Here, one constructs a predictor
ŷ(x) by utilizing activations or embeddings from a forward pass of the LLM. Abstractly, we first ex-
tract an input representation Φ(x) ∈ Rq , which is then fed into a regressor s : Rq → R. Canonically,
the regressor is a linear model, yielding ŷ(x) = b + w> Φ(x) for learnable w ∈ Rq , b ∈ R.
Various choices for Φ(x) have been considered in previous works. To describe these, we need some
                           .
additional notation. Let V = |V|. Given a string x ∈ V∗ of length L, a Transformer-based language


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model (Vaswani et al., 2017) first constructs an input embedding  in (x) = Ein  oh (x) ∈ RD×L , where
Ein ∈ RD×V is a matrix of D-dimensional token embeddings, and  oh (x) ∈ RV ×L is the one-hot
embedding of each token in x. Next, this input embedding is passed through a stack of attention
and MLP layers, to produce the output embedding  out (x) ∈ RD×L . One further projects this to the
                                                           >
vocabulary space to produce output logits fout (x) = Eout     out (x) ∈ RV ×L , where Eout ∈ RD×V .
Finally, one transforms these to a distribution pout (· | x) = softmax(fout (x)) ∈ [0, 1]V ×L over
possible tokens via the softmax operator. For certain models (e.g., Gemma), one ties Ein = Eout .
Given the above, one may extract an input representation through multiple means, most commonly
pooling or selection of the output token embeddings, output logits, or output probabilities. For
example, we may consider the final-token logit activation for a special token v∗ ∈ V (Fernandes et al.,
2023; Zhuang et al., 2023), or mean-pooling the output token embeddings (Zhuang et al., 2023).
Given a suitable predictor, one may directly optimize the mean squared error during fine-tuning. Note
here that no autoregressive decoding is conducted at inference.


3     L IMITATIONS OF STANDARD FINE - TUNING FOR REGRESSION

We analyze limitations of standard fine-tuning for autoregressive regression (proofs in Appendix A).

3.1   L IMITATIONS OF STANDARD FINE - TUNING AND STANDARD DECODING

A natural baseline is to employ cross-entropy based fine-tuning by minimizing Equation 7, and to
then apply standard decoding (see Equation 2). Since the log-loss is strictly proper, minimizing
Equation 7 recovers the Bayes distribution P(· | x) in the population limit (Gneiting & Raftery,
2007). In practice, however, the fine-tuned model distribution p(· | x) may deviate from P(· | x). The
following Lemma shows that even when the fine-tuned model distribution p(· | x) perfectly fits P, the
standard decoding predictor can incur a high squared error compared to the Bayes-optimal predictor.
                                                    .
Lemma 1. Assume |Y| ≥ 2 and 0 ∈ Y, withhN = max(Y). For any   ∈ [0, i0.5], there exist P, p such
                                                                         2      2
that: Ex DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤  , and Ex Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] − ŷmode (x)    ≥ N2 .

Thus, using cross-entropy fine-tuning with standard decoding is not well-aligned with the eventual
goal of approximating Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ]. Simply stated, although the distance between a predicted
probability distribution p, and the true distribution P may be small (or even 0), the squared error
between the mean of the distribution P and the mode of the distribution p can be disproportionately
large. This is because the mode of a distribution can be far from its mean, leading to a high error.

3.2   L IMITATIONS OF STANDARD FINE - TUNING AND RAIL DECODING

Given that the standard decoding can lead to arbitrary large errors due to the predictor being ill suited
for regression tasks, one may expect a better approach would be to employ cross-entropy based
fine-tuning by minimizing Equation 7, and to then apply the RAIL decoding (see Equation 5). This
approach indeed mitigates the issue of standard decoding being misaligned with the Bayes-optimal
predictor. However, we can show that when the fine-tuned model distribution p(· | x) deviates from
P by even a small error, the predictor can lead to a significant squared error.
                                                        .
Lemma 2. Assume |Y| ≥ 2 and 0 ∈ Y, with N h= max(Y). For any   ∈ [0, 0.5],      there exists P, p
                                                                            2 i       2
                                                           ∗
such that: Ex DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤  , and Ex Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ] − ŷRAIL (x)      ≥ N4  .

Thus again, using cross-entropy fine-tuning with RAIL might not align with the goal of approximating
Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ]. Intuitively, cross-entropy fine-tuning treats all “wrong” predictions the same, as it is
unaware of the difference in the magnitude of the numerical values represented by the tokens; e.g., if
100 and 1, 000 are two incorrect predictions each represented by single tokens, then placing a large
mass on the token representing 100 is penalized similarly to placing a large mass on the token 1, 000.
One solution to the above issue is to directly employ the RAIL predictor in the fine-tuning process.
This requires going beyond the log-loss in Equation 8, as we detail next.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     R EGRESSION - AWARE AUTOREGRESSIVE LLM TRAINING

To overcome the drawbacks of using RAIL with traditional fine-tuning, we propose a novel regression-
aware objective that directly minimizes the squared loss on the RAIL predictor.

4.1   R EGRESSION - AWARE LLM FINE - TUNING

As an alternative to the standard log-loss, we propose the following.
Definition 1. Define the regression-aware fine-tuning (RAFT) loss as follows:
                                                                           2
                       `RAFT (y ∗ , p(· | x)) = y ∗ − Ey∼p(·|x) [float(y)] .                          (9)

Equally, this uses the RAIL predictor ŷRAIL (x) to construct a numeric value from the LLM, and
measures the square loss against the target y ∗ . Given a finite grid Ygrid ⊂ Y and fine-tuning set S, the
empirical loss corresponding to Equation 9 is:
                                                                                     2
                                      1 X  ∗                X
                L̂RAFT (p; Ygrid ) =                 y −            p(str(y) | x) · y  .            (10)
                                     N       ∗
                                           (x,y )∈S         y∈Ygrid

Note that computing this loss only requires scoring each y ∈ Ygrid under the model; we do not need
to perform any explicit sampling or decoding during training.
Compared to standard fine-tuninghwith RAIL decoding, we attempt   to avoid the issue in Lemma 2 by
                                              ∗
                                                              2 i
seeking to directly minimize Ex Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ] − ŷRAIL (x) . Surprisingly, despite computing
ŷRAIL (x) over the restricted target space Ygrid , under mild conditions the minimizer of Equation 9
exactly mimics the Bayes-optimal predictor over the full space Y.
Lemma 3. Suppose Y ⊂ R, and arg miny∈Y ∈ Ygrid and arg maxy∈Y ∈ Ygrid . Let p∗ (· | x) be the
                    P loss from Definition 1 over all distributions p(· | x). Then the RAIL predictor
minimizer of the RAFT
ŷRAIL (x; Ygrid ) = y∈Ygrid p∗ (str(y) | x) · y constructed from p∗ (· | x) satisfies:

                                  ŷRAIL (x; Ygrid ) = Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ].

The intuition behind this result is that any numerical target in Y can be expressed by a convex
combination of the smallest and largest numbers in Y, and can thus be realized by the RAIL predictor.
In Appendix C we contrast RAFT loss against a variant optimizing regression metrics via sampled
model predictions, following the Minimum Bayes Risk prediction literature (Kaiser et al., 2000;
Shannon, 2017; Prabhavalkar et al., 2018).

4.2   C ONTRASTING AND UNIFYING RAFT AND PREDICTIVE HEAD APPROACHES

Our discussion of RAFT highlighted its close relation to autoregressive RAIL decoding, which
appears rather different to predictive head approaches. However, in the case of a single-digit grid
Ygrid (wherein each element corresponds to a single token in V), the predictor function for RAFT
bears similarities to the predictive head approaches. Note that if y ∈ Ygrid corresponds to a single
token, by definition p(str(y) | x) = pout (· | x)str(y),L . Then, the RAIL predictor becomes
                                   X                           X
            ŷRAIL (x; Ygrid ) =        y · p(str(y) | x) =          y · pout (· | x)str(y),L .
                                 y∈Ygrid                        y∈Ygrid

We may now contrast RAFT against various predictors considered in prior work (see Table 2 for a
summary). In particular, it is instructive to compare this with the final-token logit activation method
from Table 2. Both take the following form for an activation Ψ and weight vector w ∈ RV :
                                    ŷ(x) = b + w> Ψ (fout (x):,L ) .

Contrasting the RAFT and the final-token logit method, we observe the following differences:


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Category          Approach                                                              Predictor function ŷ(x)         Fine-tuning loss
                  Standard decoding zero-shot (Kocmi & Federmann, 2023)                 arg maxy∈Y p(y | x)              N/A
Autoregressive                                                                          P         0     0
(prior works)     RAIL zero-shot (Lukasik et al., 2024)                                   y 0 ∈Y y · p(y |x)             N/A
                  Standard fine-tuning and standard decoding (Fernandes et al., 2023)   arg maxy∈Y p(y | x)              − log p(y ∗ | x)
Autoregressive                                                                          P            0
                  RAIL standard fine-tuning                                               y 0 ∈Y y       · p(y 0 |x)     − log p(y ∗ | x)
(this work)
                                                                                        P                                              2
RAFT              General RAFT                                                            0   y 0 · p(y 0 |x)            (ŷ(x) − y ∗ )
(this work)                                                                             Py ∈Y        0                                  2
                  Single-digit RAFT                                                      y ∈Ydigit y · pout (x)y 0 ,L
                                                                                          0                              (ŷ(x) − y ∗ )
                                                                                                                                       2
Predictive head   Final-token logit (Fernandes et al., 2023)                            b + fout (x)v∗ ,L                (ŷ(x) − y ∗ )
(prior works)                                                                                                                          2
                  Pooled output embeddings (Zhuang et al., 2023)                        b + w> pool( out (x))            (ŷ(x) − y ∗ )
                                                                                                      >                                2
                  MLP on the final-token logits                                         b + MLP(Eout      out (x):,L )   (ŷ(x) − y ∗ )
Predictive head                                                                                                                        2
(this work)       Probability-vector projection                                         b + w> pout (x):,L               (ŷ(x) − y ∗ )
                                                                                        P                                           ∗ 2
                  Learnable regression-aware training                                      y 0 ∈Y wy · pout (x)y ,L      (ŷ(x) − y )
                                                                                                    0           0


Table 2: Approaches for applying decoder-based LLMs to regression. Here, p(· | x) denotes a
distribution over possible outputs given an input string x, and ŷ(x) ∈ R a predictor given by a
predictive head approach. b and w are learnable parameters, v ∗ ∈ V is a fixed token, pool is a pooling
operator, L is the length of input x, and Ydigits denotes all digits covering the range of targets (unless
otherwise stated, ’1’-’5’). The first 4 rows show the autoregressive baselines: standard decoding
(Section 2.2), RAIL zero-shot (Section 2.3), standard fine-tuning and decoding (Section 2.4), RAIL
with standard fine-tuning (Section 3.2). The next 2 rows show RAFT: the general autoregressive
form (Y = Ygrid for general output spaces), and the single digit version (e.g. Y = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}). The
following 2 rows present the prior works from Fernandes et al. (2023); Zhuang et al. (2023). The last
3 rows present new predictive head approaches that attempt to mimic the behavior of RAFT.


 • Activation: for single-digit RAFT, Ψ is the softmax activation that converts fout (x) to the proba-
   bility vector pout (· | x). For the final-token logit, Ψ is the identity activation.
 • Weight vector: for the final-token logit, w is a one-hot vector with 1 corresponding to the special
   token position. For single-digit RAFT, wv = float(v) for each v ∈ V; note that, as a result,
   positions corresponding to non-digits have weight 0.
 • Initialization: another important factor is that the RAFT predictor at initialization exactly co-
   incides with RAIL decoding, and thus, forms a strong predictor for zero-shot inference with
   LLMs (Lukasik et al., 2024). By contrast, most predictive head approaches will incur a high error
   at initialization due to deviating from the next token prediction task. Therefore, RAFT can be
   seen as a predictive head approach with strong performance at initialization, potentially making
   optimization easier; indeed, we empirically observe RAFT to converge faster compared to the
   baselines (see Figure 4 and Figure 5 in Appendix E.7).
In light of the close similarities between RAFT and the final-token logit approach, it is prudent to
carefully analyze these differences and identify whether any of these choices play an important role
in RAFT’s performance. Therefore, we introduce the following new predictive head variants:
 • MLP on final-token logits: this is a variant of the final-token logit method, wherein a 2-layer MLP
   with a non-linear activation (sigmoid) is employed on the entire final-token logit vector, rather
   than selecting the logit for a single special token:
                                                ŷ(x) = b + MLP(fout (x):,L ).                                                         (11)
 • Learnable-RAFT: this is a variant of RAFT, wherein the weights over the output model probabili-
   ties are learned, rather than being fixed to the vector wv = float(v):
                                                         X
                                              ŷ(x) =            wy0 · pout (x)str(y0 ),L                                              (12)
                                                        y 0 ∈Y

The learnable-RAFT variant adds more flexibility to the predictor function ŷ over the vanilla RAFT
method. However, as with other predictive head methods, it deviates from the next-token prediction
pre-training task. Which of these two factors — predictor flexibility, and alignment to the pre-training
task — is the most important? To answer this question, we compare learnable-RAFT against RAFT,
and also experiment with fine-tuning from a randomly initialized (as opposed to a pre-trained) model.


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dataset         Model size       Zero-shot       Zero-shot   Standard fine-tuning   Standard fine-tuning   Predictive head     RAFT
                             standard decoding    RAIL        standard decoding           RAIL
Wireless        2B                 0.88            0.88          0.70 ± 0.01            0.67 ± 0.01          0.51 ± 0.01     0.47 ± 0.01
(Amazon)        9B                 0.89            0.88          0.78 ± 0.05            0.86 ± 0.03          0.46 ± 0.00     0.45 ± 0.00
Personal care   2B                 1.00            0.97          0.77 ± 0.01            0.74 ± 0.01          0.52 ± 0.02     0.49 ± 0.00
(Amazon)        9B                 0.97            0.95          0.73 ± 0.14            0.59 ± 0.01          0.48 ± 0.01     0.47 ± 0.01
Music           2B                 1.30            1.29          1.16 ± 0.11            0.88 ± 0.12          0.52 ± 0.00     0.50 ± 0.00
(Amazon)        9B                 1.29            1.29          0.83 ± 0.35            0.61 ± 0.02          0.50 ± 0.00     0.47 ± 0.00
STSB            2B                 1.10            1.05          0.59 ± 0.01            0.57 ± 0.00          0.54 ± 0.00     0.54 ± 0.01
                9B                 1.37            1.29          0.58 ± 0.00            0.53 ± 0.00          0.52 ± 0.00     0.51 ± 0.01



Table 3: RMSE across datasets, methods, and Gemma-2 models of varying sizes. Fine-tuning
methods report mean ± std dev from model retraining. See Table 10 (Appendix) for Gemma-2 27B.



5      E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We now present experiments and ablations comparing the autoregressive regression, predictive head
and RAFT approaches on natural language regression datasets. We make the following main empirical
findings: (i) RAFT outperforms all autoregressive regression and predictive head baselines across
datasets and models; (ii) ablations indicate the importance of aligning fine-tuning to the pre-training
loss; (iii) RAFT tends to work well when the grid Ygrid corresponds to digit tokens.


5.1       E XPERIMENT SETTINGS

Datasets. We use the following natural language regression datasets, with RMSE as the main metric:
 (i) US Amazon reviews, where we aim to predict the 5-star rating for a product review (Ni et al.,
     2019). We consider a few categories from the Amazon reviews datasets, each forming a separate
     dataset: Wireless, Music, Personal products. We use 1,500 examples for the test set (after
     Lukasik et al. (2024)), 1,500 for validation and 10,000 examples for training.
(ii) Semantic Textual Similarity Benchmark (STSB) (Cer et al., 2017), comprising of sentence pairs
     human-annotated with a similarity score from 0 to 5. To measure the impact of varying the
     dataset size, we also consider 1,000 examples for training (STSB 1K; see Table 8 in Appendix).
(iii) MovieLens-1M, where we construct a movie rating prediction task following Luo et al. (2024).
We summarize the dataset statistics and the prompts in Table 6 and Table 7 (Appendix).
Models. We experiment with Gemma-2 (Team et al., 2024) and PaLM-2 (Anil et al., 2023) instruction-
tuned model families of different sizes (see Appendix D for training details). Where standard
deviations are reported, fine-tuning is performed 3 times.
Methods. We compare the following methods: (1) autoregressive baselines (Section 2.2), RAIL zero-
shot (Section 2.3), RAIL with cross-entropy fine-tuning (Section 3.2); (2) predictive head approaches
from Fernandes et al. (2023); Zhuang et al. (2023); (3) the new RAFT method (Section 4.1); (4) new
predictive head approaches that attempt to mimic the behavior of RAFT (Section 4.2). In zero-shot
standard decoding, we use greedy decoding; in zero-shot RAIL, the predictor is obtained by sampling
32 targets with temperature T = 1 (Lukasik et al., 2024). We also run ablations with replacing causal
attention masking with bi-directional attention masking, following previous works on classification
with decoder-based LLMs (Dukić & Snajder, 2024; Qorib et al., 2024).
Implementation of the RAFT objective. An important practical consideration is the grid Ygrid .
Unless otherwise stated, we choose Ygrid = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 } as targets from all considered datasets
belong to [0, 5]. For Amazon reviews datasets, Ygrid = Y, while for STSB, Ygrid ⊂ Y (as the targets
take floating point values). Recall that RAFT can represent real valued targets even under such a
choice for Ygrid (see Lemma 3). Nonetheless, we analyze the impact of Ygrid on the results.


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             1.0                                                                                                             2.536
                                                    Standard fine-tuning                       Standard fine-tuning                          1.704
                                                    Predictive head                            Predictive head
                        0.95                        RAFT                               1.0     RAFT
                                                                                                                                     0.327
                                         0.91


                                                                               RMSE
      RMSE
                                                         0.89                          0.1

                                                                                             0.018
                                                                                                     0.013
                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                            0.005
             0.8                      Pre-trained                                                Pre-trained                      Random
                                      checkpoint                                                 checkpoint                      checkpoint

                               (a) MovieLens-1M.                                             (b) Synthetic data (“Original #1”).

Figure 2: Comparing standard fine-tuning, predictive head and RAFT approaches on MovieLens
(left) and the synthetic “Original #1” (right) datasets with Gemma-2 2B. RAFT outperforms the
baselines on MovieLens. RAFT also improves over the baselines on the synthetic dataset “Original #
1” when using a pre-trained — but not a randomly initialized — checkpoint. (Best viewed in color.)


                   Approach                                                                    Gemma-2 2B             Gemma-2 9B
                   Standard fine-tuning                                                        0.83                   0.82
                   Special-token logit (Fernandes et al., 2023)                                0.51                   0.46
                   Special-token logit + 2-layer MLP                                           0.48                   0.46
                   Pooled output embeddings (mean) (Zhuang et al., 2023)                       0.50                   0.47
                   Pooled output embeddings (min)                                              1.38                   1.18
                   Pooled output embeddings (max)                                              1.32                   1.13
                   RAFT                                                                        0.47                   0.45
                   Learnable-RAFT over all tokens                                              0.48                   0.45
                   Learnable-RAFT over digits ’1’-’5’                                          0.47                   0.45

Table 4: RMSE on Gemma-2 models on Amazon Wireless across predictive head and RAFT variants.
RAFT outperforms the different predictive head variants. Additionally, we find that RAFT with
learnable decision rule (learnable-RAFT) does not improve over RAFT with the fixed decision rule.


5.2          RAFT LEADS TO BETTER AUTOREGRESSIVE REGRESSION

We compare different autoregressive and prediction head approaches across across Gemma-2 models
of varying sizes in Table 3. We report additional results from PaLM-2 models on STSB in Table 11
(Appendix) to verify the findings across an additional model family. We make several observations.
First, we verify the value of both (1) use of an appropriate decoding strategy (greedy versus regression-
aware inference), and (2) fine-tuning over zero-shot inference. Indeed, we find that zero-shot greedy
decoding, RAIL (see Section 2.3), standard fine-tuning with greedy decoding (see Section 3.2) and
standard fine-tuning with RAIL inference (see Section 4.1) work increasingly better.
Second, we find that the predictive head approach outperforms the autoregressive baselines, including
those that perform standard fine-tuning. This corroborates Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, which pointed at
the limitations of standard fine-tuning due to it being misaligned with the squared error.
Finally, we find RAFT to outperform the predictive head and the autoregressive approaches across
almost all settings. RAFT outperforming the autoregressive approaches corroborates the posited
importance of aligning the fine-tuning loss in regression tasks to a regression loss. RAFT outper-
forming the predictive head approach corroborates the posited importance of not deviating from the
autoregressive setting, which aligns with the next-token prediction pre-training task.
To further evaluate RAFT, we next contrast the key approaches (RAFT, predictive head and standard
fine-tuning) on a large scale dataset for the movie recommendation problem (MovieLens-1M) with
Gemma-2 2B model. We again find RAFT to improve over the baselines (see Figure 2(a)).


                                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          1.85                                                                                   1.89
                 Standard fine-tuning                                                                   Standard fine-tuning
                 Predictive head                                                                        Predictive head
       1.5       RAFT                                                                          1.5      RAFT


       1.0                                         0.94
RMSE


                                                                                        RMSE
                                                                                               1.0                                        0.94
              0.83                                                                                   0.82
                     0.51 0.47                                              0.5 0.49                        0.46 0.45                                              0.46 0.44
       0.5                                                                                     0.5


                                        diverges


                                                                 diverges


                                                                                                                               diverges


                                                                                                                                                        diverges
       0.0     Pre-trained                   Random                Pre-trained                 0.0    Pre-trained                   Random                Pre-trained
               checkpoint                   checkpoint            bi-directional                      checkpoint                   checkpoint            bi-directional

                                 (a) Gemma-2 2B.                                                                        (b) Gemma-2 9B.

Figure 3: Comparing standard fine-tuning, predictive head and RAFT variants on Amazon Wireless.
We find that changing causal to bi-directional attention masking does not significantly affect the
results of the predictive head and RAFT, while expectedly making standard fine-tuning untrainable
(due to the model being able to attend to the predicted target). We also analyze the effect of random
initialization, and find all methods to perform worse. RAFT improves over predictive head when
initializing from a pretrained checkpoint, but not when initializing from a random checkpoint,
empirically corroborating the argument for better alignment of RAFT to the pre-training task.


5.3          A BLATING DESIGN CHOICES IN RAFT AND PREDICTIVE HEAD APPROACHES

Predictive head non-linear variant. We experiment with two variants of learnable-RAFT (see
Equation 12): one where the weight vector is learnt for all vocabulary entries, and the second, where
only entries corresponding to digits ’1’-’5’ are learnt, while other entries are fixed to 0. For both
variants we found it necessary to initialize from the solution corresponding to RAFT, as random
initialization did not lead to good training dynamics. Overall, as reported in Table 4, we find both
approaches to not improve over RAFT. We also consider adding a non-linear function over the
special-token logit in the form of a two-layer MLP (see Equation 11). This again does not lead
to improvements over RAFT. Both results demonstrate that it may be more important to align the
fine-tuning to the pre-training loss, as opposed to only try make the predictor more expressive.

Predictive head design choices. We experiment with additional predictive head variants, including
pooling over the full sequence of token embeddings from the LLM, instead of taking the final token
activation. As shown in Table 4, we find it to not lead to significantly better results than the special-
token logit method. Additionally, as seen on Figure 3, we find bi-directional masking of attention
does not significantly affect the results of the predictive head and RAFT, while expectedly making
standard fine-tuning untrainable (due to the model being able to attend to the predicted target during
training). Overall, none of the predictive head variants improves over the RAFT approaches, again
suggesting the importance of not deviating from the pre-training loss in fine-tuning.

Role of pre-training. To shed light on the importance of aligning the method with the pre-training
task, we experiment with fine-tuning from a randomly initialized checkpoint (see Figure 3). We
find that standard fine-tuning does not converge to a reasonable result, RAFT converges to a poor
predictor, and predictive head fares the best. We next run experiments on a synthetic regression
dataset from Vacareanu et al. (2024a) (the Original #1 dataset) and report results in Figure 2(b). We
corroborate the finding that RAFT improves over predictive head when initialized from a pre-trained
checkpoint, and not when the model weights are initialized randomly. This supports the hypothesis
that RAFT outperforms predictive head due to alignment with the pre-training task.

6            D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We introduced regression-aware fine-tuning (RAFT), a new method for fine-tuning decoder-based
LLMs to predict numeric targets. We demonstrated empirically that RAFT can consistently out-
perform existing methods that perform standard cross-entropy fine-tuning, as well as methods that
construct separate predictive heads. An interesting direction for study would be applications of such
techniques to problems like time-series forecasting, as well as problems of ordinal regression.


                                                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A.
  Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa
  Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad
  Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari,
  Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
  Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
  Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang
  Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni,
  Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John
  Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov,
  Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy,
  Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So,
  Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
  Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
  Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny
  Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
  R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Inigo Lopez-Gazpio, and Lucia Specia. SemEval-2017 task
 1: Semantic textual similarity multilingual and crosslingual focused evaluation. In Proceedings
  of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/s17-2001. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
  18653/v1/S17-2001.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human
  evaluations? In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the
  61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 15607–15631, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.870/.
DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bin Wang, Bingxuan Wang, Bo Liu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi
  Dengr, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li,
  Fangyun Lin, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Hanwei Xu, Hao
  Yang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian
  Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jin Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junxiao Song, Kai
  Dong, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Liyue
  Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming
  Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J.
  Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruizhe Pan, Runxin Xu, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan
  Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou,
  Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Size Zheng, T. Wang, Tian Pei, Tian Yuan, Tianyu Sun, W. L.
  Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wei An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li,
  Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang
  Chen, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingkai
  Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Xuan Lu, Xuecheng Su, Y. Wu, Y. K. Li, Y. X. Wei,
  Y. X. Zhu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Wang, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yiliang Xiong, Yilong Zhao, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao,
  Yixin Dong, Yixuan Tan, Yiyuan Liu, Yongji Wang, Yongqiang Guo, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang,
  Yuheng Zou, Yukun Zha, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui
  Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhewen Hao, Zhihong Shao,
  Zhiniu Wen, Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihan Wang, Zihui Gu, Zilin Li, and Ziwei
  Xie. Deepseek-v2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language model, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.04434.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019.
David Dukić and Jan Snajder. Looking right is sometimes right: Investigating the capabilities of
  decoder-only LLMs for sequence labeling. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar
  (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 14168–14181,
  Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.843.
Patrick Fernandes, Daniel Deutsch, Mara Finkelstein, Parker Riley, André Martins, Graham Neubig,
  Ankush Garg, Jonathan Clark, Markus Freitag, and Orhan Firat. The devil is in the errors: Leverag-
  ing large language models for fine-grained machine translation evaluation. In Philipp Koehn, Barry
  Haddow, Tom Kocmi, and Christof Monz (eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Machine
  Translation, pp. 1066–1083, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.wmt-1.100. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.wmt-1.100.
Gemini Team et al. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, 2024.
Saibo Geng, Martin Josifoski, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. Grammar-constrained decoding
  for structured NLP tasks without finetuning. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KkHY1WGDII.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and esti-
  mation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007. doi:
  10.1198/016214506000001437. URL https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
  Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
  Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev,
  Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru,
  Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak,
  Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu,
  Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle
  Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego
  Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova,
  Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel
  Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon,
  Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan
  Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet,
  Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde,
  Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie
  Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua
  Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak,
  Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley
  Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence
  Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas
  Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri,
  Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie
  Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes
  Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne,
  Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal
  Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie
  Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana
  Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie,
  Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon
  Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan,
  Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas
  Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami,
  Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti,
  Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier
  Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao
  Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song,
  Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe
  Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya
  Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei
  Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu,
  Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit
  Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury,
  Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer,
  Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu,
  Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido,
  Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu
  Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer,
  Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu,
  Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc
  Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers,
  Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank
  Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee,
  Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan,
  Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph,
  Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog,
  Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James
  Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny
  Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings,
  Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai
  Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik
  Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle
  Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng
  Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish
  Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim
  Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle
  Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang,
  Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam,
  Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier,
  Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia
  Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro
  Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani,
  Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy,
  Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin
  Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu,
  Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh
  Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay,
  Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang,
  Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie
  Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta,
  Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman,
  Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun
  Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria
  Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru,


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz,
  Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv
  Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait,
  Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The
  Llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Nate Gruver, Marc Finzi, Shikai Qiu, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Large language models are
  zero-shot time series forecasters, 2023.

Haoming Jiang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Tuo Zhao. Smart:
  Robust and efficient fine-tuning for pre-trained natural language models through principled regu-
  larized optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03437, 2019.

Janez Kaiser, Bogomir Horvat, and Zdravko Kacic. A novel loss function for the overall risk criterion
  based discriminative training of hmm models. In 6th International Conference on Spoken Language
  Processing (ICSLP 2000), pp. vol. 2, 887–890, 2000. doi: 10.21437/ICSLP.2000-412.

Tom Kocmi and Christian Federmann. Large language models are state-of-the-art evaluators of
  translation quality. In Mary Nurminen, Judith Brenner, Maarit Koponen, Sirkku Latomaa, Mikhail
  Mikhailov, Frederike Schierl, Tharindu Ranasinghe, Eva Vanmassenhove, Sergi Alvarez Vidal,
  Nora Aranberri, Mara Nunziatini, Carla Parra Escartín, Mikel Forcada, Maja Popovic, Carolina
  Scarton, and Helena Moniz (eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the European
  Association for Machine Translation, pp. 193–203, Tampere, Finland, June 2023. European
  Association for Machine Translation. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.eamt-1.19.

Zongxi Li, Xianming Li, Yuzhang Liu, Haoran Xie, Jing Li, Fu lee Wang, Qing Li, and Xiaoqin
  Zhong. Label supervised llama finetuning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01208.

Haokun Liu, Derek Tam, Mohammed Muqeeth, Jay Mohta, Tenghao Huang, Mohit Bansal, and
  Colin A Raffel. Few-shot parameter-efficient fine-tuning is better and cheaper than in-context
  learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 1950–1965. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  0cde695b83bd186c1fd456302888454c-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Tiedong Liu and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Goat: Fine-tuned LLaMA outperforms GPT-4 on arithmetic
  tasks, 2023.

Michal Lukasik, Harikrishna Narasimhan, Aditya Krishna Menon, Felix Yu, and Sanjiv Kumar.
 Regression aware inference with LLMs. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen
 (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pp. 13667–13678,
 Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
 v1/2024.findings-emnlp.799. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.799/.

Sichun Luo, Yuxuan Yao, Bowei He, Yinya Huang, Aojun Zhou, Xinyi Zhang, Yuanzhang Xiao,
  Mingjie Zhan, and Linqi Song. Integrating large language models into recommendation via mutual
  augmentation and adaptive aggregation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13870.

Ali Naseh, Kalpesh Krishna, Mohit Iyyer, and Amir Houmansadr. Stealing the decoding algorithms
  of language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
  Communications Security, CCS ’23, pp. 1835–1849, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association
  for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400700507. doi: 10.1145/3576915.3616652. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3576915.3616652.

Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. Justifying recommendations using distantly-labeled
   reviews and fine-grained aspects. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.),
   Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
   the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp.
   188–197, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
   10.18653/v1/D19-1018. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1018.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Made Nindyatama Nityasya, Haryo Wibowo, Alham Fikri Aji, Genta Winata, Radityo Eko Prasojo,
 Phil Blunsom, and Adhiguna Kuncoro. On “scientific debt” in NLP: A case for more rigour
 in language model pre-training research. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki
 Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8554–8572, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for
 Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.477. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/2023.acl-long.477.
OpenAI et al. GPT-4 technical report, 2023.
Rohit Prabhavalkar, Tara N. Sainath, Yonghui Wu, Patrick Nguyen, Zhifeng Chen, Chung-Cheng
  Chiu, and Anjuli Kannan. Minimum word error rate training for attention-based sequence-to-
  sequence models. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4839–4843, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8461809.
Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Honglei Zhuang, Junru Wu, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Jialu Liu,
  Donald Metzler, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. Large language models are effective text
  rankers with pairwise ranking prompting, 2023.
Muhammad Qorib, Geonsik Moon, and Hwee Tou Ng. Are decoder-only language models better
 than encoder-only language models in understanding word meaning? In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre
 Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 ACL 2024, pp. 16339–16347, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024. Association
 for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.967.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
James Requeima, John Bronskill, Dami Choi, Richard E. Turner, and David Duvenaud. Llm processes:
  Numerical predictive distributions conditioned on natural language. CoRR, abs/2405.12856, 2024.
  URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/corr2405.html#abs-2405-12856.
James Requeima, John Bronskill, Dami Choi, Richard Turner, and David K Duvenaud. Llm
  processes: Numerical predictive distributions conditioned on natural language. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:109609–109671, 2025.
Igal Sason. On reverse Pinsker inequalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.07118, 2015.
Matt Shannon. Optimizing expected word error rate via sampling for speech recognition, 2017. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02776.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya
  Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan
  Ferret, Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar,
  Charline Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin,
  Nikola Momchev, Matt Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur,
  Olivier Bachem, Alanna Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchison,
  Alvin Abdagic, Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge, Antonia
  Paterson, Ben Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar, Chris
  Perry, Chris Welty, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Weinberger,
  Dimple Vijaykumar, Dominika Rogozińska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang, Eric
  Noland, Erica Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin, Gary
 Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harleen Batra,
  Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha
  Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost
  van Amersfoort, Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed,
  Kartikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia,
  Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago,
  Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel
  Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow,
  Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moynihan,
  Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao, Nenshad


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil Botarda,
  Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko Georgiev, Phil Culliton, Pradeep
  Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni, Rishabh
  Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien M. R. Arnold,
  Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan Chan, Timothy
  Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi, Vihan Jain, Vikas
  Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei Wei, Wenming Ye, Woohyun
  Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei, Victor Cotruta, Phoebe
  Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin
  Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D. Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav Petrov, Oriol Vinyals,
  Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi, and Alek Andreev.
  Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2408.00118.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023.
Robert Vacareanu, Vlad Andrei Negru, Vasile Suciu, and Mihai Surdeanu. From words to numbers:
  Your large language model is secretly a capable regressor when given in-context examples. In
  First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  LzpaUxcNFK.
Robert Vacareanu, Vlad-Andrei Negru, Vasile Suciu, and Mihai Surdeanu. From words to numbers:
  Your large language model is secretly a capable regressor when given in-context examples. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.07544, 2024b.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of NeurIPS 2017, 2017.
Zhen Yang, Ming Ding, Qingsong Lv, Zhihuan Jiang, Zehai He, Yuyi Guo, Jinfeng Bai, and Jie Tang.
  Gpt can solve mathematical problems without a calculator, 2023.
Wenxuan Zhang, Yue Deng, Bing Liu, Sinno Pan, and Lidong Bing. Sentiment analysis in the era
 of large language models: A reality check. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard
 (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 3881–3906,
 Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
 2024.findings-naacl.246. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-naacl.246.
Honglei Zhuang, Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Ji Ma, Jing Lu, Jianmo Ni, Xuanhui Wang, and
  Michael Bendersky. Rankt5: Fine-tuning t5 for text ranking with ranking losses. In Proceedings
  of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
  Retrieval, SIGIR ’23, pp. 2308–2313, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 9781450394086. doi: 10.1145/3539618.3592047. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/3539618.3592047.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Proofs of theoretical results                                                              18
       A.1 Proof for Lemma 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
       A.2 Proof for Lemma 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
       A.3 Proof for Lemma 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18

     B Related works                                                                              20

     C Comparison to MBR-based fine-tuning                                                        21

     D Additional experimental details                                                            23

     E Additional experimental results                                                            24
       E.1 STSB-1K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
       E.2 Synthetic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
       E.3 Gemma-2 27B and PALM-2 models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24
       E.4 Comparison to encoder-based baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
       E.5 Choices for tokens in RAFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25
       E.6 Choices for loss, normalization and token initialization in RAFT . . . . . . . . .     26
       E.7 Convergence speed of RAFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29
       E.8 Distribution over tokens in the RAFT Predictor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS OF THEORETICAL RESULTS
A.1   P ROOF FOR L EMMA 1
                                                               .
Lemma (Restated). Assume |Y| ≥ 2 and 0 ∈ Y, with hN = max(Y). For any   ∈ [0, i0.5], there exist
                                                                                   2      2
P, p such that: Ex DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤  , and Ex Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] − ŷmode (x)    ≥ N2 .

                                                  .
Proof. Pick any α ∈ [0, 1]. Recall that N = max(Y). Consider a distribution P where, for any
example x ∈ X, P(0 | x) = 1+0.5α
                             2   , P(N | x) = 1−0.5α
                                                2    , and all other targets attain probability 0.
Next, consider the model distribution: p(0 | x) = 1−0.5α
                                                      2   , p(N | x) = 1+0.5α2    , and all other targets
                                                                                2        2           2
attain probability 0. Then, for any x ∈ X, we have: (ŷmode (x) − Ey∗ ∼P [y ∗ ]) = N2        1 + α2     ≥
 N 2

  2    and kP(·|x) − p(·|x)k1 = α. Using the reverse Pinsker’s inequality (Sason, 2015), we further
have
                                                      !
                                                    2
                                   kP(·|x) − p(·|x)k1                    2α2
 DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤ log 1 +                            = log 1 +                   ≤ log 1 + 4α2 ,
                                     miny∈Y p(y|x)                    1 − 0.5α
where we use the fact that α ≤ 1.
              √
Setting α = 21 e  − 1, for any   ∈ [0, log(5)], we have:
                                                 h                         i   N  2
                                                                       ∗ 2
          Ex DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤  ;         Ex (ŷmode (x) − Ey∗ ∼P [y ]) ≥        .
                                                                               2



A.2   P ROOF FOR L EMMA 2
                                                           .
Lemma (Restated). Assume |Y| ≥ 2 and 0 ∈ Y, with N
                                                 h = max(Y). For any   ∈ [0, 0.5],i there exists
                                                                                2         2
                                                                ∗
P, p such that: Ex DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤  , and Ex Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ] − ŷRAIL (x)    ≥ N4  .

                                              .
Proof. Pick any α ∈ (0, 1]. Recall that N = max(Y). Consider a distribution P such that, for any
example x ∈ X, P(0 | x) = 1+0.5α
                              2   , P(N | x) = 1−0.5α
                                                 2    , and all other targets attain probability 0.
Next, consider the model distribution: p(0 | x) = 1−0.5α2   , p(N | x) = 1+0.5α  2   , and all other
                                                                                   2          2
targets attain probability 0. Then, for any x ∈ X: Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] − ŷRAIL (x) = αN   2     and
kP(·|x) − p(·|x)k1 = α. Using the reverse Pinsker’s inequality (Sason, 2015), we further have
                                                     !
                                                   2
                                  kP(·|x) − p(·|x)k1                   2α2
 DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤ log 1 +                          = log 1 +                 ≤ log 1 + 4α2 ,
                                    miny∈Y p(y|x)                    1 − 0.5α
where we use the fact that α ≤ 1.
              √
Setting α = 21 e  − 1, for any   ∈ [0, log(5)], we have Ex DKL P(·|x), p(·|x) ≤  , and:
      h                                     2                   2                     2
                   ∗
                                   2 i     N                  N                      N
  Ex Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ] − ŷRAIL (x)     =         (e − 1) ≥          (1 +   − 1) =        ,
                                            4                  4                      4
where we use the fact that e  ≥ 1 +  .

A.3   P ROOF FOR L EMMA 3

Proof. For simplicity, we avoid explicitly stating conversions from float to string, and vice versa. For
any x, we wish to minimize:
                                                                   2 
                                             X                         
                            Ey∗ ∼P(·|x)           p(y|x) · y − y ∗   .
                                             y∈Ygrid


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equating the derivative w.r.t. p(y|x) to 0, we derive the first-order condition for optimality:

                                                                   
                                        X
                  2 · Ey∗ ∼P(·|x)                p(y 0 |x) · y 0 − y ∗  · y = 0, ∀y ∈ Ygrid .
                                      y 0 ∈Ygrid

So the optimal solution is achieved when:
                                 X
                                      p(y 0 |x) · y 0 = Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ].
                                  y 0 ∈Ygrid


From the conditions in the lemma, we have that the smallest and largest numbers in Y are present
in Ygrid . Since Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] can be expressed as a convex combination of the smallest and largest
numbers in Y, it can also be expressed as a convex combination of numbers  P in Ygrid . Hence, there
exists a probability distribution p∗ (y|x) such that ŷRAIL (x; Ygrid ) = y0 ∈Ygrid p∗ (y 0 | x) · y 0 =
Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ], thus satisfying the condition for optimality.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    R ELATED WORKS
Encoder-based models (e.g., BERT) relying on the masked language modeling pretraining tasks have
been primarily employed to discriminative tasks (including classification and regression) (Devlin
et al., 2019). Decoder-based large language models (LLMs) (e.g., GPT, LLaMa) on the other hand,
mostly relying on the next-token prediction pretraining task, showed state of the art results across
a range of generative tasks. (OpenAI et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Gemini
Team et al., 2024) While there is an on-going research regarding whether the encoder or decoder
architecture is better tailored to predictive tasks (Nityasya et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Dukić &
Snajder, 2024; Qorib et al., 2024), in this work we focus on the question of how do we best apply
decoder models to predictive tasks?
Generative models have been successfuly applied to numeric prediction, where a number is generated
autoregressively token-by-token. For example, Gruver et al. (2023); Requeima et al. (2024) considered
it in a zero-shot learning setup for time series prediction, Vacareanu et al. (2024a) experimented
with zero-shot regression problems, and Liu & Low (2023); Yang et al. (2023) considered the
autoregressive finetuning over numerical targets applied to arithmetic tasks. Multiple prior works
used predictive distribution from an LLM towards improving the prediction, including the median
rule (Gruver et al., 2023; Requeima et al., 2024) and more broadly, Bayes-optimal rule optimizing
a regression metric of choice (Lukasik et al., 2024). The importance of tokenizing the numerical
targets into individual digits has been raised by previous works (Liu & Low, 2023; Yang et al., 2023),
and importance of prompt selection was analyzed by Requeima et al. (2024).


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    C OMPARISON TO MBR- BASED FINE - TUNING
The RAFT loss may be contrast against ideas in the literature on Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR)
prediction literature (Kaiser et al., 2000; Shannon, 2017; Prabhavalkar et al., 2018), which optimize
non-regression metrics via approximation using sampled model predictions. For the squared loss,
this may be formulated as follows:
Definition 2. Define the sampled regression-aware loss as follows:
                                                         h                   i
                                                                           2
                        `MBR (y ∗ , p(· | x)) = Ey∼p(·|x) (y ∗ − float(y)) .                     (13)

Compared to the loss in Equation 9, the key difference is that the expectation over the model outputs
appears outside the square loss. A naïve empirical implementation of this objective requires explicitly
sample responses from the model p(· | x); this can be expensive and incur high variance. As with
ŷRAIL (x; Ygrid ), one may instead consider a practical variant that approximates the expectation using
a restricted grid of targets Ygrid ⊂ Y:
                                         1 X          X                              2
                     L̂MBR (p; Ygrid ) =                    p(str(y) | x) · (y ∗ − y)               (14)
                                         N     ∗
                                             (x,y )∈S y∈Ygrid

Even this variant has a notable disadvantage: the minimizer of Equation 14 is a one-hot distribution
that places all its probability mass on one of the targets in Ygrid ⊂ Y:
Lemma 4. Let y ∗ (x) = Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] denote the Bayes-optimal prediction for input x. We
assume P(· | x) is supported on numerical targets only. The minimizer of the approximate sampled
regression-aware loss in Equation 14 over all model distributions p(· | x) is of the form:
                                   (
                                     1 if y = arg miny0 ∈Ygrid ky 0 − y ∗ (x)k2
                        p(y | x) =                                              .
                                     0 else

Therefore, the quality of the minimizer p(· | x) entirely depends on how well Ygrid approximates the
original target space Y. For example, if Ygrid is a set of integers, the minimizer of Equation 14 will
also be limited to predicting integers, even when the original target space Y contains floating-point
numbers of arbitrary precision. As shown in Lemma 3, RAFT does not suffer from the loss of
precision resulting from the use an approximate target space, and also avoids the high variance
associated with sampling. In Table 5, we experimentally verify better performance of RAFT over the
MBR-based fine-tuning, and unless otherwise stated, we focus our attention to RAFT. Also, see §E.8
for an analysis of the RAFT predictor in terms of the learnt distributions over tokens.
We next prove Lemma 4.

Proof. Notice that:
                                                              "                      #
                                                                X
                                         ∗ 2                                     ∗ 2
             Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) Ey∼p(·|x) (y − y )     = Ey∗ ∼P(·|x)     p(y|x) · (y − y )
                                                                            y
                                                         X
                                                     =         p(y|x) · Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) (y − y ∗ )2 .
                                                           y


                                                value is achieved for p to be a one-hot vector with a 1
Since this is a convex combination,  the optimal
on the index arg miny Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) (y − y ∗ )2 . We thus want a y that minimizes:

                   Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) (y − y ∗ )2 = Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) y 2 + (y ∗ )2 − 2 · y · y ∗ .

Equivalently, we want a y that minimizes:
                                       y 2 − 2 · y · Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] .
or equivalently:
             y 2 − 2 · y · Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ] + (Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ])2 = (y − Ey∗ ∼P(·|x) [y ∗ ])2 .



                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Method/ablation                                   RMSE
                            Sampled regression aware (Definition (2))          0.98
                            Regression aware (Definition (1))                  0.40


Table 5: Root mean squared error (RMSE) on STSB across regression aware approaches and their
variants on Gemma-2 9B.


We next provide a general version of Lemma 4.
Lemma 5. The minimizer of the following objective:
                                     Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) Ey∼p(·|x) [`(y ∗ , y)] ,
for a loss function ` : Y × Y → R+ , is a one-hot distribution over targets such that all probability
mass is on a target ŷ ∈ Y which minimizes Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , ŷ)].

Proof. The proof is elementary. Expanding the above objective:
             Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) Ey∼p(·|x) [`(y ∗ , y)] = Ey∼p(·|x) Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , y)]
                                                    Z
                                                  =      Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , y)] · p(y|x) · dy
                                                     y∈Y
                                                    Z
                                                  ≥      Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , ŷ)] · p(y|x) · dy
                                                     y∈Y
                                                 = Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , ŷ)]
                                                   Z
                                                 =      Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , y)] · p(y|x) · dy,
                                                     y∈Y

where the third step follows from the fact that ŷ minimizes Ey∗ ∼p∗ (·|x) [`(y ∗ , ·)]; on the final step,
p(·|x) is a probability distribution that has a point mass on ŷ.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
We update all parameters during the fine-tuning. We summarize specific settings below. For Gemma-2,
we use the following settings:

        • We use dropout rate 0.1 and batch size 16.
        • We train for 200K steps and select the best step using the held out validation set (see Table
          7 for details on the train/test/validation splits).
        • We use a constant learning rate schedule. We select the learning rate value over the validation
          set from the values: 10−4 , 10−5 , 10−6 .
        • We use the Adafactor optimizer to save memory during the fine-tuning (we find Adam to
          not perform better). The parameters for Adafactor are:  1 = 10−30 ,  2 = 10−3 , decay rate
          = 0.8.

For PaLM-2, we use the above settings, except we use batch size 64 and no dropout, and train for 5K
steps and report the results from the last checkpoint.
For MovieLens, we use AdamW optimizer and sweep learning rates from the range {10−4 , 10−5 ,
10−6 }. We use a cosine decay schedule for the learning rate, with 10K steps of warmup from learning
rate 10−8 .
In Table 6, we report the prompts we used in our experiments, and in Table 7 we report the dataset
statistics.

 Dataset               Input prompt                                                                                                Target
                                                                                                                                   range
 STSB                  What is the sentence similarity between the following two sentences measured on a scale of 0 to 5:          [0, 5]
                       {Sentence #1}, {Sentence #2}. The similarity measured on a scale of 0 to 5 with 0 being unrelated
                       and 5 being related is equal to
 Amazon reviews        product_category: {product category} product_title: {product title} review_date: {review date} 1, 2, 3,
                       review_headline: {review headline} review_body: {review body} Question: In a star rating of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
                       4, 5, the higher the better, what would be the star rating of the above review? Please only give me the
                       final rating and I do not need any explanations.
 MovieLens-1M          Instruction: Predict the rating of a target movie based on the user’s historical movie ratings. Rating      1, 2, 3,
                       History: {Rating history} Candidate Item: {Candidate Item}. Output:                                         4, 5
 Synthetic (Original   The task is to provide your best estimate for ’output score’ based on ’input score’. Please provide that    [0, 9]
 #1 from (Vacareanu    and only that, without any additional text. Input score: {Input score}. Output score:
 et al., 2024a))


Table 6: Prompts used for different datasets and the corresponding target ranges. Curly braces denote
inputs specific to an input example. For Synthetic (Original #1 from (Vacareanu et al., 2024a)) we
normalize the targets to correspond to [0, 9].


     Dataset                                                                 Train size       Validation size          test size
     Wireless                                                                    10,000                    1,500         1,500
     Personal care                                                               10,000                    1,500         1,500
     Music                                                                       10,000                    1,500         1,500
     STSB                                                                         4,887                      863         1,500
     STSB 1k                                                                      1,000                      863         1,500
     MovieLens-1M                                                               797,758                   10,145        10,145
     Synthetic (Original #1 from (Vacareanu et al., 2024a))                      10,000                    1,000         1,000


                                      Table 7: Summary of dataset statistics.


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We provide additional experimental results corroborating the findings in the main paper.

E.1   STSB-1K

In Table 8, we report results from sub-sampling the training set for STSB down to 1K examples. We
find similar trends as observed in the case of other datasets in Table 3.

      Model size       Zero-shot              Standard fine-tuning   Predictive head        RAFT
                   standard decoding           standard decoding
      2B                      1.10                 0.61±0.01            0.58±0.01       0.58±0.00
      9B                      1.31                 0.57±0.01            0.57±0.01       0.56±0.01


Table 8: RMSE on STSB-1K across methods, and Gemma-2 models of varying sizes. Fine-tuning
methods report mean ± std dev from model retraining.


E.2   S YNTHETIC DATA

For a simple setting, we consider a synthetic regression dataset from Vacareanu et al. (2024a) referred
to as the Original #1 dataset by the authors. We report results in Table 9 and corroborate our
observation from the language regression task experiment that RAFT improves over the predictive
head approach when initialized from a pre-trained checkpoint, and not when the model weights are
initialized randomly. This provides additional support for our hypothesis that the alignment of RAFT
to the next-token prediction pre-training task is the underlying reason for its better performance over
the predictive head.

                initialiation    model size     autoregressive   predictive head    RAFT
                Pre-trained             2B          0.018            0.013          0.005
                checkpoint              9B          0.017            0.017          0.006
                                        2B          2.536            0.327          1.704
                Random
                                        9B          2.536            0.147          1.092


Table 9: The role of initialization to the pre-trained checkpoint on a synthetic regression dataset
from Vacareanu et al. (2024a) (the Original #1 dataset). We compare RMSE across different
Gemma model sizes, and across different fine-tuning methods: autoregressive, predictive head and
autoregressive regression aware. We corroborate our observation from language regression tasks that
RAFT improves over the predictive head approach when initialized from a pre-trained checkpoint,
and not when model weights are initialized randomly.


E.3   G EMMA -2 27B AND PALM-2 MODELS

We report results on Gemma-2 27B across all dataset in Table 10 and on PALM-2 models on STSB
in Table 11, corroborating the findings of RAFT improving in most settings.

E.4   C OMPARISON TO ENCODER - BASED BASELINES

In Table 12, we report results with additional baselines that use a prediction head over RoBERTa
representation for the input sequence. We include: mean-pooling and CLS token variants, and both
frozen RoBERTa weights and unfrozen weights in the fine-tuning. We also include the SMART
method (Jiang et al., 2019). In keeping with previous work, in addition to RMSE, we also report
performance on the Pearson and Spearman metrics for STSB (Jiang et al., 2019) (where available).
We find RAFT to surpass all the included baselines.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 dataset           zero-shot       autoregressive   predictive head    RAFT
                 Wireless            0.87              0.83               0.50          0.44
                 Personal care       0.94              0.89               0.50          0.47
                 Music               1.26              1.23               0.47          0.49
                 STSB 1k             1.29              0.60               0.56          0.55
                 STSB                1.29              0.62               0.51          0.48


Table 10: Comparison of RMSE across datasets for Gemma-2 27B. In most cases, RAFT outperforms
all other methods.

              model family       model size     autoregressive      predictive head     RAFT
              PALM-2                    1B         0.79 ± 0.02       0.61 ± 0.01      0.62 ± 0.01
              PALM-2                   24B         0.63 ± 0.03       0.56 ± 0.00      0.53 ± 0.00


Table 11: Comparison of root mean squared error (RMSE) on STSB across different PALM-2 model
sizes, and across different fine-tuning methods: autoregressive, predictive head and autoregressive
regression aware. Each model is ran for 3 times to obtain standard deviations. For PALM-2 1B,
we find no difference in the performance of predictive head and RAFT, and both outperform the
autoregressive approach. For PALM-2 24B, we see a significant improvement from RAFT over both
the autoregressive and the predictive head approaches.


E.5    C HOICES FOR TOKENS IN RAFT

Sensitivity to the grid size Following Lemma 3, ŷRAIL (x) can express any numerical target in the
population limit, even with a coarse grid. Empirically, however, one might expect different grids to
affect the results. We now assess this point on the Amazon reviews Wireless dataset, comparing the
following choices for Ygrid :

      (1) { ’1’, ’2’, ’3’, ’4’, ’5’ } (the default choice for RAFT),
      (2) { ’5’ } (viz. max(Y)),
      (3) { ’1’,’9’ } (the smallest and largest digit in V),
      (4) { ’4’, ’5’ } (the two largest digits in Y for all datasets),
      (5) { ’7’,’8’,’9’ } (the two largest digits in V).


 Method/ablation                              Parameter count       RMSE     Pearson corr.     Spearman corr.
 RoBERTa Base CLS                             110M                    0.64            90.84             90.59
 RoBERTa Large CLS                            356M                    0.59            91.99             92.02
 RoBERTa Large mean-pooling                   356M                    0.63            91.65             91.56
 RoBERTa Large mean-pooling freeze            356M                    1.08            72.72             74.16
 RoBERTa Large CLS freeze                     356M                    1.30            56.48             54.76
 SMART BERT (Jiang et al., 2019)              356M                       -            90.00             89.40
 SMART RoBERTa (Jiang et al., 2019)           356M                       -            92.80             92.60
 Gemma-2 2B RAFT                              2B                      0.54            93.55             93.22
 Gemma-2 9B RAFT                              9B                      0.51            94.30             94.18


Table 12: Parameter counts and performance metrics on STSB across baselines. Results from SMART
(Jiang et al., 2019) taken as reported in the paper (RMSE was not reported).


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Dataset         Model size   ’1’-’5’        ’5’        ’1’,’9’      ’4’,’5’     ’7’,’8’,’9’
      Wireless           2B        0.47±0.01   0.48±0.01    0.48±0.00    0.48±0.00      0.48±0.01
                         9B        0.45±0.01   0.45±0.01    0.47±0.02    0.46±0.00      0.47±0.01
      Personal care      2B        0.49±0.00   0.49±0.00    0.49±0.02    0.49±0.00      0.49±0.00
                         9B        0.47±0.01   0.48±0.01    0.48±0.02    0.47±0.00      0.47±0.00
      Music              2B        0.50±0.00   0.50±0.00    0.50±0.01    0.50±0.00      0.50±0.01
                         9B        0.46±0.01   0.47±0.00    0.48±0.02    0.47±0.00      0.48±0.00


Table 13: Comparison of RMSE (mean ± std dev) across variants of RAFT with varying sizes of the
grid Ygrid . The choice of ’1’-’5’ outperforms the alternatives.


In Table 13, we report the results for different choices for Ygrid . We find that, aligned with Lemma 3,
limiting the grid does not significantly impact the results. However, when comparing the number of
steps to convergence (see Table 21), we find that the default choice (1) in most cases tends to converge
faster to the best solution than other choices. One explanation for this finding is the following. As
shown by Lukasik et al. (2024), the choice of { ’1’, ’2’, ’3’, ’4’, ’5’ } yields a reasonable result
for the zero-shot RAIL approach, and thus it provides a good starting point for fine-tuning. Recall
that the zero-shot RAIL corresponds to the RAFT approach at step 0 of training, since the predictors
for each are equivalent.

Sensitivity to the grid token indices The next question we pose is about the importance of strictly
sticking to numeric tokens: what would happen if the RAFT predictor ŷRAFT (x) used non-numeric
tokens? To analyze this question, let us consider a more general form of the predictor:
                                               X
                           ŷRAFT−NN (x) =           p(token(y) | x) · y,                     (15)
                                               y∈Ygrid

where token(y) ∈ V denotes a token of choice corresponding to the numerical target y.
We keep Ygrid as composed of the digits { ’1’, ’2’, ’3’, ’4’, ’5’ }, and use the predictor in
Equation 15 with the following choices for tokens:

      (1) token for each digit becomes an alphabet token starting with ’a’ and ending with ’a’,
      (2) each token is a digit (i.e., ’1’ becomes ’5’, ’2’ becomes ’4’),
      (3) we only consider digit ’5’.

As shown in Table 14, in most settings, the choice of digits { ’1’, ’2’, ’3’, ’4’, ’5’ } is as
performant as any other choice. In certain settings, we even find a large drop in performance (e.g., the
choice of characters or months). However, by enlarge, we find the results do not worsen significantly
when different tokens are used.

E.6     C HOICES FOR LOSS , NORMALIZATION AND TOKEN INITIALIZATION IN RAFT

In Table 15 we compare the MSE loss to distillation style log loss on STSB. The target is scaled to be
between 0 and 1 for this set of experiments. The log loss is defined as −y ∗ log p1 −(1−y ∗ ) log(1−p1 )
where p1 is the probability of digit ’1’. We find that both the MSE loss and the log loss yield similar
results, and that scaling the range of the targets does not negatively affect the performance.
We next analyze whether enforcing the probabilities over the grid to sum to 1 (by normalizing them by
the sum of the probabilities of all numbers in Ygrid ) can improve the performance of RAFT. Table 16
shows that applying normalization to the probabilities for numbers in Ygrid does not significantly
affect the results.
In Table 17, we compare three initialization methods for the embedding of numbers in autoregressive
and RAFT methods. The tokens used are of granularity of 0.1 for both autoregressive and RAFT
methods, except for RAFT ’1’-’5’, where digits from 1 to 5 are used for the grid (granularity 1.0).


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dataset           model size     digits ’1’–’5’    characters ’a’-’e’      reversed digits   ’January’-’May’
Wireless              2B          0.47 ± 0.01          0.48 ± 0.01          0.48 ± 0.00           0.83 ± 0.01
                      9B          0.45 ± 0.00          0.46 ± 0.00          0.46 ± 0.01           0.47 ± 0.01
Personal care         2B          0.49 ± 0.00          0.48 ± 0.00          0.48 ± 0.01           0.85 ± 0.00
                      9B          0.47 ± 0.01          0.47 ± 0.00          0.48 ± 0.01           0.48 ± 0.01
Music                 2B          0.50 ± 0.00          0.50 ± 0.01          0.50 ± 0.01           0.50 ± 0.00
                      9B          0.46 ± 0.00          0.48 ± 0.01          0.47 ± 0.01           0.61 ± 0.25


Table 14: Comparison of RMSE (mean ± std dev) across variants of RAFT where different tokens
are used for the prediction formula of RAFT. Each experiment repeated for 3 times. In most settings,
the choice of digits ’1’–’5’ is at least as performant as any other choice. In certain settings, we find
a large drop in performance compared to the choice of digits (i.e., months ’January’-’May’.


                                      unscaled targets             targets scaled to [0, 1]
                model size     predictive head      RAFT        RAFT ’0’ and ’1’       log loss
                    1B          0.61 ± 0.01       0.62 ± 0.01        0.63 ± 0.01      0.63 ± 0.01
                   24B          0.56 ± 0.00       0.53 ± 0.00        0.54 ± 0.01      0.53 ± 0.00


Table 15: Comparision of RMSE (mean ± std dev) on the STSB dataset for MSE loss and log loss
when the target is scaled to be between 0 and 1. The models are PALM-2 1B and 24B models.
The MSE loss uses digit ’0’ and ’1’ to compute the predicted value. The log loss is in the form
−y ∗ log p1 − (1 − y ∗ ) log(1 − p1 ) where p1 is the probability of digit ’1’.



Overall, we find that RAFT is less sensitive to the initialization method than the autoregressive
approach.
In Table 18, we experiment with random initialization for the tokens in the RAFT grid. We find
random initialization to lead to worse results compared to using pre-trained token embeddings.
We next analyze the impact of the choice of Ygrid in computing the RAIL predictor. To this end, we
vary the granularity of Ygrid by constructing a list of equally spaced numbers covering the range of Y.
For example, choosing granularity to be 0.1 when Y = [0, 5] yields Ygrid = {’0.0’, ’0.1’, ’0.2’,
. . . , ’4.9’, ’5.0’ }. In our implementation, all numbers in Ygrid are represented by single tokens
that we add to the vocabulary. We initialize the token embedding with either the First or the Average
method. In the First method, we initialize the embedding with the embedding of the first digit of the
number (e.g. use token ’0’ embedding for the number ’0.1’). In the Average method, we initialize
the embedding with the average of the embedding from the constituent tokens (e.g. use the average
embeding of token ’0’, ’.’ and ’1’ for the number ’0.1’.) We report the results on the STSB datasets
with PALM-2 1B model in Table 19 and find no significant difference in the results across different
choices for the granularity of Ygrid .
Additionally, in Table 19 we also include the autoregressive method utilizing additional tokens from
Ygrid as constructed with the methodology outlined above (i.e., with varying granularity). Here,
contrary to RAFT, we find the initialization method to affect the results, with First performing better
than Average. Note that the autoregressive method is equivalent to the generative classification
from (Fernandes et al., 2023), where the classes correspond to the numbers from the grid.
Lastly, we would like to note that in the case of generative classification, there is a trade-off between
how fine-grained the grid is and how many examples per token are observed during training. In
particular, if the classes are too coarse, we observe a loss in performance. On the other hand, if
the classes are too fine-grained, there may be insufficient training examples per label to learn the
embeddings for new tokens. For example, with granularity 0.05, 17 out of the 101 numbers in the
grid do not appear in the training data. This can also lead to a loss in performance.


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                model size     not normalized        normalized
                                         1B     0.63 ± 0.00          0.63 ± 0.02
                                        24B     0.53 ± 0.00          0.53 ± 0.01


Table 16: The effect of normalization of grid token probabilities in RAFT on the STSB dataset. The
models are PALM-2 1B and 24B models.



                      initialization    autoregressive          RAFT         RAFT ’1’-’5’
                      Zero                1.20 ± 0.01         0.62 ± 0.00     0.63 ± 0.00
                      First               0.80 ± 0.02         0.63 ± 0.00     0.62 ± 0.02
                      Average             0.98 ± 0.01         0.64 ± 0.01     0.61 ± 0.01


Table 17: Comparison of different initialization methods for embeddings for tokens corresponding
to numbers in autoregressive and RAFT methods on STSB dataset with PALM-2 1B model. We
consider granularity 0.1 for constructing the tokens for autoregressive and RAFT reported in the first
2 columns, whereas the final column reports RAFT with tokens 1 to 5. Zero denotes initialization with
0 values, First denotes the initialization with the embedding corresponding to the first token of the
number (e.g. use token ’0’ embedding for the number ’0.1’), and Average denotes the initialization
with the embedding corresponding to the different tokens in the number (e.g. average embeddings
for tokens ’0’, ’.’ and ’1’ when initializing the embedding for the number ’0.1’). RAFT is less
sensitive to the initialization method. We find the performance does not significantly worsen with
different initialization methods compared to using the pre-trained token embeddings at initialization
(see Table 15).



                              RAFT with ’1’-’5’                  RAFT with ’5’
                           baseline     random                baseline     random
                         0.63 ± 0.00      0.66 ± 0.02        0.62 ± 0.01    0.64 ± 0.01


Table 18: RMSE across different initialization (baseline and random) of the tokens in RAFT. We find
random initialization of tokens in the RAFT grid to hurt the performance. The model is the PALM-2
1B model.



                                         autoregressive                  RAFT ’1’-’5’
                  granularity          First       Average             First      Average
                  0.05           0.85 ± 0.01     1.11 ± 0.01        0.61 ± 0.01    0.63 ± 0.00
                  0.1            0.80 ± 0.02     0.98 ± 0.01        0.63 ± 0.00    0.64 ± 0.01
                  0.2            0.83 ± 0.02     0.89 ± 0.01        0.64 ± 0.01    0.66 ± 0.02
                  0.5            0.84 ± 0.01     0.87 ± 0.01        0.63 ± 0.01    0.63 ± 0.02
                  1.0            0.81 ± 0.01     0.85 ± 0.01        0.62 ± 0.02    0.61 ± 0.01


Table 19: Comparison of RMSE on autoregressive and RAFT methods with different granularity
of tokens. We append tokens that represent numbers with various granularity. For example, with
granularity 0.05, the tokens are ’0.00, ’0.05, ’0.10’, . . . , ’5.00’. For autoregressive, this is equivalent
to generative classification method from (Fernandes et al., 2023). First and Average denotes different
ways to initialize the embeddings of the tokens, with details described in the caption of Table 17. The
model is the PALM-2 1B model.



                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 model size      ’1’–’5’                                  ’5’          ’1’–’9’          ’b’-’f’         ’5’–’1’      ’’Jan.’-’May’’
 1B           0.63 ± 0.00                            0.62 ± 0.01     0.63 ± 0.01     0.61 ± 0.01      0.62 ± 0.01      0.64 ± 0.01
 24B          0.53 ± 0.00                            0.53 ± 0.01     0.53 ± 0.00     0.54 ± 0.02      0.54 ± 0.00      0.55 ± 0.01


Table 20: Comparison of RMSE (mean ± std dev) on the STSB dataset across variants of RAFT
where different tokens are used to construct the grid for computing the RAFT predictor. The models
are the PALM-2 24B and 1B models.



         dataset                               model size       ’1’-’5’      ’5’     ’1’,’9’       ’4’, ’5’     ’7’,’8’,’9’
         Wireless                                    2B          1,000       3,000      2,000         1,600         2,200
                                                     9B          1,600       2,800      3,400         3,200         4,200
         Personal care                               2B          2,200       2,200      2,400         1,600         2,200
                                                     9B          4,200       2,000      6,200          400          2,400
         Music                                       2B           800        1,200      1,800         1,800         1,800
                                                     9B          1,000       2,200      3,000         1,600         3,000


Table 21: Comparison of the number of steps to convergence of RAFT where different number of
numerical targets are used for the grid in RAFT. Results on the Amazon Wireless dataset.



                                                            Predictive Head
                    # Steps to Convergence


                                             4,000          RAFT

                                             3,000
                                             2,000
                                             1,000
                                                     %
                                                           %
                                                                   %
                                                                         %
                                                                              %
                                                                                     %
                                                                                          %
                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                              0%
                                                 10
                                                          20
                                                                30
                                                                       40
                                                                             50
                                                                                   60
                                                                                         70
                                                                                                80
                                                                                                      90
                                                                                                           10


                                                                     Percentage of Training Data

Figure 4: Comparison of the number of steps to convergence of RAFT and predictive head, with
different percentage of the training set.



E.7    C ONVERGENCE SPEED OF RAFT

In Table 21 we report the number of training steps to convergence to the best result on the held out
validation set of different methods. We can see that RAFT with digits ’1’-’5’ it majority of cases
converges faster than other choices for the grid.
In Figure 4 we compare the number of steps to convergence of RAFT and predictive head on STSB.
The figure shows that RAFT converges with fewer number of steps across different percentages of
training data used for training.
In Figure 5 we report RMSE on the test set as a function of the training step. We find that compared to
predictive head, RAFT starts from a much lower RMSE score (as it corresponds to the RAIL method
before training), and then converges in fewer steps.


                                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        4.0                                         RAFT
                                                                    Predictive head

                        3.0


                 RMSE
                        2.0

                        1.0

                        0.0   0      1000           2000         3000          4000
                                                Training step

Figure 5: RMSE on the test set as a function of the training step on Amazon Wireless for Gemma-2
2B. Compared to predictive head, RAFT starts from a much lower RMSE at step 0, and then converges
to its best RMSE in fewer steps.


Figure 6: The histogram of per-example change (after vs. before fine-tuning) in entropy over the
probabilities for the digits in the RAFT predictor. The entropy on average increases after the RAFT
fine-tuning, meaning that the probabilities are overall more spread over the digits than prior to RAFT
fine-tuning.


E.8   D ISTRIBUTION OVER TOKENS IN THE RAFT P REDICTOR

We next investigate the distribution over tokens in the RAFT predictor. We find that, while the error
decreases with training, the entropy increases after RAFT training, as we show in Figure 6. This
corresponds to the model on average spreading the probabilities over tokens more than prior to fine-
tuning, as shown for specific examples in Figure 7. We posit this to be beneficial, and indeed, RAFT
fine-tuning does not restrict uncertainty of the model, contrary to the MBR fine-tuning (compare
Lemma 3 and Lemma 4).


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Example #1


                                          (b) Example #2

Figure 7: Comparison of the distribution over digit tokens in RAFT predictor (Gemma-2 2B on
STSB) before and after fine-tuning. We find the entropy over the digit token probabilities overall
increases after fine-tuning with the RAFT objective.


                                               31
