Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROTO S NAP :
P ROTOTYPE A LIGNMENT FOR C UNEIFORM S IGNS
 Rachel Mikulinsky1∗xx Morris Alper1∗xx Shai Gordin2
 Enrique Jimenez3 xx Yoram Cohen1 xx Hadar Averbuch-Elor1,4
 1
     Tel Aviv Universityxx 2 Ariel Universityxx 3 LMU xx4 Cornell University



                                               A BSTRACT
              The cuneiform writing system served as the medium for transmitting knowledge
              in the ancient Near East for a period of over three thousand years. Cuneiform
              signs have a complex internal structure which is the subject of expert paleo-
              graphic analysis, as variations in sign shapes bear witness to historical devel-
              opments and transmission of writing and culture over time. However, prior
              automated techniques mostly treat sign types as categorical and do not explic-
              itly model their highly varied internal configurations. In this work, we present
              an unsupervised approach for recovering the fine-grained internal configura-
              tion of cuneiform signs by leveraging powerful generative models and the ap-
              pearance and structure of prototype font images as priors. Our approach, Pro-
              toSnap, enforces structural consistency on matches found with deep image
              features to estimate the diverse configurations of cuneiform characters, snap-
              ping a skeleton-based template to photographed cuneiform signs. We provide
              a new benchmark of expert annotations and evaluate our method on this task.
              Our evaluation shows that our approach succeeds in aligning prototype skele-
              tons to a wide variety of cuneiform signs. Moreover, we show that condition-
              ing on structures produced by our method allows for generating synthetic data
              with correct structural configurations, significantly boosting the performance
              of cuneiform sign recognition beyond existing techniques, in particular over
              rare signs. Our code, data, and trained models are available at the project page:
              https://tau-vailab.github.io/ProtoSnap/


1        I NTRODUCTION
The earliest forms of decipherable scripts date back to the late 4th millennium BCE, with the inven-
tion of the cuneiform writing system in ancient Mesopotamia, which came to be used for a number
of historically significant ancient languages such as Sumerian and Akkadian (Radner and Robson,
2011; Streck, 2021). Cuneiform signs have complex internal structures which varied significantly
across the eras, cultures, and geographic regions among which cuneiform writing was used. The
study of these variations is part of a field called paleography, which is crucial for understanding
the historical context of attested writing (Biggs, 1973; Homburg, 2021). However, while compu-
tational methods show promise for aiding experts in analyzing cuneiform texts (Bogacz and Mara,
2022), they are challenged by the vast variety of complex sign variants and their visual nature:
Represented as wedge-shaped imprints in clay tablets which have often sustained physical dam-
age, cuneiform appears as shadows on a non-uniform clay surface which may even be difficult for
human experts to identify under non-optimal lighting conditions (Taylor, 2015).
Prior work has focused on digitization of cuneiform tablets at a coarse resolution, localizing and
classifying signs from photographs of whole tablets (Dencker et al., 2020; Stötzner et al., 2023a).
However, these methods treat sign types as categorical while neglecting sign-internal configura-
tions of strokes in each character, which provides crucial information for identifying rare signs
and distinguishing between sign variants. In this work, we aim to recover the fine-grained internal
configuration of real cuneiform signs, given coarse-grained categorical information as input. In
     ∗
         Equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: ProtoSnap applied to a full tablet by cropping each sign using existing bounding boxes
(such as those depicted in unique colors), and matching prototypes of the signs (illustrated in the
center). Our technique “snaps” the skeletons of the prototypes to the target images depicting real
cuneiform signs. These aligned results can be used to produce an automatic digital hand copy
(right). We also show that our approach can be used to boost performance of cuneiform sign recog-
nition.



particular, our method is provided with a prototype image and its associated skeleton indicating the
canonical structure of a sign, and aligns this structure to a target image depicting a corresponding
real cuneiform sign. As illustrated in Figure 1, our technique is analogous to the laborious hand
copies produced by expert Assyriologists; when applied to a tablet with existing character-level
annotations, this outputs the outlines of signs in the style of the original document. Furthermore,
we show that these aligned skeletons may be used to boost optical character recognition (OCR)
performance, by training a generative model with structural conditioning as detailed below.
To this aim, we present ProtoSnap, an unsupervised approach leveraging deep diffusion features to
snap a skeleton-based prototype to a target cuneiform sign, revealing its structure without requiring
any labelled examples of real photographed signs. By using a fine-tuned generative model as a
prior on the appearance of cuneiform images, and enforcing global and local consistency, we are
able to localize the constituent strokes in real cuneiform images. We make use of the key insight
that pairwise similarities between regions of the prototype and target images encode information
about both coarse global alignment and fine-grained local deviations of each stroke from its canon-
ical pose. Our technique distills this information with a multi-stage process performing global
alignment followed by local refinement of stroke positions.
We provide a new benchmark of expert-annotated photographed signs for evaluation, and show that
our system succeeds at identifying their internal structures, significantly outperforming generic
correspondence matching techniques. We also show the downstream utility of ProtoSnap for au-
tomatic digitization of cuneiform texts, by using aligned prototype skeletons as a condition for
a generative model to produce structurally-correct synthetic data to train cuneiform OCR. Our
results show that this achieves state-of-the-art results on cuneiform sign recognition, particularly
enhancing performance on rare signs where naive synthetic data generation struggles to produce
instances of the correct sign.
Stated explicitly, our key contribution are:

       • ProtoSnap, an unsupervised prototype alignment method capturing the structure of pho-
         tographed cuneiform signs.

       • A novel benchmark with expert annotations, and results showing that our method outper-
         forms generic correspondence methods at this task.

       • State-of-the-art OCR results for cuneiform when using synthetic data produced using our
         method’s alignments for conditional generation.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Machine learning (ML) for cuneiform. Ancient texts provide a window into our history, but
their decipherment and interpretation require painstaking work and expert knowledge of esoteric
languages, complex writing systems, and historical context which serve as a barrier to their trans-
lation and analysis on scale. Due to the high societal value of these tasks and the scarcity of expert
knowledge and time, machine learning promises to provide an invaluable aid for understanding
the ancient world. In the context of a number of works on ML applied to diverse ancient inscrip-
tions (Hassner et al., 2013a; Assael et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019; Luo et al.,
2021; Hayon et al., 2024), the cuneiform script poses particular challenges. These include the na-
ture of the physical writing media (indentations in textured and often damaged clay under various
lighting conditions), and the diverse nature of cuneiform signs which changed over thousands of
years of use in vast geographical regions.
Various approaches have been applied to modeling cuneiform signs for the purpose of down-
stream tasks such as optical character recognition. Some works apply recognition directly to image
data (Bogacz et al., 2017; Dencker et al., 2020; Stötzner et al., 2023a), while others have treated
cuneiform as structured graphs to recognize signs based on their internal configurations (Kriege
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2024). A handful of works have explicitly modeled cuneiform signs as
compositions of wedges, though these mainly focus on segmentation from 3D meshes or localiz-
ing strokes on the bounding box level (Bogacz and Mara, 2022; Stötzner et al., 2023b; Hamplová
et al., 2024). By contrast, our approach provides a pixel-aligned skeleton indicating the relative
positions, sizes, and orientations of the strokes, and unlike prior works we operate exclusively on
2D photographs of cuneiform signs and without any strong supervision.
Skeleton-based template alignment. Our approach to inferring the configuration of cuneiform
images as compositions of strokes by aligning a skeleton-based template bears partial similarity to
various existing methods that typically operate over generic natural images.
Our method resembles template matching in that we use a template image (our font prototype) and
search for relevant regions in the target image. While earlier approaches used naive comparisons
of image intensities or low-level features when sliding the template across the target image (Ben-
Arie and Rao, 1993; Cole et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2011), this is not robust to complex relations
between the template and target. To handle these challenges, more recent works have adopted
deep image features along with modeling complex non-rigid deformations (Oron et al., 2017;
Talmi et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2019; Gao and Spratling, 2022). Our method similarly searches
for matches to our template using deep features and allowing for deformations, although we differ
from conventional template matching in explicitly using the skeletonized graph structure of the
template and matching each of its constituent strokes separately.
We also note similarity to pose estimation methods, as we infer the structure of a sign by localiz-
ing keypoints. Pose estimation methods align a graph of keypoints to an image, most commonly
applied to a single category such as humans (Fang et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023), animals (Li
and Lee, 2021; Yang et al., 2022), or vehicles (Reddy et al., 2018; López et al., 2019), where the
same fixed graph applies to all instances. However, in our setting the number and connectivity
of keypoints depends on the sign type under consideration. In this respect our method resembles
category-agnostic pose estimation methods (Xu et al., 2022; Hirschorn and Avidan, 2023), though
our input also includes a template image rather than only using an abstract graph.
In the context of images depicting text, a number of works address the problem of text spotting,
which searches for matches to a given visual text representation in images (He et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023). This may include alignment or dewarping of detected text, but does
not typically explicitly leverage the internal shape of symbols as in our method. We also note
several works performing transcript alignment using dense correspondence methods, which align
visual text but do not explicitly handle character-internal structure (Hassner et al., 2013b; 2016).


3   T HE C UNEIFORM W RITING S YSTEM

Cuneiform, one of the earliest known writing systems, was a logo-syllabic script indicating both
units of sound and meaning with signs. Unlike the Latin alphabet which uses less than thirty basic


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Method Overview. Given a prototype image with annotated skeleton and a target image
of a real cuneiform sign, ProtoSnap first extracts best-buddy correspondences from deep diffusion
features (extracted with our fine-tuned SD- model), globally aligning the target image to the
skeleton of the prototype. Our method then “snaps” the individual strokes into place with a local
refinement stage by optimizing a per-stroke transform.


letters to indicate sounds, cuneiform signs numbered upwards of one thousand unique types, which
varied dramatically in their realizations across eras, languages, and geographical regions (Walker,
1987). See, for instance, the two right-most examples in Figure 5, both variants of the same sign
AN from different eras. Scholars have attempted to collate lists of known signs and their vari-
ants (Labat and Malbran-Labat, 1988; Borger, 2003), and canonical representations of the most
common variants for different time periods have been encoded in digital fonts.
Cuneiform was written on clay tablets by scribes using a stylus to create wedge-shaped impres-
sions, also known as strokes, which combine to form signs. Scribes used styli with triangular
edges to create impressions on the moist clay in three possible directions: horizontal, vertical, or
oblique (Cammarosano, 2014; Cammarosano et al., 2014). Various encoding schemes proposed
to encode these strokes digitally (Bogacz and Mara, 2022); we adopt the four-keypoint scheme,
treating all strokes as being composed of a triangular head indicated with three keypoints and a
fourth keypoint indicating the stroke’s tail; see Figure 2 (second to left) for an example. We refer
to the graph of these keypoints and the edges connecting them as a sign’s skeleton. Our method’s
prototype input consists of both a rasterized font image along with its skeleton encoding the con-
figuration of its strokes; we collect these skeletons via manual annotation as described in the ap-
pendix.


4     M ETHOD

Given a prototype consisting of a font image annotated with a skeleton composed of strokes and a
target image of a real cuneiform sign, our system aligns the prototype skeleton to match the sign
structure in the target image. An overview of this process is shown in Figure 2.
Our system consists of three steps: First, we calculate a semantically-adapted 4D similarity volume
which encodes the pairwise feature similarities of each pair of regions in the two images. This
similarity volume uses diffusion features to encapsulate the complex geometry and semantics of
cuneiform images. We then calculate a global alignment between the prototype font image and the
target image, using best-buddies sparse correspondences, extracted from the similarity volume, as
a robust signal to fit this alignment. Finally, we perform local refinement to optimize the relative
positions of each stroke and their internal configurations, when deviation from the canonical con-
figuration is necessary. We describe each step in turn below, with further implementation details
provided in the appendix.

4.1   S EMANTICALLY-A DAPTED 4D S IMILARITY VOLUME

Our system is based on the guiding assumption that local similarities between regions in the two
images can be used to compute a structurally-consistent matching between the prototype sign struc-
ture and the target cuneiform sign. As a backbone for computing meaningful similarity scores, we
use diffusion features (DIFT Tang et al. (2023)), which leverage the strong geometric and semantic
understanding of a generative text-to-image model to represent image features for discriminative
tasks. These features are calculated as intermediate activations the model’s denoising compo-
nent, applied to the input image with added random noise. However, standard generative models


                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: DIFT-Based Best-Buddies Correspondences. Noised images are passed through our
fine-tuned denoising diffusion model SD- to extract deep Diffusion Features (DIFT), used to
calculate the 4D similarity volume S. For each region (i, j) in the target image, we examine the
2D slice S[i, j, ·, ·], and determine the indices (k, ℓ) which maximize its value. Symmetrically, for
each region (k, ℓ) in the prototype we find the corresponding region in the target by maximizing
the 2D slice S[·, ·, k, ℓ]. If these two regions correspond to each other, they are identified as best
buddies.


are typically pretrained on natural images from the Internet, with cuneiform scans being out-of-
distribution. We thus fine-tune the generative model Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) on
cuneiform image scans, which we indicate as SD- , using the cuneiform sign name as its accompa-
nying text prompt. We use this as our vision backbone for calculating DIFT features.
We apply DIFT with SD- to our prototype and target images to obtain feature vector maps
           (p)                   (t)
F (p) = (fi,j )i,j and F (t) = (fi,j )i,j respectively of unit-normalized feature vectors. Each feature
map is a C × H × W tensor, where C is the number of feature dimensions and H and W are the spa-
tial dimension of the feature map (lower-resolution than the original image, as each feature vector
has a larger receptive field in the image). Using these features, we calculate the four-dimensional
                             (p)   (t)
similarity volume S = (fi,j · fk,ℓ )i,j,k,ℓ . This H × W × H × W tensor, visualized in Figure 3,
contains the pairwise cosine similarities between features encoding patches of the prototype and
target images.

4.2   G LOBAL A LIGNMENT FROM B EST-B UDDIES C ORRESPONDENCES

While S provides a strong similarity measure, it does not encode geometric constraints on the over-
all matching between the two images. For instance, multiple regions in one image may all have
high similarity scores with a single region in the other image, but mapping them all to the same
target region will result in a degenerate solution. To robustly identify a sparse set of best-matching
pairs of regions, we follow prior work (Oron et al., 2017; Drory et al., 2020) by identifying best
buddies, defined as pairs of patches in the two images which are mutual nearest-neighbors ac-
cording to their similarities scores in S. Formally, this is defined as pairs of coordinates (i, j) and
(k, ℓ) such that (i, j) = arg maxi,j Si,j,k,ℓ and (k, ℓ) = arg maxk,ℓ Si,j,k,ℓ . See Figure 3 for an
illustration.
Using these sparse correspondences, we fit an affine transformation with least squares estimation,
defining a global alignment G of the prototype to the target image. This transformation allows for
basic deformations while preserving the overall structure of the prototype. We learn the parameters

                                             g11 g12 g13
                                           "                #
                                     G = g21 g22 g23
                                              0     0     1

permitting scaling, rotation, and shear (g11 , g12 , g21 , g22 ) as well as translation (g13 , g23 ). This is
                                                                        T
applied in projective space P2 , i.e. mapping a point v = [x, y, 1] ∈ P2 to the point v′ = Gv =
              T
[x′ , y ′ , 1] .


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Local Refinement via Skeleton-Based Optimization. To adjust the positioning of indi-
vidual strokes in a sign, our global alignment is followed by a local refinement stage which learns
transformations for each stroke. The loss function encourages positioning on salient regions (Lsal )
while semantically matching the corresponding regions in the prototype image, as measured by
feature similarity (Lsim ). For each stroke (exemplified by the stroke in red above), these objectives
are calculated along points sampled from the skeleton (red dots above). The loss also includes a
regularization term (Lreg ) preventing excessive deviation from the global transformation.


To handle outliers in a robust manner, we perform the fitting with RANSAC. For further robust-
ness, we incorporate a prior on inlier points being spread over the majority of the area of prototype
and target images, by performing this procedure multiple times (including the stochastic calcula-
tion of DIFT features and correspondences from Section 4.1) and selecting the result with the best
spread of inlier points across the relevant regions in the images, following Hassner et al. (2014)
and as further described in the appendix.

4.3   L OCAL R EFINEMENT VIA S KELETON - BASED O PTIMIZATION

Our global alignment procedure can roughly align the prototype to the target image. However, as
the target image was written by hand, each stroke’s location may deviate from the canonical rela-
tive position given by the prototype font image. Therefore, we introduce a local refinement stage,
illustrated in Figure 4, which allows each stroke to move from the canonical prototype structure
and “snap” into place, while avoiding excessive deviations from the global structure representing
the sign’s identity. We model each stroke’s deviation from the global alignment as a projective
transformation, allowing for a higher degree of deformation than the affine global transformation.
The local transformation of stroke i is parameterized by the matrix
                                                                 
                                                  (i)   (i)   (i)
                                                p11 p12 p13
                                   P (i) = I + p(i)    (i)   (i) 
                                               
                                                  21   p22 p23 
                                                  (i)   (i)
                                                p31 p32       0
where I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix. These are applied on top of the global transformation, resulting
in per-stroke transformation of the form P (i) G. As a projective transformation, this maps a point
              T                                   T                          T       (i)
v = [x, y, 1] ∈ P2 to P (i) Gv = [x′ , y ′ , z ′ ] ∼ [x′ /z ′ , y ′ /z ′ , 1] . The pjk are all initialized to
zero (i.e. each local transformation is initialized as the identity).
                                (i)
We optimize the parameters pjk via gradient descent with the loss function
                                 L = λsim Lsim + λsal Lsal + λreg Lreg
where λsim , λsal , λreg are constant weights. We proceed to define each loss term.
Featural Similarity Loss Lsim . To encourage semantically-correct positioning of strokes, we
define a loss to maximize feature similarities between matching points on the prototype and target
images under the local transformation. Using the similarity volume S from 4.1, we sample points
along the lines connecting skeleton keypoints in the prototype image, calculate their correspond-
ing points under the current global and local transformations, and evaluate their similarity via S
with a temperature-weighted softmax applied to each slice of S over the prototype image. This
uses differentiable grid sampling to interpolate values of S, as S has a lower spatial resolution in
comparison to the images.
Saliency Map Loss Lsal . To encourage the strokes to cover salient regions (i.e. areas which ap-
pear to contain writing), we calculate a saliency map over the target image and use it to define a


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


xPrototype
xxxInput
 +Refinement xxxGlobal


Figure 5: Qualitative alignment results, aligning the prototypes (first row) to target cuneiform
images (second row). We demonstrate the results after performing global alignment (third row),
and the final result after local refinement (fourth row). As illustrated above, the global alignment
stage provides a coarse placement of the prototype template, while the refinement stage allows
each stroke to slightly diverge from the original prototype, resulting in more accurate alignments.


loss. The saliency map is calculated using the 4D similarity tensor S from Section 4.1; for each
region in the target image, we calculate the difference between mean similarities to foreground
(black) and background (white) regions in the prototype font image, and post-process by applying
adaptive histogram equalization, scaling and setting low values to zero. This yields an approximate
segmentation map of the cuneiform sign visible in the scanned image. The loss Lsal is calculated
as the mean value of the map sampled at points along the transformed skeleton, selecting points
and using temperature-scaled differentiable grid sampling as in Section 4.1.
Regularization Loss Lreg . To avoid invalid solutions that over-optimize the previous objectives,
we add a regularization term that penalizes excessive deformations and solutions that stray from
the boundaries of the image. This is defined as Lreg = LL1 + Loob . L1 regularization loss is given
by
                                    1 X (i)         1 X (i)
                           LL1 =           pjk =          ∥P − I∥L1
                                   N               N i
                                        i,j,k

where N is the number of strokes and I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix. This penalizes local transforma-
tions which greatly deviate from the identity.
The out-of-bounds loss Loob is defined as zero if all transformed keypoints are within the image
boundaries, otherwise as the maximum absolute difference between each transformed coordinate
and the image bounds. This models the soft constraint that all keypoints must lie within the image,
handling edge cases where the global transformation pushes part of a stroke outside the image
bounds.


5                        E XPERIMENTS

We conduct various experiments, evaluating our method both directly on our benchmark of expert-
annotated real photographed signs (Section 5.1) and by testing it on a downstream OCR bench-
mark (Section 5.2). We also present qualitative results (Figure 5 and appendix), which further
highlight the complexity and unique challenges of the task and setting addressed in our work. Fi-
nally, we discuss limitations of our approach (Section 5.3). Further implementation details and
results are provided in the appendix.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Method                              F1@20     F1@30      F1@40
                  SIFT (Lowe, 1999) + RANSAC           2.56%     3.78%      5.01%
                  DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024)         12.33%    21.88%     31.04%
                  DINOv2 + RANSAC                     16.12%    28.19%     37.93%
                  DIFT (Tang et al., 2023)            16.14%    25.80%     33.79%
                  DIFT + RANSAC                       13.13%    21.96%     30.15%
                  Ours (w/o refinement)               21.31%    37.08%     50.13%
                  Ours (full)                         27.14%    42.09%     52.43%

Table 1: Alignment evaluation, measuring keypoint localization at various distance thresholds.
We compare against several generic correspondence matching baselines, including a geometry-
based method (SIFT) and deep feature-based methods (DINOv2, DIFT). As illustrated above, our
method significantly outperforms these baselines. Furthermore, our local refinement stage provides
a performance boost beyond learning simply a global transform.


5.1   A LIGNMENT E VALUATION

To evaluate the quality of alignment, we curate a test set of ground-truth (GT) alignments from
manual annotations by expert archeologists. Provided with photographs of cuneiform signs from
the eBL dataset Cobanoglu et al. (2024), the experts annotated the position of strokes by indicating
groups of four keypoints. Images were marked for exclusion from the test set if they were poor
quality or show sign variants differing from the corresponding prototype font images. In total,
our test set contains 272 images with expert annotations, covering 25 different sign types, which
were not seen in training of SD- . A breakdown of this test set and more details on our annotation
procedure are provided in the appendix.
To quantify performance on this benchmark, we compare the predicted and GT positions of stroke
keypoints; given a fixed distance threshold, we consider a predicted keypoint as a true positive
prediction if it is within the given threshold of a GT keypoint. We report F1 scores for several
distance thresholds (along with precision and recall in the appendix).
In Table 1 we compare our solution to generic correspondence matching techniques. We com-
pare against a traditional geometry-based baseline that computes SIFT (Lowe, 1999) features and
aligns the images using RANSAC. We also compare against two deep feature-based techniques
(DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024), DIFT Tang et al. (2023)), applied by assigning each keypoint to the
corresponding point of maximum similarity in the target image.
We see that ProtoSnap significantly outperforms the baseline methods at localization, as our so-
lution explicitly considers the complex structure of the sign. We also report performance of our
approach without local refinement (i.e performing the first step of global alignment alone); we
see that the final step of local optimization indeed achieves better alignment as reflected in our
metrics. This may also be seen visually in Figure 5, illustrating the overall global alignment and
more precise results yielded by local refinement. In the appendix, we show an ablation study of
the different components of our system (such as using fine-tuned SD- and each of our loss terms).
These results provide further motivation for the design of our full system. We also provide addi-
tional qualitative results.
To further evaluate the practical usability and effectiveness of ProtoSnap, we conducted a survey
of 12 assyriologists, finding that users are approximately twice as likely to prefer scans with our
aligned skeleton overlaid to an overlay without our alignment applied. Further details regarding
this user study can be found in the appendix.

5.2   L EARNING OCR FROM A LIGNED DATA

We show the downstream benefit of our approach by using ProtoSnap alignments to produce
structurally-diverse synthetic training data for an OCR system. As cuneiform signs are highly
diverse, with number and arrangement of strokes varying significantly between eras, regions, and
individuals, a model trained to produce synthetic data conditioned on sign type alone may strug-
gle to depict the correct configurations of signs, particularly rare signs with few to no attestations


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   Accuracy         Balanced Accuracy
            Training Data                 All             Rare        All       Rare
                   ⋆
            CSDD (Dencker et al., 2020) 58.43%           25.84%     34.57%     16.45%
            +SD- data                   61.56%           38.56%     39.02%     31.13%
            +CN- data                   64.14%           53.17%     43.57%     39.98%
Table 2: Sign classification performance when training on previously collected real data (CSDD),
and with added data generated using our fine-tuned diffusion model (SD- ) or ControlNet trained
using alignments from ProtoSnap (CN- ). Our solution demonstrates improved OCR results, with
structural augmentations showing increased performance relative to direct unconditional image
generation, especially on rare signs (signs that have less than 50 occurrences in the real train set).
⋆ denotes our reproduced model, as further described in the appendix.


in the existing data. Furthermore, conditioning on sign type does not allow to specify the exact
variant of the sign, resulting in generation of the most prevalent variant in the data. As we show,
conditioning on a skeleton-based structures provides control over the generated fine-grained struc-
tures yielding synthetic data which better captures the real configurations. To demonstrate the
benefit of our approach for the downstream task of OCR, we align prototype skeletons to a set of
cuneiform images from the eBL dataset (Cobanoglu et al., 2024), and fine-tune ControlNet (Zhang
et al., 2023) to generate new cuneiform images using such skeletons as a condition, instead of a
text prompt. This model, denoted as CN- , allows us to produce new cuneiform sign images with
any input structure, not limited to a list of predefined categories or specific structural configura-
tions. We then use this model to generate synthetic training data, as shown in Figure 6. Further
details about the model training are provided in the appendix.
We examine the benefit of this generated data for learning cuneiform sign classification. Dencker
et al. (2020) report sign classification performance on the CSDD dataset when training a
Resnet18 (He et al., 2016) model with supervision from the CSDD training set alone. We compare
this to augmenting the training set with the CN- -generated synthetic data described above. As an
additional baseline, we also compare with using SD- (see Section 4.1) generations for augment-
ing sign types which uses categorical sign names as a textual condition rather than structural con-
ditions. We report classification accuracy following Dencker et al. (2020); as this dataset is highly
imbalanced, we also report balanced accuracy and performance on rare sign types (signs with less
than 50 occurrences in the real training set). Results are summarized in Table 2. As seen there, aug-
menting the CSDD dataset with synthetic data significantly improves classification performance,
with structurally-conditioned data from CN- providing a significant boost over synthetic data
from SD- . These results reflect that structurally-controlled generation with CN- guarantees gen-
eration of the correct sign variant, while SD- struggles to produce correct configurations from the
sign category alone, as seen in Figure 6.

5.3   L IMITATIONS

We note various limitations of our work (visualized in Figure 7). Our alignment procedure requires
a canonical sign image and will still fail if the scan displays a structurally different variant of
the sign in question. Additionally, our method may fail under extreme deformations, or on low-
quality tablets or scans which cannot be feasibly interpreted. Future work might investigate how to
calculate a confidence measure to detect such failure cases.


6     C ONCLUSION

We have proposed the ProtoSnap method for estimating the internal structure of cuneiform signs
without any direct supervision, by harnessing pairwise comparisons of deep image features in re-
gions of photographed cuneiform images and skeleton-based prototypes. We have curated expert
annotations to provide a new benchmark for this task, and have shown that our method signifi-
cantly outperforms generic correspondence-based techniques. Beyond its direct application for
paleographic analysis, we have also shown our method’s utility for the downstream task of OCR,
by using aligned skeletons for conditional synthetic data generation.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Name
                                         LU         IM            BA                      E2
                                         xx          xx           xx                       xx

                     xPrototype xxxSD-
                       xxxCN-


                                          (1) Unseen signs    (2) Signs with multiple variants
Figure 6: We demonstrate the benefit of producing structurally-controlled synthetic data (denoted
as CN- above), in comparison to text-conditional generation (denoted as SD- ), using two differ-
ent scenarios: (1) Text-conditional generation cannot succeed in generating signs unseen during
training, while our method can correctly adhere to the structural conditioning provided as input,
even for rare or unseen signs. (2) A text-conditional model often generates the sign variation most
prevalent during training (e.g., the variants on the right sides above), while our method can gener-
ate different variants, yielding a more diverse synthetic set for training downstream models.
 Prototype
 ProtoSnap xxInput


Figure 7: Limitations of our method, illustrating examples with significant deformations from the
prototype skeleton (left) and structurally different sign variants (middle) and corrupt sign image
(right). We visualize correctly-aligned strokes in green, and misaligned strokes in red.



We foresee a range of applications and possible extensions of our work. Our method represents
a step towards paleographic analysis on scale, tracking allographs (sign variants) for each sign
as produced by scribes between time periods, cities, archives, and personal handwriting styles. It
could also be used to automate the production of hand copies, currently produced manually by
experts to illustrate tablet contents in their original context. While we have focused on the case of
single sign scans, we foresee future work extending these results to lines of text, as our method
could be incorporated into a pipeline including text detection and localization of individual signs
applied either to images or directly to 3D scans of inscriptions. Finally, our per-stroke optimiza-
tion process is designed for cuneiform signs composed of wedge shapes parametrized by four
keypoints, future work might extend this to other ancient scripts with different geometric config-
urations – for example, by using more flexible primitives such as Bezier splines to model curved
lines found in ancient Chinese oracle bone inscriptions. We hope that our work will spur future
research on using the internal structure of glyphs in complex scripts such as cuneiform to advance
downstream tasks.


                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Karen Radner and Eleanor Robson, editors. The oxford handbook of cuneiform culture. Oxford
  University Press, Oxford, 2011. doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199557301.001.0001. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199557301.001.0001.

Michael P. Streck, editor. Sprachen des Alten Orients. wbg Academic, Darmstadt, 4., überarbeitete
 und aktualisierte auflage edition, 2021.

Robert D Biggs. On regional cuneiform handwritings in third millennium mesopotamia. Orientalia,
  42:39–46, 1973.

Timo Homburg. Paleocodage—enhancing machine-readable cuneiform descriptions using
  a machine-readable paleographic encoding. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 36
  (Supplement_2):ii127–ii154, 2021.

Bartosz Bogacz and Hubert Mara. Digital assyriology—advances in visual cuneiform analysis.
  Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH), 15(2):1–22, 2022.

Jon Taylor. Wedge Order in Cuneiform: a Preliminary Survey, page 1–30. PeWe-Verlag, Gladbeck,
  2015.

Tobias Dencker, Pablo Klinkisch, Stefan M Maul, and Björn Ommer. Deep learning of cuneiform
  sign detection with weak supervision using transliteration alignment. Plos one, 15(12):e0243039,
  2020.

Ernst Stötzner, Timo Homburg, and Hubert Mara. Cnn based cuneiform sign detection learned from
  annotated 3d renderings and mapped photographs with illumination augmentation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1680–1688, 2023a.

Tal Hassner, Malte Rehbein, Peter A. Stokes, and Lior Wolf. Computation and Palaeography:
  Potentials and Limits (Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop 12382). Dagstuhl Reports, 2(9):184–199,
  2013a. ISSN 2192-5283. doi: 10.4230/DagRep.2.9.184. URL https://drops.dagstuhl.
  de/entities/document/10.4230/DagRep.2.9.184.

Yannis Assael, Thea Sommerschield, and Jonathan Prag. Restoring ancient text using deep learning:
  a case study on Greek epigraphy. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
  6369–6376, 2019.

Xusen Yin, Nada Aldarrab, Beáta Megyesi, and Kevin Knight. Decipherment of historical
  manuscript images. In 2019 International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition
 (ICDAR), pages 78–85. IEEE, 2019.

Shuangping Huang, Haobin Wang, Yongge Liu, Xiaosong Shi, and Lianwen Jin. Obc306: A large-
  scale oracle bone character recognition dataset. In 2019 International Conference on Document
  Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), pages 681–688. IEEE, 2019.

Jiaming Luo, Frederik Hartmann, Enrico Santus, Regina Barzilay, and Yuan Cao. Deciphering under-
   segmented ancient scripts using phonetic prior. Transactions of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics, 9:69–81, 2021.

Offry Hayon, Stefan Münger, Ilan Shimshoni, and Ayellet Tal. Arcaid: Analysis of archaeological
  artifacts using drawings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
  Computer Vision, pages 7264–7274, 2024.

Bartosz Bogacz, Maximilian Klingmann, and Hubert Mara. Automating transliteration of cuneiform
  from parallel lines with sparse data. In 2017 14th IAPR International Conference on Document
  Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), volume 1, pages 615–620. IEEE, 2017.

Nils M Kriege, Matthias Fey, Denis Fisseler, Petra Mutzel, and Frank Weichert. Recognizing
  cuneiform signs using graph based methods. In International Workshop on Cost-Sensitive
  Learning, pages 31–44. PMLR, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yizhou Chen, Anxiang Zeng, Qingtao Yu, Kerui Zhang, Cao Yuanpeng, Kangle Wu, Guangda
  Huzhang, Han Yu, and Zhiming Zhou. Recurrent temporal revision graph networks. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ernst Stötzner, Timo Homburg, Jan Philipp Bullenkamp, and Hubert Mara. R-cnn based polygonal
  wedge detection learned from annotated 3d renderings and mapped photographs of open data
  cuneiform tablets. 2023b.
Adéla Hamplová, Avital Romach, Josef Pavlíček, Arnošt Veselý, Martin Čejka, David Franc, and
  Shai Gordin. Cuneiform stroke recognition and vectorization in 2d images. Digital Humanities
 Quarterly, 18(1), 2024. URL https://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/18/
 1/000733/000733.html.
Jezekiel Ben-Arie and K Raghunath Rao. A novel approach for template matching by nonorthogonal
  image expansion. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 3(1):71–84,
  1993.
Luke Cole, David Austin, Lance Cole, et al. Visual object recognition using template matching. In
  Australian conference on robotics and automation, 2004.
Hae Yong Kim et al. Ciratefi: An rst-invariant template matching with extension to color images.
  Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering, 18(1):75–90, 2011.
Shaul Oron, Tali Dekel, Tianfan Xue, William T Freeman, and Shai Avidan. Best-buddies similar-
  ity—robust template matching using mutual nearest neighbors. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 40(8):1799–1813, 2017.
Itamar Talmi, Roey Mechrez, and Lihi Zelnik-Manor. Template matching with deformable diversity
   similarity. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pages 175–183, 2017.
Jiaxin Cheng, Yue Wu, Wael AbdAlmageed, and Premkumar Natarajan. Qatm: Quality-aware
   template matching for deep learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 11553–11562, 2019.
Bo Gao and Michael W Spratling. Robust template matching via hierarchical convolutional features
  from a shape biased cnn. In The International Conference on Image, Vision and Intelligent
  Systems (ICIVIS 2021), pages 333–344. Springer, 2022.
Hao-Shu Fang, Jiefeng Li, Hongyang Tang, Chao Xu, Haoyi Zhu, Yuliang Xiu, Yong-Lu Li, and
  Cewu Lu. Alphapose: Whole-body regional multi-person pose estimation and tracking in real-
  time. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Ce Zheng, Wenhan Wu, Chen Chen, Taojiannan Yang, Sijie Zhu, Ju Shen, Nasser Kehtarnavaz,
  and Mubarak Shah. Deep learning-based human pose estimation: A survey. ACM Computing
  Surveys, 56(1):1–37, 2023.
Chen Li and Gim Hee Lee. From synthetic to real: Unsupervised domain adaptation for animal
  pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pages 1482–1491, 2021.
Yuxiang Yang, Junjie Yang, Yufei Xu, Jing Zhang, Long Lan, and Dacheng Tao. Apt-36k: A large-
  scale benchmark for animal pose estimation and tracking. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:17301–17313, 2022.
N Dinesh Reddy, Minh Vo, and Srinivasa G Narasimhan. Carfusion: Combining point tracking and
  part detection for dynamic 3d reconstruction of vehicles. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1906–1915, 2018.
Javier García López, Antonio Agudo, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. Vehicle pose estimation via
  regression of semantic points of interest. In 2019 11th International Symposium on Image and
  Signal Processing and Analysis (ISPA), pages 209–214. IEEE, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lumin Xu, Sheng Jin, Wang Zeng, Wentao Liu, Chen Qian, Wanli Ouyang, Ping Luo, and Xiao-
  gang Wang. Pose for everything: Towards category-agnostic pose estimation. In European
  conference on computer vision, pages 398–416. Springer, 2022.
Or Hirschorn and Shai Avidan. Pose anything: A graph-based approach for category-agnostic pose
  estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17891, 2023.
Tong He, Zhi Tian, Weilin Huang, Chunhua Shen, Yu Qiao, and Changming Sun. An end-to-end
  textspotter with explicit alignment and attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 5020–5029, 2018.
Mingxin Huang, Yuliang Liu, Zhenghao Peng, Chongyu Liu, Dahua Lin, Shenggao Zhu, Nicholas
 Yuan, Kai Ding, and Lianwen Jin. Swintextspotter: Scene text spotting via better synergy between
 text detection and text recognition. In proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pages 4593–4603, 2022.
Maoyuan Ye, Jing Zhang, Shanshan Zhao, Juhua Liu, Tongliang Liu, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao.
 Deepsolo: Let transformer decoder with explicit points solo for text spotting. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 19348–19357,
 2023.
Tal Hassner, Lior Wolf, and Nachum Dershowitz. Ocr-free transcript alignment. In 2013 12th
  International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, pages 1310–1314. IEEE,
  2013b.
Tal Hassner, Lior Wolf, Nachum Dershowitz, Gil Sadeh, and Daniel Stökl Ben-Ezra. Dense cor-
  respondences and ancient texts. Dense Image Correspondences for Computer Vision, pages
  279–295, 2016.
Christopher Bromhead Fleming Walker. Cuneiform, volume 3. Univ of California Press, 1987.
R. Labat and F. Malbran-Labat. Manuel d’Épigraphie Akkadienne. Paris, sixth edition edition, 1988.
R. Borger. Mesopotamisches Zeichenlexicon. Alter Orient Und Altes Testament: Veröffentlichun-
  gen Zur Kultur Und Geschichte Des Alten Orients Und Des Alten Testaments. Ugarit Verlag,
  Münster, 2003.
Michele Cammarosano. The cuneiform stylus. Mesopotamia: Rivista di Archeologia, Epigrafia e
 Storia Orientale Antica, 69:53–90, 2014.
Michele Cammarosano, Gerfrid G. W. Müller, Denis Fisseler, and Frank Weichert. Schriftmetrologie
 des keils: Dreidimensionale analyse von keileindrücken und handschriften. Die Welt des Orients,
 44(1):2–36, 2014.
Luming Tang, Menglin Jia, Qianqian Wang, Cheng Perng Phoo, and Bharath Hariharan. Emergent
  correspondence from image diffusion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  1363–1389, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
Amnon Drory, Tal Shomer, Shai Avidan, and Raja Giryes. Best buddies registration for point clouds.
 In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.
Tal Hassner, Liav Assif, and Lior Wolf. When standard ransac is not enough: cross-media visual
  matching with hypothesis relevancy. Machine Vision and Applications, 25:971–983, 2014.
Yunus Cobanoglu, Luis Sáenz, Ilya Khait, and Enrique Jiménez. Sign detection for cuneiform
  tablets. it - Information Technology, 66(1):28–38, 2024. doi: doi:10.1515/itit-2024-0028. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1515/itit-2024-0028.
David G Lowe. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. In Proceedings of the seventh
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, volume 2, pages 1150–1157. Ieee, 1999.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran,
 Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra,
 Michael Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick
 Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without
 supervision, 2024.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pages 770–778, 2016.
Eugen Rusakov, Turna Somel, Gernot A. Fink, and Gerfrid G.W. Müller. Towards query-by-
  expression retrieval of cuneiform signs. In 2020 17th International Conference on Frontiers in
  Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), pages 43–48, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICFHR2020.2020.00019.


A PPENDIX

A     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Below we provide additional experimental details. Our code is also provided (zipped in the supple-
mentary material). For all experiments described below, a single A5000 GPU was used. Running
the method on a single image takes about 1 minute.

A.1   I MAGE AND F ONT I NFORMATION

For all of our tests, we use RGB images with resolution 512 × 512, resizing images as needed.
Font images are rendered from the Santakku and SantakkuM fonts, designed by Sylvie Vanséveren
and available on the Hethitologie Portal Mainz. For a uniform appearance, the white margins of the
image are cropped, than 10 pixels of white margins are added to each side, and finally the image is
resized to 512 × 512 resolution.

A.2   M ODEL D ETAILS

We use the CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4 checkpoint as our base Stable Diffusion
model. We fine-tune this on eBL classification train dataset (Cobanoglu et al., 2024), for 50K
iterations with batch size of 4, learning rate of 10−5 and Adam optimizer. For textual prompts,
we use a unique code for each sign type indicated in the eBL dataset. This fine-tuned Stable
Diffusion model, SD- , is used for our DIFT feature calculations as well as in the synthetic
data generation for our OCR application. For tests using ControlNet, we fine-tune the base
illyasviel/sd-controlnet-openpose checkpoint, on 932 samples with their paired
alignment created by ProtoSnap. We trained it for 20K iteration, with batch size of 4, learning rate
of 10−5 and Adam optimizer. This fine-tuned ControlNet, CN- , uses another fine-tuned Stable
Diffusion model, trained with the same parameters as SD- , but without a prior from a textual
prompt, using the same prompt for all signs: "cuneiform single ancient icon".
For DIFT feature calculations, we average an ensemble of results on four random noises, sampled
at timestamp t = 261, following Tang et al. (2023). We concatenate features from the second and
third upscaling U-Net layers, bilinearly interpolated to the same spatial resolution, yielding a set of
64 × 64 feature vectors of dimension 1920.

A.3   G LOBAL A LIGNMENT D ETAILS

To fit our global alignment, we apply RANSAC with 2000 iterations. At each iteration, 5 corre-
spondences are used to fit a least-squares affine transformation, with a distance threshold of 50
pixels used to identify outliers. The transformation with the greatest number of inliers is returned.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a high-quality set of correspondences should explain the relevant regions in both of the images,
we incorporate a prior on inlier points being spread across the images, following Hassner et al.
(2014). In particular, we perform the above procedure 8 times, and assign each result a score using
the convex hulls of the inlier points in the prototype and scanned cuneiform sign images. For the
prototype image, we calculate the proportion pproto of the prototype font foreground contained
within the convex hull of inlier points. For the scanned cuneiform sign image, we calculate the
proportion pscan of the total area of the image covered by the convex hull of inlier points. Finally,
we select the result with maximum score pproto · pscan , to encourage the global transformation to be
based on matches between regions covering most of the scan and prototype font.


A.4   L OCAL R EFINEMENT D ETAILS

Our total loss uses coefficients λsim = 1.0, λsal = 3 × 10−4 , and λreg = 10−4 .
To calculate the saliency map used for the saliency loss, we compute differences in mean similari-
ties as described in the main paper, apply CLAHE histogram equalization with clip limit 10.0 and
tile grid size (2, 2), set values below the mean to zero, and scale values to the range [0, 1]. This
yields a scalar field of resolution 64 × 64.
For both semantic similarity and saliency losses, at each iteration values are sampled at both each
of the keypoints in the skeleton, and at 8 randomly-sampled points along each line segment in the
skeleton connecting keypoints. Loss values are averaged over all of these points. The sampled
points are sampled uniformly from the lines in the prototype images, and then transformed using
the current global and local transformations to obtain corresponding points in the target scanned
cuneiform sign image. Loss values are computed with differentiable grid sampling, using bilinear
interpolation over scalar fields (the similarity values in respective slices of S, and saliency map
values) each of which is passed through a softmax with fixed temperature parameter 100.
To perform optimization, we apply gradient descent for 100 iterations with learning rate 0.01 and
Adam optimizer, updating the the parameters of the local transformations of all strokes.


A.5   DATASET D ETAILS

Both the training and the test datasets are taken from the eBL classification dataset Cobanoglu et al.
(2024) which consists of scanned imaged of cuneiform signs. The dataset was originally split to
train and test by source tablet. The train set included 34,868 sign images, representing 362 sign
types and was used to train SD- . The test set was used to select the 272 images for our test set
(as described in 5.1), focusing on signs for which we have an available prototype, and the samples
in the set match the prototype structure variant. The final test set consists of 272 samples from 25
different signs, not seen in training, varying from 2 strokes per sign to 8.
The full dataset comprises around 40% from the Neo-Babylonian period (1000–600 BC), around
20% from the Neo-Assyrian (1000-609 BCE), and less than 10% from the following periods: Ur
III (2100–2002 BCE), Old Babylonian (2002-1595 BCE), Old Assyrian (1950–1850 BCE), Middle
Babylonian (1500–1000 BCE), Late Babylonian (600 BC–100 AD), Persian (539-331 BCE),
Hellenistic (331-141 BCE), Parthian (141 BCE-100 CE). The dataset represents the Akkadian and
Sumerian languages used at those eras.


A.6   U SER SURVEY DETAILS

For the users survey, we have asked experiences assyriologists to review 35 cuneiform signs. For
each signs, we presented them with 3 options - a plain sign, a sign with an overlaid prototype
without alignment, and a sign with overlaid prototyped aligned using ProtoSnap. For each sign we
asked the user to select the image in which they can most easily identify the sign. 12 assyriologists
had answered the survey. In all but three signs, the users preferred an overlaid option to the plain
one, and out of those, the users preferred the aligned option 65% of the time (in 21 signs).


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


xGenerated xxControl
xGenerated xxControl


Figure 8: Examples for data generated using our fine-tuned ControlNet model CN- , where the
control is an image of a prototype sign (with two different added transformations).



A.7                    OCR E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

For the OCR experiment we have generated 50 samples per each sign in the test set (180 signs
in total), using our fine-tuned SD- described above. In addition, we used CN- to generate 50
samples for each sign we have available prototype (124 signs in total). To better mimic human
handwriting, we augmented the skeletons by applying small random transformation on the entire
skeleton and on each stroke individually, creating a diverse set of controls for each sign. Figure 8
shows examples of such generated data. Both generations were done using 50 inference steps and
classifier-free guidance scale 7.5.
For the experiment we used 6205 samples from the CSDD data (consisting of data from all URLs
which were not broken in the dataset), 3299 samples in the train set and 2906 in the test. Training
ResNet18 on this dataset alone was done for 10 epochs, using batch size of 64, learning rate of
10−3 and Adam optimizer. Training with generated data (both from SD- and CN- ) was done
for 8 epochs, and then fine-tuned 10 more on real data only, using batch size of 64, learning rate of
5−4 and Adam.
Note that our reproduced baseline on CSDD achieves slightly higher accuracy than reported by
Dencker et al. (2020), but the test dataset includes URLs which are no longer operational which
may contribute to this slight discrepancy in results.


B                      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Figure 9 shows additional examples, illustrating ProtoSnap applied to various samples of the
same sign. Figure 10 shows ProtoSnap results on our manually annotated test set, compared to
the baseline of applying DIFT directly (assigning each keypoint to the region of maximal feature
similarity).
Figure 11 shows ProtoSnap results on a new, previously unseen dataset, JOCCH (Rusakov et al.,
2020) , which contains signs from the Hittite language, as opposed to the Akkadian and Sumerian
from which the training and test set are composed. Those results show that our method is robust
and can be generalizable to other usages of the cuneiform writing system.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


xxFont                    xxSkeleton   ProtoSnap applied to scanned cuneiform images


Figure 9: Examples of ProtoSnap applied on photographed cuneiform signs of varying structure,
illumination conditions and degrees of intactness.
xxxxInput
  xxxxxGT
xPoseAnything xxxxxDIFT
  xxxxxOurs


Figure 10: Results of ProtoSnap on our manually annotated test set, with DIFT and PoseAnything
(Hirschorn and Avidan, 2023) shown for comparison. We can see that our method produces align-
ments which are much closer to expert annotations and is generally less sensitive to outliers.



                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 xxPrototype
 xxxxInput
 xxProtoSnap


Figure 11: ProtoSnap applied on images from a different dataset and language (Hittite), showing
that the method is robust and generalizable to various usages of cuneiform writing system. The 3
images on the left show signs from types (names) unseen in the training data, further emphasizing
the generalizability of the method.

                                                    threshold = 20                 threshold = 40
  Method                      Precision                   Recall       F1    Precision    Recall      F1
  SIFT (Lowe, 1999) + RANSAC    2.59%                     2.53%      2.56%     5.49%      4.61%     4.91%
  DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024)  12.42%                    12.25%     12.33%    32.09%     30.05%    31.04%
  DINOv2 + RANSAC              16.22%                    16.01%     16.12%    38.47%     37.42%    37.93%
  DIFT (Tang et al., 2023)     16.18%                    16.10%     16.14%    34.32%     33.27%    33.79%
  DIFT + RANSAC                13.15%                    13.11%     13.13%    30.43%     29.88%    30.15%
  Ours (w/o refinement)                      21.38%      21.23%     21.31%   50.55%      49.73%    50.13%
  Ours (full)                                27.17%      27.10%     27.14%   52.76%      52.10%    52.43%

Table 3: Precision and recall metrics for the alignment evaluation, on top of F1 metric presented in
the main paper, at two distance thresholds.


B.1            A DDITIONAL METRICS

Table 3 shows precision and recall metrics for the alignment evaluation, on top of F1 metric pre-
sented in the main paper. Table 4 show alignment evaluation breakdown per signs, and also pro-
vides the number of samples in the test set per sign.

B.2            A BLATION STUDY

We demonstrate the effect of key parts of our system by ablating them and evaluating performance
on our test set. In particular, we ablate the following:

               • Use of our fine-tuned SD- (rather than base Stable Diffusion)
               • Use of best-buddies correspondences for computing the global transformation (rather than
                 using all correspondences between prototype image regions and the best-matching regions
                 in the target image according to DIFT)
               • Each of the three loss terms in our full loss function

As seen in Table 5, most of these ablations have a significant negative effect on quantitative perfor-
mance. Removing Lsim slightly improves metrics, but we find this is reflects a qualitative trade-off.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Sign Name     # Samples    # Strokes    F1@20      F1@30     F1@40
                  ME             20           2        23.13%     33.75%    46.88%
                    A            19           3        26.75%     40.79%    52.41%
                  IGI            18           3        12.50%     25.23%    37.50%
                  AN             19           3        30.04%     46.05%    61.39%
                  UD             18           3        16.20%     29.17%    44.21%
                 GISH            19           3        28.29%     42.11%    54.17%
                  MA             16           4        26.95%     44.73%    57.81%
                  EN              5           5        20.00%     36.00%    47.49%
                   IR            17           5        22.94%     36.17%    42.04%
                   IB            15           5        35.17%     55.17%    63.33%
                  HA              3           5        23.33%     35.81%    48.33%
                  UR             16           5        32.66%     49.06%    57.50%
                   RI            13           5        29.81%     44.03%    57.11%
                  RU             15           5        24.67%     37.50%    45.83%
                 DIM2             2           5        25.00%     35.00%    42.50%
                   DI             6           5        24.17%     43.71%    51.25%
                   U2             9           5        21.67%     41.39%    53.88%
                  DIB             3           6        23.61%     34.01%    46.52%
                   SA             3           6        36.79%     45.13%    52.00%
                   GI             1           7        28.57%     46.43%    53.57%
                  DA              1           7        28.57%     42.86%    50.00%
                  KA             12           7        26.64%     44.94%    55.79%
                   ZI            10           7        31.43%     42.50%    50.35%
                   A2             4           8        29.69%     44.92%    55.47%
                  ZE2             8           8        39.45%     54.49%    60.35%

Table 4: Performance breakdown by sign type. We report alignment performance of our model
over the different annotated signs. We also provide the number of strokes in each sign (#Strokes)
and number of samples of the sign in the test set (#Samples).


We foresee an expansion of our test set or development of additional test metrics for this task to
better capture this performance.

                                             F1@20     F1@30      F1@40
                         ProtoSnap (ours)    27.14%    42.09%     52.43%
                         −SD-                19.01% 31.89% 41.25%
                         −best buddies       26.76% 41.76% 52.76%
                         −Lsim               27.37% 42.61% 53.19%
                         −Lsal               21.13% 37.48% 50.08%
                         −Lreg               26.72% 39.66% 47.41%

Table 5: Ablation study results, demonstrating differences in performance when removing key
parts of our system. Most ablations negatively impact quantitative results, further explained in
Section B.2.



C    A NNOTATION D ETAILS

Our expert annotations were performed by Assyriologists who participated in this research.
Below, we provide further details on our annotations collected via crowdsourcing, used to anno-
tate keypoints in prototype font images and in scanned cuneiform signs. We then connected the
keypoints manually ourselves, creating the prototype skeleton.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1   IRB A PPROVAL , PARTICIPANT S OURCING , AND C OMPENSATION

Our annotation tasks, approved by our institution’s IRB, were conducted on the Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk (MTurk) crowdsourcing platform. We published our tasks for MTurk workers with at
least 1000 completed HITs (MTurk tasks) and a HIT approval rate of at least 95%. Workers were
compensated $0.25 for each font annotation, corresponding to the duration of this task.

C.2   A NNOTATION TASK I NSTRUCTIONS

In this task, you will indicate keypoints on ancient character ("cuneiform") to indicate the location
of each stroke. Please indicate each stroke with four keypoints as shown here:


If there are multiple strokes, please indicate each stroke in a separate color using four keypoints
per stroke, as in these examples:


Make sure the four keypoints are in the locations as shown above – three indicating the corners of
the stroke’s triangular head, and one indicating the end of its tail.
Use the point tool to place points on the requested target(s) of interest: Four each stroke in the
character, place four keypoints of the same color, using your mouse to click on each keypoint. Use
the four keypoints described in the instructions: for each stroke, three points indicating the corners
of the stroke’s triangular head, and one indicating the end of its tail. Make sure to indicate every
stroke seen in the glyph.


                                                 20
