Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S YNTACTIC AND S EMANTIC C ONTROL OF L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS VIA S EQUENTIAL M ONTE C ARLO
 João Loula∗1 Benjamin LeBrun∗5 Li Du∗6 Ben Lipkin1 Clemente Pasti2 Gabriel Grand1
 Tianyu Liu2 Yahya Emara2 Marjorie Freedman8 Jason Eisner6 Ryan Cotterell2
 Vikash Mansinghka‡1 Alexander K. Lew‡1,7 Tim Vieira‡2 Timothy J. O’Donnell‡3,4,5
 1
   MIT 2 ETH Zürich 3 McGill 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 5 Mila 6 Johns Hopkins 7 Yale 8 ISI
 genlm@mit.edu



                                                       A BSTRACT

             A wide range of LM applications require generating text that conforms to
             syntactic or semantic constraints. Imposing such constraints can be naturally
             framed as probabilistic conditioning, but exact generation from the resulting
             distribution—which can differ substantially from the LM’s base distribution—is
             generally intractable. In this work, we develop an architecture for controlled LM
             generation based on sequential Monte Carlo (SMC). Our SMC framework allows
             us to flexibly incorporate domain- and problem-specific constraints at inference
             time, and efficiently reallocate computational resources in light of new information
             during the course of generation. By comparing to a number of alternatives and
             ablations on four challenging domains—Python code generation for data science,
             text-to-SQL, goal inference, and molecule synthesis—we demonstrate that, with
             little overhead, our approach allows small open-source language models to outper-
             form models over 8× larger, as well as closed-source, fine-tuned ones. In support
             of the probabilistic perspective, we show that these performance improvements
             are driven by better approximation to the posterior distribution. Our system builds
             on the framework of Lew et al. (2023) and integrates with its language model
             probabilistic programming language, giving users a simple, programmable way
             to apply SMC to a broad variety of controlled generation problems.
                 https://github.com/probcomp/genlm-control


1       I NTRODUCTION

The goal of controlled generation from language models (LMs) is to produce text guided by a set of
syntactic or semantic constraints. One prominent example is semantic parsing, or code generation,
which involves producing text in a programming (or other formal) language, typically from a natural
language prompt. We may wish to use diverse signals to guide code generation, for example:
• Checking (partial) code statically (type-checking, linting, partial evaluation);
• Running (partial) code on a test case and checking if it raises an error or returns the wrong answer;
• Simulating environments (e.g., in robotics or chemistry) and assigning a score to the resulting state;
• Rolling out possible completions of partial code and computing their max, min, or average score;
• Asking another language model to critique the code generated so far.
Such signals vary along several important dimensions: some are cheap to compute (linting), others are
more costly (simulations); some can be evaluated incrementally with each sampled token (language
model critique), others provide sparser guidance (running code); some enforce binary hard constraints
(type-checking), others yield soft continuous scores (scoring).
One way to represent such signals uniformly is as potential functions ϕ(x) assigning non-negative
                                                                                       Q
scores to sequences of tokens x. Given a set Φ of such potentials, we will write Φ(x) = ϕ∈Φ ϕ(x).
We frame the problem of controlled generation probabilistically: We wish to sample from the global

    ∗
        co-first authorship, ‡ co-senior authorship.


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


product of experts distribution on complete sequences x:
                                                 1
                                        g(x) =      p(x)Φ(x)                                      (1)
                                                 Z
where p is a distribution over complete token sequences defined by an autoregressive LM, and Z is a
normalizing constant. The distribution g can be interpreted as a posterior with p as the prior and Φ
as the likelihood function. Importantly, even when both sampling from p and evaluating Φ(x) are
efficient, sampling exactly from g is generally intractable (Rosenfeld et al., 2001).
Two popular sampling-based approaches that avoid the intractability of g are locally constrained
decoding and sample reranking (see Appendix F for a detailed review of related work, including
other approaches such as MCMC). Locally constrained decoding uses per-token logit biasing or
masking to incorporate signals at each step, for example to ensure that the complete sequence will
fall in a specified regular or context-free language (e.g., Shin et al., 2021; Scholak et al., 2021; Poesia
et al., 2022; Willard & Louf, 2023; Moskal et al., 2024; Ugare et al., 2024). Sample-rerank-based
approaches first generate complete sequences and then rerank or reweight these based on the specified
set of signals. Examples of this approach include best-of-n reweighting with a reward model
(Nakano et al., 2021; Krishna et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Gui et al., 2024; Mudgal et al., 2024;
Ichihara et al., 2025) or filtering samples with a verifier (Olausson et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024;
Lightman et al., 2024; Xin et al., 2024). Each approach suffers from significant weaknesses. Locally
constrained decoding requires the guiding signals Φ to be cheap enough to evaluate very frequently
(for instance on the full token vocabulary at every step of generation). Moreover, it often introduces
greedy approximations that badly distort the distribution (relative to g, Lew et al., 2023; Park et al.,
2025). Sample-rerank does not impose constraints Φ until full sequences have been sampled and,
thus, cannot make use of information available incrementally during generation; this can significantly
increase the number of samples needed to find high probability, constraint-satisfying sequences.
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) has been proposed as an effective approach to approximate inference
for such intractable distributions in other difficult language modeling problems, such as infilling,
prompt engineering, and prompt intersection as well as for more traditional tasks in natural language
processing (Börschinger & Johnson, 2011; Dubbin & Blunsom, 2012; Buys & Blunsom, 2015; Lin
& Eisner, 2018; Lew et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024). In this paper, we use SMC to tackle a number
of challenging semantic parsing problems, guiding generation with incremental static and dynamic
analyses. When these signals are efficient enough to be used incrementally, our approach incorporates
them into proposal distributions, gaining the benefits of locally constrained decoding; more costly
potentials—as often used in sample-rerank approaches—are incorporated as twist functions that
reweight partial sequences to favor promising paths (Naesseth et al., 2019). Our approach emphasizes
programmable potentials and proposals that can easily be specialized for specific tasks or problems
(e.g., by integrating libraries for molecular structure or robotic planning, see §3.1). We contrast this
with the use of learned proposals or twist functions (Lawson et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2024), which
requires costly, problem-specific fine-tuning.
Our paper makes the following contributions:
• SMC for constrained semantic parsing. We develop an architecture specializing SMC for
  code generation under diverse syntactic and semantic constraints (§2). Unlike many previous
  frameworks for constrained decoding, our algorithm can integrate constraints that cannot be
  incrementally evaluated over the entire token vocabulary, as well as constraints that can only be
  evaluated at irregular intervals during generation. The framework emphasizes programmable
  inference (Mansinghka et al., 2018), allowing users to deploy proposals and potentials that exploit
  the structure of application domains. Our system also fully integrates with the language model
  probabilistic programming framework of Lew et al. (2023).
• Empirical evaluation of performance in diverse domains. We apply our approach—and six
  alternatives—to four challenging problem domains: Python code generation for data science,
  text-to-SQL, goal inference, and molecule synthesis (§3.1). We find that, with little overhead,
  our approach significantly improves performance across domains, allowing small open-source
  language models to outperform models over 8× larger, as well as closed-source fine-tuned models.
  We additionally find that, with 5–10× fewer particles, SMC outperforms approaches that only
  incorporate constraints at the end of generation (§3.2).
• Empirical evaluation of algorithm components. We run ablation experiments and find that
  improved performance can be attributed to three algorithmic components: weight correction, which


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Grammar constrained generation
    Existing particles                     Enforces grammaticality                                                     Accuracy by method across domains
                                            tensors,
    0.4     a = torch.tensor(
                                            tensors)

    0.3     a = torch.stack(                ))                                   tensors)

                                            (
    0.4     a = torch.vstack(
                                            _)


    Weight correction                                  Expensive potential
    Mitigates greediness                               Incorporates costly signals
             tensors,   tensors)       (
    0.8                                                0.0   a = torch.tensor(tensors)         ValueError

             tensors)              (
    0.7                                                1.0   a = torch.stack(tensors)


             tensors,   tensors)       (
    0.8                                                1.0   a = torch.vstack(tensors)


                                                                 Resampling
     Updated particles                                           Focuses computation on promising particles
      0.0     a = torch.tensor(tensors)                          0.18 a = torch.stack(tensors)

     0.21     a = torch.stack(tensors)                           0.18 a = torch.vstack(tensors)

    0.32      a = torch.vstack(tensors)                          0.18 a = torch.stack(tensors)


Figure 1: Controlled generation from LMs via sequential Monte Carlo. Left: We use sequential Monte Carlo
to sample from high-quality approximations to posteriors over LM outputs. Partial sequences are repeatedly
extended via grammar-constrained generation. We then apply weight corrections to mitigate the greediness of
locally constrained decoding, as well as expensive potentials to encode rich information that cannot be included
in logit masks. Finally, resampling focuses computation on promising particles. Right: Accuracy gains from
these innovations on challenging data science, text-to-SQL, goal inference, and molecule synthesis benchmarks.
  mitigates the greediness of locally constrained decoding; expensive potentials, which incorporate
  useful signals that several baseline methods cannot integrate; and adaptive resampling, which
  adaptively refocuses computation on partial sequences that look more promising.
• Empirical validation of the probabilistic perspective. We derive estimators of the KL divergence
  from each method’s output distribution to the global product of experts (Appendix D). We find that
  the best-performing methods (i) have outputs that are closer in KL divergence to the global product
  of experts within each problem instance, and (ii) assign probabilities that are more correlated with
  downstream performance across problem instances (§3.3).


2            M ONTE C ARLO I NFERENCE FOR C ONSTRAINED S EMANTIC PARSING

Notation. We use x to refer to a sequence of tokens, with xi being the ith token in the sequence. Let
     def
x<t = x1 ··· xt−1 . Let ε denote the empty sequence. We use juxtaposition (e.g., x y) to denote
sequence concatenation. Let A be a vocabulary of tokens, and let A∗ denote the set of all finite
sequences of tokens in A. We refer to the set A∗ as the set of partial sequences. We use EOS ∈/ A to
                                                                                        def
denote a special token marking the end of sequences not included in A. We define AEOS = A ∪ {EOS}
                                            def
and the set of complete sequences A∗ EOS = {x EOS | x ∈ A∗ }.
Language models. A language model p is a probability distribution over complete sequences (i.e.,
                                                                               ′
P
   x∈A∗ EOS p(x) = 1). We assume that p provides a conditional distribution p(x | x) over its next
token x′ ∈ AEOS given any sequence x ∈ A∗ ; the probability of any complete sequence factors as
                                                                                                 |x|
                                                                                                 Y
                                                                                     p(x) =             p(xt | x<t )                                       (2)
                                                                                                 t=1
We find it convenient to extend the definition of p(x) from Eq. (2) to partial sequences x ∈ A∗ ; note,
however, that p(x) is a prefix probability,1 so p is not a probability distribution over partial sequences.
                                                            x′ )
With this extended definition, we have p(x′ | x) = p(x   p(x) provided p(x) > 0.

Potential functions. We consider a set Φ of domain- or task-specific potential functions that encode
relevant constraints or preferences as nonnegative scores. Each potential function ϕ ∈ Φ has the
type ϕ : (A∗ ∪ A∗ EOS) → R≥0 , meaning that it assigns a non-negative real ϕ(x) when evaluated
on some sequence x, freely using any structure in the sequence so far regardless of whether x
1
    I.e., p(x) is the probability that a complete sequence x′ ∼ p has the partial sequence x as a prefix.


                                                                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is a partial or complete sequence. For technical reasons, we assume that all potentials satisfy
ϕ(x) = 0 =⇒ ϕ(x y) = 0, for all x and y such that x y ∈ A∗ EOS.
Target distribution. We formalize the goal of controlled generation as sampling sequences x ∈
A∗ EOS from the target distribution given by the global product of experts between p and Φ:2
                               1                            X
                       g(x) = p(x)Φ(x) where Z =               p(y)Φ(y)                      (3)
                               Z                             ∗      y∈A EOS
For intuition, if Φ(x) ∈ {0, 1} for all x in A∗ EOS, the global product of experts can be understood
as the rejection sampling distribution that arises by repeatedly generating x ∼ p, and rejecting if
Φ(x) = 0. The normalizing constant Z is the rate at which samples are accepted. Thus, the expected
runtime of rejection sampling is 1/Z per accepted sample, making it expensive if Z is small. Our
work aims to accurately approximate the global product of experts with much less computation.
Locally constrained decoding. A popular approach3 to enforcing constraints at inference-time is to
apply them before sampling each token. In this approach, at each time step t, the current sequence
x<t is extended with a new token xt ∼ ℓΦ (· | x<t ) (until xt = EOS) where4
                        p(xt | x<t ) Φ(x<t xt )
                                      Φ(x<t )
                                                                             X                    Φ(x<t x′ )
                                                                                   p(x′ | x<t )
                  def                                                  def
    ℓΦ (xt | x<t ) =                              where LΦ (x<t ) =                                          (4)
                           LΦ (x<t )                                                               Φ(x<t )
                                                                 x′ ∈AEOS
                   def Q |x|                                                    ∗
We write ℓΦ (x) =        t=1 ℓΦ (xt | x<t ) for either the probability of x ∈ A EOS or the prefix
                       ∗
probability of x ∈ A . Note that in the former case, ℓΦ is a distribution over complete sequences.
We call it a local product of experts model because normalization is performed locally (at each step
of the sequence), rather than globally (once per complete sequence).
Despite its popularity, locally constrained decoding has two important shortcomings. First, for most
practical potential functions, the local and global product of experts do not define the same distribution
(Lew et al., 2023; Park et al., 2025). In particular, while the global product of experts is defined with
respect to complete sequences, the local product typically only has access to the string generated so far
and a single token of lookahead—which can lead to myopic sampling down paths that lead to globally
poor solutions. In principle, this problem can be mitigated by the choice of intermediate potentials
(Φ(x) for x ∈ A∗ ), which implement more aggressive forms of lookahead. In particular, locally
constrained decoding is an exact sampler when Φ(x) = Φ∗ (x), the expected future potential of
           def
x, Φ∗ (x) = Ex′ ∼p [Φ(x′ ) | x is a prefix of x′ ].5 Unfortunately, much like Z, computing Φ∗ exactly
is typically intractable. Although we may seek to approximate it, for example, by learning (Zhao
et al., 2024) or adaptive methods (Park et al., 2025), here we instead focus on variants of locally
constrained decoding which marginalize over the immediate next token as in Eq. (4); see Footnote 3.
Our experiments (§3) compare our method to this dominant form of local decoding from the literature,
using efficient tests for whether the addition of a single candidate token can satisfy the constraint.
The second, related problem with locally constrained decoding is that the local product of experts
can only be sampled efficiently when it is possible to cheaply evaluate the potentials ϕ ∈ Φ on
all possible one-token continuations x<t x′t of the current sequence. For some constraints (e.g.,
checking membership or prefixhood in the language of a regular expression or context-free grammar),
algorithms exist for efficient parallel evaluation across tens of thousands of possible continuations.
However, for many of the constraints of interest in the present paper (including several listed in
Table 1, for example, error-checking with test cases) this is not feasible. In what follows, we will
assume that the set of potentials Φ can be partitioned into expensive potentials Φexp , which are
too costly to use as part of locally constrained decoding, and efficient potentials Φeff , which can
be used in sampling from the local product of experts.
Importance sampling. The shortcomings of local decoding can be addressed with importance
sampling, a Monte Carlo technique for approximating intractable distributions. We describe a
2
  Note that care has to be taken to ensure that the sum which defines the normalizing constant in Eq. (3) converges.
  One sufficient (but not necessary) condition ensuring this is if Φ is bounded above by a constant.
3
  E.g., Shin et al. (2021); Scholak et al. (2021); Poesia et al. (2022); Willard & Louf (2023); Ugare et al. (2024).
4
  Here our assumption that ϕ(x) = 0 =⇒ ϕ(x y) = 0 ensures that whenever Φ(x<t ) = 0, all extensions will
  be 0 as well, making it safe in such cases to define Φ(x  <t x)
                                                         Φ(x<t )
                                                                   = 0.
5 ∗
  Φ is also known in the SMC literature as the optimal twist function (e.g., Zhao et al., 2024).


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


particular application of the technique specialized to our setting. Here, we use the local product of
experts model ℓΦeff (abbreviated ℓeff ) with respect to just Φeff as a proposal distribution, from which
                                                           i.i.d.
we sample multiple complete particles x(1) , ... , x(N ) ∼ ℓeff . For each particle x(i) we define its
importance weight w(i) as
                                                      (i)             
                                 (i)          (i)     |x |
                         def p(x     ) · Φ(x      )    Y           (i)
                    w(i) =                          =      Leff (x<t ) · Φexp (x(i) )              (5)
                                 ℓeff (x(i) )          t=1

The numerator is an unnormalized variant of the target distribution g, which we write as ge hereafter,
while the denominator ℓeff is the proposal distribution that was used to draw the sequence. These
                                                                                            1{x=x(i) }
                                                                                 PN     (i)
                                                                             def  i=1 w
weighted particles define the following posterior approximation: gb(x) =             PN
                                                                                             w(j)
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                       j=1

which under mild conditions converges to g as N grows.6 Our importance weights simplify as shown
in Eq. (5), and we note how they correct for the two problems we identified with ℓeff . The first
        Q|x(i) |         (i)
factor, t=1 Leff (x<t ), corrects for the greediness of ℓeff , penalizing particles where all possible
continuations xt ∈ AEOS score poorly in context. The second factor, Φexp (x(i) ), incorporates the
expensive potentials that could not be used in ℓeff . These importance weights can be computed
efficiently: the first factor is already computed as a byproduct of sampling from ℓeff , and the second
factor is computed by running each of the expensive efficient potentials once on each x(i) .
Sequential Monte Carlo. While importance sampling addresses several shortcomings of local
decoding, it too suffers from a major weakness: weight corrections and expensive potentials are not
integrated until after a complete sequence has been generated from the proposal. This is despite
the fact that critical information about whether a sequence can satisfy a constraint is often available
much earlier and can be used to avoid large amounts of unnecessary computation. Sequential Monte
Carlo (SMC; e.g., Chopin & Papaspiliopoulos, 2020), is a natural generalization of importance
sampling that constructs importance-weighted samples from a sequence of unnormalized target
distributions ⟨egt ⟩∞
                    t=0 to arrive at the final unnormalized target g
                                                                   e. In our case, we consider intermediate
                                                    (t) def
targets get defined on the sequence of spaces A = {x ∈ A∗ | |x| = t} ∪ {x ∈ A∗ EOS | |x| ≤ t},
that is, partial sequences of length equal to t and complete sequences of length less than or equal to t.
The targets are defined as
                                      get (x) = p(x)Φ(x), for x ∈ A(t)                                  (6)

Note that ge and get are unnormalized distributions over different spaces: A∗ EOS and A(t) respectively.
Whereas ge only considers potentials on complete sequences, get depends also on the behavior of the
potentials Φexp when applied to partial sequences. But as t → ∞, there is less and less mass on
partial sequences, and get approaches ge no matter how the partial potentials are defined.
The particles for get are drawn as prefixes from ℓeff (stopping at length t if EOS has not been reached),
again requiring an importance weighting correction. The importance weight at time t can be re-
expressed as the importance weight from time t − 1 times a correction factor for step t:
                                                (i) (i)
                                  (i) def g
                                          et (x<t xt )
                                wt    =           (i)
                                                                                                                 (7a)
                                          ℓeff (x<t xt )
                                                    t                 (i)   (i)
                                             (i)
                                                    Y           get′ (x<t′ xt′ )
                                     = ge0 (x<1 )               (i)                (i)
                                                                                                                 (7b)
                                                t′ =1 get′ −1 (x<t′ ) ℓeff (xt′ | x<t′ )
                                                           (i) (i)
                                        (i)         get (x<t xt )
                                     = wt−1           (i)              (i)
                                                                                                                 (7c)
                                            get−1 (x<t ) ℓeff (xt | x<t )
                                                                       (i) (i)
                                        (i)            (i)    Φexp (x<t xt )
                                     = wt−1 · Leff (x<t ) ·               (i)
                                                                                                                 (7d)
                                                                Φexp (x<t )
The sequential Monte Carlo algorithm generates approximations to each intermediate target get ,
using resampling steps to reallocate computation from less to more promising partial sequences.
We begin with a collection of N weighted particles (x(i) , w(i) ) = (ε, 1), where ε is the empty
6
    However, the number of particles required to obtain a good approximation of the target distribution is exponential
    in the KL divergence between target g and proposal ℓeff (Chatterjee & Diaconis, 2018).


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sequence of tokens. Then, starting at t = 1, we repeat the following three steps until all particles are
EOS-terminated (i.e., x(i) ∈ A∗ EOS for all i):
                                                                 (i)           (i)                               (i)
1. Extend. For each incomplete particle x(i) , sample xt ∼ ℓeff (· | x<t ) and update x(i) ← x(i) xt .
                                                                                                             (i) (i)
                                                                                                (i)   Φexp (x<t xt )
2. Reweight. For each extended particle x(i) , update the weight w(i) ← w(i) Leff (x<t )                  .     (i)
                                                                                                        Φexp (x<t )
                                                                             (1)          (N )

                                                         i.i.d.
3. Resample. Sample ancestor indices a(1) , ... , a(N ) ∼ Categorical wW , ... , wW              where W =
                                                                (a(i) ) W
   PN     (i)                                 (i)    (i)
     i=1 w . Then, reassign all particles (x , w ) ← (x                , N ) for all i simultaneously.7
The extension step extends each incomplete particle with a next token proposed by the local product
of experts ℓeff . The reweighting step computes the updated importance weight, incorporating a new
factor for the new token. The resampling step exploits any early signal available in the updated
weights at time t to abandon some less promising incomplete particles (which are unlikely to be
chosen as ancestors) and focus more future computation on more promising particles (which are likely
to be chosen as ancestors multiple times and then will be extended in multiple ways at time t + 1).
This reallocation of computation often leads to dramatic improvements in inference quality—without
it, SMC would reduce to the previous importance sampling method.
Further extensions. We further extend our SMC implementation in two ways. First, potentials in
Φeff may still be modestly expensive to evaluate on the entire vocabulary. In these cases, we develop
cheap stochastic approximations to the local product of distributions and use these as proposals
during the Extend step. The incremental weight computation must also be corrected to account for
these approximations; we derive stochastic unbiased estimators of the incremental weights that can
be soundly used within SMC (see Appendix C). Second, the intermediate targets get do not need to
advance token-by-token; in some domains, it is beneficial to consider more semantically meaningful
increments. For example, in one of our experiments, the intermediate target pt is defined over the
space of all partial Python programs containing t or fewer lines of code (rather than tokens); the
Extend step then samples a different number of tokens per particle, waiting in each partial sequence
until a new full line has been generated. Such strategies can lead to better particle alignment (Lundén
et al., 2018), making resampling more effective.


3       E XPERIMENTS

We compare seven approaches to constrained generation:
1. Language model (Base LM). This method simply samples from the base language model p (see
   §3.1 for details on the language models used).
2. Language model with grammar constraint (Locally constrained decoding). This is the approach
   used by much prior work (Footnote 3). In each of our domains, we formulate a context-free
   grammar (CFG) encoding a notion of syntactic well-formedness appropriate for the domain (see
   §3.1). We let Φeff encode the binary function that determines whether its input is a prefix of some
   valid sequence in the grammar’s language. This baseline directly samples from ℓeff , i.e., it uses
   per-token logit masking to greedily enforce the CFG constraint.
3. Language model with grammar constraint and weight correction (Grammar-only IS). This method
   generates particles from ℓeff , then computes importance weights to correct toward the global
   product of p and Φeff . These weights mitigate some of the greediness of local-product-of-experts
   sampling, but do not yet integrate any potentials beyond Φeff .
4. Language model with grammar constraint, weight correction, and resampling (Grammar-only
   SMC). This method is a straightforward application of Lew et al. (2023) to locally constrained
   decoding and is similar to Park et al. (2025), which also attempts to correct for the greediness of
   locally constrained decoding. As in the previous method, it targets the global product of p and
   Φeff but uses resampling to reallocate computation to promising particles.
5. Language model with grammar constraint and expensive potential (Sample-Rerank). Sample-
   Rerank is a common family of approaches for incorporating an external signal into an LM’s
   generations post-hoc, for instance by choosing the best-of-n particles via a reward model (Nakano
   et al., 2021; Krishna et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Gui et al., 2024; Mudgal et al., 2024; Ichihara
                                                                                 2
                                                                     ( N w(i) )
                                                                       P
7                                                              b def
    In practice, we only resample if the effective sample size N = PNi=1(w(i) )2 is under a threshold (e.g., N3 ).
                                                                        i=1


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Summary of tasks and potential functions. Examples are truncated for brevity. Full prompts include
additional information.
                                  Potentials                                       Examples
 Task
                          Φeff             Φexp                     Prompt                           Output
                                                        Write the STRIPS goal condition
                                                                                                  (:goal (and
                        STRIPS                              for the planning problem
 Goal Inference                       Plan simulation                                        (arm-empty) (on-table
                         parser                             described below [...]. The
                                                                                                    b1) [...]
                                                        STRIPS initial condition is: [...]
                                                        Here is a sample dataframe: [...]
                                                         I’d like to add inverses of each           result =
                                      Error-checking
 Python Data Science       -                            existing column to the dataframe     df.join(df.apply(lambda
                                      with test cases
                                                                       [...]                       x: 1/x) [...]

                                         Alias and      Here is a database schema: [...]        SELECT T2.name,
                          SQL                            For each stadium, how many
 Text-to-SQL                           table-column                                          COUNT(*) FROM concert
                         parser                                concerts are there?
                                         checking                                                  AS T1 [...]
                                        Incremental        Given the following list of
                        SMILES
 Molecular Synthesis                     molecule        molecules in SMILES format,         CC1=CC2(OC=N)C(=O) [...]
                         parser
                                         validation     write an additional molecule [...]


   et al., 2025) or filtering via a verifier (Olausson et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Lightman et al.,
   2024; Xin et al., 2024). In each domain, we formulate an additional potential Φexp that encodes
   task-specific signals of sequence quality (see §3.1). This baseline generates grammar-constrained
   sequences from the local product of experts, then reweights each sequence x by Φexp (x).
6. Language model with grammar constraint, weight correction, and expensive potential (Full IS).
   This is the full importance sampling method described in §2, with Φ = Φeff ∪ Φexp . Unlike
   in the previous method, the importance weights here include correction terms that mitigate the
   greediness of local sampling, targeting the global product g. We include this method primarily as
   an ablation of our next method (SMC), modified not to include incremental resampling.
7. Language model with grammar constraint, weight correction, expensive potential, and resampling
   (Full SMC). This method includes all of the algorithmic contributions of our approach. It is the
   full sequential Monte Carlo algorithm, with Φ = Φeff ∪ Φexp . It targets the same global posterior
   g as the previous method but uses resampling to reallocate computation to promising particles.
We report results using N = 10 particles; see Appendix A.2 and Fig. 2 for downstream accuracy
results for a varying number of particles. We ran experiments on GCP instances with 1 A100 GPU
and 12 vCPUs (our CFG parser is implemented for CPU and is parallelized across particles), with the
exception of the Data Science domain, for which we used 4 H100 GPUs and 64 vCPUs.

3.1     D OMAINS

We study the performance of our proposed sampling methods on four challenging semantic parsing
domains, summarized in Table 1; see Appendix E for further details.
• Goal inference (Planetarium). Task: Formally specify an agent’s goal in the STRIPS subset
  of the PDDL planning language, based on a natural-language description of the goal and PDDL
  code detailing the agent’s initial conditions and plan for achieving it. Data: Blocksworld tasks
  with up to 10 objects from the Planetarium benchmark (Zuo et al., 2024). Metric: Accuracy with
  respect to ground-truth PDDL goal. Base LM: Llama 3.1 8B. Grammar: STRIPS syntax for goals
  within Planetarium Blocksworld’s domain definition. Expensive potential: Run a simulation with a
  ground-truth plan and check whether the resulting state conforms to the predicted (partial) goal.
• Python for data science (DS-1000). Task: Generate Python code that uses standard data science
  libraries (NumPy, PyTorch, Pandas, etc.) to solve a task specified in natural language and via
  (executable) test cases. Data: DS-1000 benchmark (Lai et al., 2023). Metric: Accuracy of the
  generated program with respect to the provided test cases. Base LM: Llama 3 70B. Grammar:
  We use a trivial potential Φeff (x) = 1, as we find that the unconstrained LM reliably generates
  grammatical Python (that may nonetheless induce runtime errors). Expensive potential: Given
  a partial program x, Φexp truncates x to the longest prefix of the sequence that consists of only
  valid Python statements (discarding any incomplete material at the end), and executes the resulting
  (partial) program on the provided test case, checking for runtime errors.
• Text-to-SQL (Spider). Task: Generate SQL queries from a natural language question and a
  database schema. Data: Spider development split (Yu et al., 2018). Metric: Execution accuracy
  (whether the generated SQL query, when run against a test database, produces the same results


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 2: Comparison of method performance across domains with bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. For
brevity, grammar constraint and weight correction are abbreviated as grammar and correction, respectively.
                                                                                                      Score
 Method
                                                                 Goal inference      Molecular synthesis        Data science         Text-to-SQL
 Base LM                                                        0.063 (0.05, 0.08)    0.132 (0.12, 0.15)      0.213 (0.19, 0.24)   0.531 (0.51, 0.55)
 w/ grammar constraint (Locally constrained Decoding)           0.086 (0.07, 0.11)    0.189 (0.17, 0.21)              -            0.559 (0.54, 0.58)
 w/ grammar, weight correction (Grammar-only IS)                0.083 (0.06, 0.11)    0.228 (0.21, 0.25)              -            0.597 (0.57, 0.62)
 w/ grammar, potential (Sample-Rerank)                          0.289 (0.24, 0.34)    0.392 (0.36, 0.42)              -            0.581 (0.56, 0.60)
 w/ grammar, correction, and resampling (Grammar-only SMC)      0.401 (0.34, 0.46)    0.205 (0.18, 0.23)              -            0.596 (0.57, 0.62)
 w/ grammar, potential, and correction (Full IS)                0.257 (0.21, 0.31)    0.404 (0.37, 0.44)      0.346 (0.31, 0.39)   0.618 (0.59, 0.64)
 w/ grammar, potential, correction, and resampling (Full SMC)   0.419 (0.37, 0.48)    0.577 (0.56, 0.59)      0.407 (0.36, 0.45)   0.620 (0.60, 0.64)


Figure 2: Left: Performance on the Data Science task (DS-1000) for different models and methods. Codex-002
performance as reported in Lai et al. (2023). Right: Performance across all tasks for Full IS and Full SMC
with 5, 10, and 50 particles. Error bars: bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.
  as the ground-truth SQL query). Base LM: Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct. Grammar: SQL context-free
  grammars released by Roy et al. (2024), which enforce valid SQL syntax. Expensive potential:
  Check whether column names in the generated (partial) query actually belong to the queried tables,
  modulo aliasing. (The grammar ensures only that the column names exist in some table.)
• Molecular synthesis (GDB-17). Task: Generate drug-like molecules in the SMILES for-
  mat (Weininger, 1988). Data: Few-shot prompts constructed by repeatedly choosing 20 random
  examples from the GDB-17 dataset (Ruddigkeit et al., 2012). Metric: Quantitative Estimate of
  Drug-likeness (QED; Bickerton et al., 2012), a standard molecular fitness function. Base LM:
  Llama 3.1 8B. Grammar: SMILES syntax for molecules. Expensive potential: A SMILES prefix
  validator implemented in the Python partialsmiles library (O’Boyle, 2024).

3.2    E VALUATION OF D OWNSTREAM P ERFORMANCE

We begin by investigating whether our approach leads to significant performance gains. Table 2 reports
posterior-weighted accuracy for our approach and ablations of its components: grammar constraints,
weight corrections, expensive potentials, and resampling. We first summarize the observed effects of
each component in our approach:
Grammar constraints. In line with previous literature (e.g., Shin et al., 2021; Scholak et al., 2021;
Poesia et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024), we find that the addition of a grammar constraint via Φeff
improves downstream accuracy relative to the base LM across all domains in which it is used, even
without the use of weight corrections.
Expensive potentials. Furthermore, we observe that integrating expensive potentials Φexp improves
accuracy in models. Even without any weight corrections, the improvement in the goal inference,
data science, and molecular synthesis domains is large; in the text-to-SQL domain, it is smaller
but statistically significant (paired permutation test, p < 0.01). This suggests that making use of
information that cannot be efficiently encoded in logit masks can greatly improve performance.
Weight corrections. Although the use of Φeff and Φexp alone leads to significant gains in downstream
accuracy, these gains can be amplified with the addition of weight corrections. In cases without the
expensive potential, weight corrections provide significant albeit relatively small gains in accuracy
across three domains; in goal inference, it does not significantly affect performance. In the presence
of the expensive potential, adding weight corrections improves accuracy for text-to-SQL and has no
effect on goal inference and molecular synthesis. Overall, these results indicate that debiasing samples
from a local product of experts to correctly target the global product of experts often significantly
improves downstream accuracy and never harms it. That said, the accuracy gains attributable to
weight corrections are modest compared to other components of the algorithm, which suggests that the
bias from locally constrained decoding may be less severe in these semantic parsing domains than has
been observed in other domains (e.g., constrained generation of natural language, Lew et al., 2023).


                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Figure 3: Estimated KL between the algorithm and the global product of experts for a representative problem
instance in each domain. Values closer to 0 indicate that the algorithm is better at approximating g. Significant
differences are indicated with ** for p < 0.01 and *** for p < 0.001 (t-test). Algorithms use N = 10 particles.


Resampling. We observe that the addition of resampling steps improves downstream accuracy in
all domains except text-to-SQL, for which they neither significantly improve nor hurt performance.
These results motivate adaptively focusing computation on promising partial sequences.
Other Evaluations. Next, we study the effects of varying the base language model, the number of
particles used by different methods, and the computational cost of our approach: Tables 4, 6 and 8 in
the appendix report the results of these experiments. We summarize key findings:
• Our approach allows smaller LMs to outperform larger ones: In 3 out of 4 domains (Data Sci-
  ence, Molecular Synthesis, Goal Inference), Full SMC allows small language models to outperform
  models over 8 times larger (see Tables 2 and 4). These gains persist on larger models: Fig. 2 shows
  how our method allows Llama 3.1 70b to outperform Codex-002, which has 175b parameters and
  is fine-tuned for coding tasks.
• Our approach makes better use of resources than approaches that apply constraints only at
  the end of generation: In 3 out of 4 domains (Data Science, Molecular Synthesis, Text-to-SQL),
  Full SMC performs as well as or better than Full IS while using one-tenth of the particles (see
  Fig. 2 and Table 6); in the remaining domain (Goal Inference), Full SMC outperforms IS with one
  fifth (10 vs 50) or one half (5 vs 10) of the particles. This is in line with the arguments drawn in §2
  for the poor scaling of importance sampling and the benefits of resampling.
• Our approach incurs minimal computational overhead: At every token, our SMC approach
  incurs two computational overheads relative to a simple locally constrained decoding baseline:
  resampling and computing expensive potentials. Though the cost of resampling is negligible,
  computing expensive potentials presents a more significant cost that varies across domains: Table 8
  shows that cost rarely rises above ∼30ms per token. In general, this cost is reduced by two factors:
  (i) expensive potentials often need to run expensive computations only at larger, semantically
  meaningful units (for instance, the end of a SQL clause or a Python statement) rather than at
  every token—therefore significantly lessening the average cost per token, (ii) expensive potentials
  operations are often performed on CPU rather than GPU, and therefore cost fewer dollars per hour.
3.3   VALIDATION OF THE P ROBABILISTIC P ERSPECTIVE
The best-performing methods from the previous section were designed to approximate the global
product of experts distribution. In this section, we investigate how closely each of these methods
approximates this global distribution and whether the downstream performance results from the
previous section are driven by the quality of the probabilistic inference. In particular, we find:
Within each problem instance, the best-performing methods have outputs that are closer in
KL divergence to the global product of experts. We consider the distribution over sequences
 r                                                                                            r
qalg (x) defined by each algorithm (see Appendix D for details and derivations). For each qalg  , we
estimate a tractable correlate of the KL between the algorithm and the global product of experts:
                r
log Z − KL(qalg    ∥ g). We refer to this quantity as the approximation quality. Since the term
log Z is algorithm-independent, we can directly compare the estimated approximation quality across
algorithms to determine which ones have lower KL divergence relative to the global product of
experts. However, because log Z is instance-specific, these comparisons can only be made at the
instance level. Accordingly, for each domain, we select the instance with the median unique accuracy


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 3: Pearson correlation between relative particle weights and accuracy scores for all weighted methods.
Greater correlation indicates that relative weights are more strongly associated with downstream performance.
                                                                  Correlation between relative weight and score
 Method
                                                 Goal inference      Molecular synthesis     Data science         Text-to-SQL
 LM with grammar constraints and weight cor-
                                                0.138 (0.10, 0.18)    0.218 (0.16, 0.28)   0.217 (0.18, 0.26)   0.810 (0.79, 0.83)
 rection (Grammar-Only IS)
 LM with grammar constraints, potential, and
                                                0.677 (0.64, 0.71)    0.570 (0.53, 0.61)   0.289 (0.25, 0.33)   0.796 (0.78, 0.81)
 weight correction (Full IS)
 LM with grammar constraints, potential,
                                                0.793 (0.76, 0.82)    0.826 (0.81, 0.84)   0.370 (0.31, 0.42)   0.810 (0.79, 0.83)
 weight correction, and resampling (Full SMC)
Figure 4: Distributional properties of compounds generated by different methods. Middle: Distribution of
drug-likeness as measured by QED score (Bickerton et al., 2012). Right: Means for other properties of interest
such as diversity and de novo similarity (details in Appendix E.2).


as a representative example. Fig. 3 visualizes estimated approximation quality on these examples
across all methods, which include Φexp . Estimates were computed across 100 runs of each algorithm.
In all domains, sampling from the local product of experts without weight correction leads to
significantly lower approximation quality relative to the methods that approximate the global product.
The addition of resampling steps also significantly improves approximation quality in the data
science and goal inference domains, but does not significantly change quality in the molecular
synthesis and text-to-SQL domains. These trends in approximation quality are consistent with those
observed in our evaluation of downstream accuracy: for example, we find that text-to-SQL is the
domain in which weight corrections led to the most significant improvement in approximations of
the global posterior, as well as the domain in which weight corrections most improve downstream
performance. This suggests that the probabilistic formulation of the problem leads to practical gains
in performance. Furthermore, these benefits can extend beyond our main performance metric; for
instance, resampling during molecular generation yields simultaneous improvements along a number
of additional dimensions of interest, including de-novo similarity and diversity (Fig. 4).
Across problem instances, the best-performing methods assign probabilities that are more
correlated with downstream performance In each of our experiments, we group output particles
by semantic equivalence, and estimate the probability of each equivalence class under the method’s
approximation to the global product of experts, by summing the normalized weights of the members
of each equivalence class (this is similar to the postprocessing performed in Shi et al., 2022). We then
measure the correlation between the estimated probability of a result and its score on the task-specific
metric. Table 3 shows sequential Monte Carlo overall exhibits high correlation between (approximate)
posterior probabilities and downstream performance, and that the differences in correlation between
methods closely track the differences in performance in §3.2. In the goal inference, molecular
synthesis, and data science domains, where expensive potentials and resampling greatly increase
performance, we find that the same features also result in higher correlation between result probability
and performance, whereas in text-to-SQL, where the performance gains are slimmer, we find that all
methods correlate and score equally well. Together, these results validate the probabilistic approach,
suggesting that the global posterior captures semantically meaningful uncertainty.
C ONCLUSION
This paper presents a principled formulation of constrained generation as sampling from a global
product of experts distribution. To solve this sampling problem, we introduce a sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) algorithm that can flexibly incorporate different constraints, making incremental use of their
signals. In a series of experiments, we show that this approach allows smaller models to outperform
larger and fine-tuned models, that the incrementality of SMC makes it an order of magnitude more
efficient than non-incremental approaches, and that downstream performance is linked to the quality
of the posterior approximation, providing support for our probabilistic perspective.


                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Manuel de Prada Corral, Brian DuSell, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and
Tan Zhi Xuan for valuable discussions, suggestions, and coding support that improved this work. The
last author gratefully acknowledges the Canada CIFAR AI Chair program for support.

AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
  First Authors
• João Loula (jloula@mit.edu): research conception and development, writing, experiment devel-
  opment, software development (prototype)
• Benjamin LeBrun (benjamin.lebrun@mail.mcgill.ca): research conception and development,
  lead software engineer, experiment development, writing
• Li Du (leodu@cs.jhu.edu): experiment development, software development (parser)

  Contributors
• Ben Lipkin (lipkinb@mit.edu): software development (grammar interfaces, testing, and integra-
  tion), writing
• Clemente Pasti (clemente.pasti@inf.ethz.ch): software and algorithm development (context-
  free grammars), writing
• Gabriel Grand (grandg@mit.edu): software development (testing and integration), analysis and
  presentation of molecular synthesis experiments
• Tianyu Liu (tianyu.liu@inf.ethz.ch): software development (vLLM integration, testing)
• Yahya Emara (yemara@ethz.ch): software development (testing and integration), writing
• Marjorie Freedman (mrf@isi.edu): organization management, writing
• Jason Eisner (jason@cs.jhu.edu): technical advice, writing, project advising and mentorship
• Ryan Cotterell (ryan.cotterell@inf.ethz.ch): organization management, senior project lead-
  ership, research conception and development, writing

  Senior Authors
• Vikash Mansinghka (vkm@mit.edu): organization management, research conception and develop-
  ment, project advising and mentorship
• Alexander K. Lew (alexander.lew@yale.edu): senior project leadership, research conception
  and development, project narrative development, writing, software development (prototype)
• Tim Vieira (tim.f.vieira@gmail.com): senior project leadership, full-stack software contributor,
  research conception and development, project narrative development, writing, software system
  design and implementation
• Timothy J. O’Donnell (timothy.odonnell@mcgill.ca): overall team leadership and direction,
  organization management, senior project leadership, research conception and development, project
  advising and mentorship, project narrative development, writing

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2204.01691, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691. (Cited on p. 33)
Afra Amini, Tim Vieira, Elliott Ash, and Ryan Cotterell. Variational best-of-N alignment. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=W9FZEQj3vv. (Cited on p. 33)
Christophe Andrieu and Gareth O. Roberts. The pseudo-marginal approach for efficient monte
  carlo computations. arXiv: Statistics Theory, 2009. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:15661729. (Cited on p. 28)


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson,
  Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson,
  Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile
  Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova
  DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer
  El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom Henighan,
  Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas
  Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073.
  (Cited on p. 32, 33)

Martin Berglund, Willeke Martens, and Brink Van der Merwe. Constructing a BPE tokenization DFA.
 In International Conference on Implementation and Application of Automata. Springer, 2024. URL
 https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1007/978-3-031-71112-1_5. (Cited on p. 33)

G. Richard Bickerton, Gaia V. Paolini, Jérémy Besnard, Sorel Muresan, and Andrew L. Hopkins.
  Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs. Nature Chemistry, 4(2), 2012. URL https://www.
  nature.com/articles/nchem.1243. (Cited on p. 8, 10, 30)

Benjamin Börschinger and Mark Johnson. A particle filter algorithm for Bayesian wordsegmentation.
  In Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology Association Workshop, December 2011.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/U11-1004/. (Cited on p. 2, 32)

Jan Buys and Phil Blunsom. A Bayesian model for generative transition-based dependency parsing.
  In Proceedings of the International Conference on Dependency Linguistics, 2015. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/W15-2108/. (Cited on p. 2, 32)

Kris Cao and Laura Rimell. You should evaluate your language model on marginal likelihood over
  tokenisations. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.161.pdf. (Cited on p.
  33)

Sourav Chatterjee and Persi Diaconis. The sample size required in importance sampling. The Annals of
  Applied Probability, 28(2), 2018. URL https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/26542331.pdf.
  (Cited on p. 5)

Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, Matei A. Zaharia, and
  James Y. Zou. Are more LLM calls all you need? towards the scaling properties of compound
  AI systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, De-
  cember 10 - 15, 2024, 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
  51173cf34c5faac9796a47dc2fdd3a71-Abstract-Conference.html. (Cited on p. 2, 7)

Emily Cheng, Marco Baroni, and Carmen Amo Alonso. Linearly controlled language generation
 with performative guarantees. NeurIPS Workshop on Foundation Model Interventions, 2024. URL
 https://openreview.net/pdf?id=V2xBBD1Xtu. (Cited on p. 32, 33)

Nadezhda Chirkova, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, and Marc Dymetman. Should you marginalize
  over possible tokenizations? In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2023. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.1.pdf.
  (Cited on p. 33)

Nicolas Chopin and Omiros Papaspiliopoulos. An Introduction to Sequential Monte Carlo, volume 4.
  Springer, 2020. URL https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-030-47845-2.
  (Cited on p. 5, 24)

Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason
  Yosinski, and Rosanne Liu. Plug and play language models: A simple approach to controlled text
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02164, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1912.02164.
  (Cited on p. 33)


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniel Deutsch, Shyam Upadhyay, and Dan Roth. A general-purpose algorithm for constrained
  sequential inference. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Natural Language
  Learning, 2019. URL https://aclanthology.org/K19-1045/. (Cited on p. 32)
Li Du, Afra Amini, Lucas Torroba Hennigen, Xinyan Velocity Yu, Holden Lee, Jason Eisner, and
  Ryan Cotterell. Principled gradient-based MCMC for conditional sampling of text. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v235/du24a.html. (Cited on p. 33)
Gregory Dubbin and Phil Blunsom. Unsupervised part of speech inference with particle filters. In
  Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Induction of Linguistic Structure, Montréal, QC,
  2012. URL https://aclanthology.org/W12-1907.pdf. (Cited on p. 2, 32)
Jay Earley. An Efficient Context-Free Parsing Algorithm. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University,
  1968. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/362007.362035. (Cited on p. 23)
Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. STRIPS: A new approach to the application of theorem proving
  to problem solving. Artificial Intelligence, 2(3-4), 1971. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/abs/pii/0004370271900105. (Cited on p. 31)
Daniel Flam-Shepherd, Kevin Zhu, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Language models can learn complex
  molecular distributions. Nature Communications, 13(1), 2022. URL https://www.nature.com/
  articles/s41467-022-30839-x.pdf. (Cited on p. 30)
Saibo Geng, Martin Josifoski, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. Grammar-constrained decoding for
  structured NLP tasks without finetuning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, 2023. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.
  674.pdf. (Cited on p. 32)
Malik Ghallab, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, Drew McDermott, Ashwin Ram, Manuela Veloso,
 Daniel Weld, and David Wilkins. PDDL—the planning domain definition language. Technical
 report, Yale Center for Computational Vision and Control, 1998. URL https://www.cs.cmu.
 edu/~mmv/planning/readings/98aips-PDDL.pdf. (Cited on p. 31)
Joshua Goodman. Semiring parsing. Computational Linguistics, 25(4), 1999. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/J99-4004/. (Cited on p. 23)
Lin Guan, Karthik Valmeekam, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Lever-
  aging pre-trained large language models to construct and utilize world models for
  model-based task planning.      In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2023.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  f9f54762cbb4fe4dbffdd4f792c31221-Paper-Conference.pdf. (Cited on p. 31)
Lin Gui, Cristina Garbacea, and Victor Veitch. Bonbon alignment for large language models and
  the sweetness of best-of-n sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC,
  Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024, 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2024/hash/056521a35eacd9d2127b66a7d3c499c5-Abstract-Conference.html. (Cited on p.
  2, 6)
Malte Helmert. The fast downward planning system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 26,
 2006. URL https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/10457. (Cited on p. 31)
Brian Hie, Salvatore Candido, Zeming Lin, Ori Kabeli, Roshan Rao, Nikita Smetanin, Tom Sercu,
  and Alexander Rives. A high-level programming language for generative protein design. bioRxiv,
  2022. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.12.21.521526v1.full.pdf.
  (Cited on p. 33)
John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages and Computa-
  tion. Addison-Wesley, 1979. ISBN 0-201-02988-X. (Cited on p. 23)
Daniel G. Horvitz and Donovan J. Thompson. A generalization of sampling without replacement
  from a finite universe. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 47(260), 1952. URL
  https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2280784.pdf. (Cited on p. 25)


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R. Howey, D. Long, and M. Fox. VAL: Automatic plan validation, continuous effects and mixed
  initiative planning using PDDL. In IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial
  Intelligence, 2004. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1374201. (Cited on p. 31)
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Dhruv Shah, Danny Driess, Andy Zeng, Yao Lu, Pete Florence, Igor
 Mordatch, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Grounded decoding: Guiding text
 generation with grounded models for embodied agents. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, volume 36, 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
 paper/2023/file/bb3cfcb0284642a973dd631ec9184f2f-Paper-Conference.pdf. (Cited on
 p. 32, 33)
Yuki Ichihara, Yuu Jinnai, Tetsuro Morimura, Kenshi Abe, Kaito Ariu, Mitsuki Sakamoto, and Eiji
  Uchibe. Evaluation of best-of-n sampling strategies for language model alignment. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research, 2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=H4S4ETc8c9. (Cited on p. 2, 6)
Terry Koo, Frederick Liu, and Luheng He. Automata-based constraints for language model decod-
  ing. In Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  BDBdblmyzY. (Cited on p. 32)
Tomasz Korbak, Ethan Perez, and Christopher Buckley. RL with KL penalties is better viewed as
  Bayesian inference. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022,
  2022. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.77. (Cited on p. 33)
Kalpesh Krishna, Yapei Chang, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Rankgen: Improving text generation
  with large ranking models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 7-11,
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2022.emnlp-main.15. (Cited on p. 2, 6)
Michael Kuchnik, Virginia Smith, and George Amvrosiadis.      Validating large lan-
 guage models with RELM.        Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 5,
 2023.        URL https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
 93c7d9da61ccb2a60ac047e92787c3ef-Paper-mlsys2023.pdf. (Cited on p. 32, 33)
Sachin Kumar, Eric Malmi, Aliaksei Severyn, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Controlled text generation as
  continuous optimization with multiple constraints. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
  79ec2a4246feb2126ecf43c4a4418002-Paper.pdf. (Cited on p. 33)
Sachin Kumar, Biswajit Paria, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Gradient-based constrained sampling from
  language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
  ural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.144/. (Cited on p. 33)
Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Wen-tau Yih,
  Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. DS-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for data science
  code generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/lai23b/lai23b.pdf.
  (Cited on p. 7, 8, 31)
Greg Landrum. RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics software. https://github.com/rdkit/
  rdkit, 2024. (Cited on p. 30)
Dieterich Lawson, Allan Raventós, Andrew Warrington, and Scott Linderman. Sixo: Smooth-
  ing inference with twisted objectives. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  fddc79681b2df2734c01444f9bc2a17e-Paper-Conference.pdf. (Cited on p. 2)
Alexander K Lew, Marco Cusumano-Towner, and Vikash K Mansinghka. Recursive Monte Carlo and
  variational inference with auxiliary variables. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v180/lew22a/
  lew22a.pdf. (Cited on p. 24, 27, 28)


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander K Lew, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Gabriel Grand, and Vikash Mansinghka. Sequential Monte Carlo
  steering of large language models using probabilistic programs. In ICML Workshop: Sampling and
  Optimization in Discrete Space, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ul2K0qXxXy.
  (Cited on p. 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 21, 32, 33)

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth
 International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11,
 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=v8L0pN6EOi. (Cited
  on p. 2, 7)

Chu-Cheng Lin and Jason Eisner. Neural particle smoothing for sampling from conditional sequence
  models. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2018. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/N18-1085/. (Cited on p. 2, 32)

Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  LLM+P: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11477, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.11477. (Cited on p. 31)

Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras,
  Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. Neurologic A* esque decoding: Constrained
  text generation with lookahead heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08726, 2021. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.57.pdf. (Cited on p. 33)

Daniel Lundén, David Broman, Fredrik Ronquist, and Lawrence M Murray. Automatic alignment
  of sequential Monte Carlo inference in higher-order probabilistic programs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.07439, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1812.07439. (Cited on p. 6)

Vikash K Mansinghka, Ulrich Schaechtle, Shivam Handa, Alexey Radul, Yutian Chen, and Martin
  Rinard. Probabilistic programming with programmable inference. In Proceedings of the 39th
  ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2018. URL
  https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3192366.3192409. (Cited on p. 2)

Clara Meister, Tim Vieira, and Ryan Cotterell. If beam search is the answer, what was the question?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02650, 2020. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.
  170/. (Cited on p. 33)

Ning Miao, Hao Zhou, Lili Mou, Rui Yan, and Lei Li. CGMH: Constrained sentence generation by
  metropolis-hastings sampling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  number 01, 2019. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4659. (Cited
  on p. 33)

Ning Miao, Yuxuan Song, Hao Zhou, and Lei Li. Do you have the right scissors? tailoring pre-
  trained language models via Monte-Carlo methods. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.314/. (Cited on p. 32)

Michal Moskal, Madan Musuvathi, and Emre Kıcıman. AI Controller Interface. https://github.
 com/microsoft/aici/, 2024. (Cited on p. 2, 32)

Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng
  Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, Jilin Chen, Alex Beutel, and Ahmad
  Beirami. Controlled decoding from language models. In Forty-first International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=bVIcZb7Qa0. (Cited on p. 2, 6)

Christian A. Naesseth, Fredrik Lindsten, and Thomas B. Schön. Elements of sequential monte
  carlo. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., 12(3), 2019. doi: 10.1561/2200000074. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1561/2200000074. (Cited on p. 2)


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. WebGPT:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.09332. (Cited on p. 2, 6)

Franz Nowak and Ryan Cotterell. A fast algorithm for computing prefix probabilities. In Proceedings
  of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.6/. (Cited on p. 23)

Noel O’Boyle. partialsmiles: A validating SMILES parser, with support for incomplete SMILES,
  2024. URL https://github.com/baoilleach/partialsmiles. (Cited on p. 8, 30)

Theo Olausson, Alex Gu, Ben Lipkin, Cedegao Zhang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Joshua Tenenbaum,
  and Roger Levy. LINC: A neurosymbolic approach for logical reasoning by combining language
  models with first-order logic provers. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, 2023. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.
  313/. (Cited on p. 2, 7)

João CA Oliveira, Johanna Frey, Shuo-Qing Zhang, Li-Cheng Xu, Xin Li, Shu-Wen Li, Xin Hong,
  and Lutz Ackermann. When machine learning meets molecular synthesis. Trends in Chemistry,
  4(10), 2022. URL https://www.cell.com/trends/chemistry/abstract/S2589-5974(22)
  00175-7. (Cited on p. 30)

Andreas Opedal, Ran Zmigrod, Tim Vieira, Ryan Cotterell, and Jason Eisner. Efficient semiring-
 weighted Earley parsing. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2023. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.204/. (Cited on p.
  23)

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob
  Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
  Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow in-
  structions with human feedback.   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf. (Cited on p. 32, 33)

Kanghee Park, Jiayu Wang, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Nadia Polikarpova, and Loris
  D’Antoni. Grammar-aligned decoding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2025. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/
  2bdc2267c3d7d01523e2e17ac0a754f3-Paper-Conference.pdf. (Cited on p. 2, 4, 6, 32, 34)

Damian Pascual, Beni Egressy, Clara Meister, Ryan Cotterell, and Roger Wattenhofer. A plug-and-
  play method for controlled text generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics, November 2021. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.334/. (Cited on p. 32, 33)

Gabriel Poesia, Alex Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek, and
  Sumit Gulwani. Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=KmtVD97J43e. (Cited on p. 2, 4, 8, 32, 33)

Isha Puri, Shivchander Sudalairaj, Guangxuan Xu, Kai Xu, and Akash Srivastava. A probabilistic
   inference approach to inference-time scaling of LLMs using particle-based Monte Carlo methods.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01618, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.01618. (Cited on
   p. 32)

Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Daniel Khashabi, and Yejin Choi. Cold decoding: Energy-based
  constrained text generation with langevin dynamics. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  3e25d1aff47964c8409fd5c8dc0438d7-Paper-Conference.pdf. (Cited on p. 33)


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ronald Rosenfeld, Stanley Chen, and Xiaojin Zhu. Whole-sentence exponential language models: A
  vehicle for linguistic-statistical integration. Computer Speech & Language, 15, 01 2001. URL
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0885230800901591. (Cited
  on p. 2)
Subhro Roy, Samuel Thomson, Tongfei Chen, Richard Shin, Adam Pauls, Jason Eisner, and
  Benjamin Van Durme. BenchCLAMP: A benchmark for evaluating language models on syn-
  tactic and semantic parsing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 36, 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  9c1535a02f0ce079433344e14d910597-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf. (Cited on p.
  8, 30)
Lars Ruddigkeit, Ruud Van Deursen, Lorenz C Blum, and Jean-Louis Reymond. Enumeration
  of 166 billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database GDB-17. Journal of
  Chemical Information and Modeling, 52(11), 2012. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.
  1021/ci300415d. (Cited on p. 8, 30)
Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for
  constrained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.emnlp-main.39/. (Cited on p. 2, 4, 8, 32)
Freda Shi, Daniel Fried, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sida I Wang. Natural language
  to code translation with execution. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, 2022. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.
  231/. (Cited on p. 10)
Richard Shin and Benjamin Van Durme. Few-shot semantic parsing with language models trained
  on code. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2022. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.naacl-main.396/. (Cited on p. 32)
Richard Shin, Christopher Lin, Sam Thomson, Charles Chen Jr, Subhro Roy, Emmanouil Antonios
  Platanios, Adam Pauls, Dan Klein, Jason Eisner, and Benjamin Van Durme. Constrained language
  models yield few-shot semantic parsers. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.
  608/. (Cited on p. 2, 4, 8, 32)
Tom Silver, Varun Hariprasad, Reece S Shuttleworth, Nishanth Kumar, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and
  Leslie Pack Kaelbling. PDDL planning with pretrained large language models. In Foundation
  Models for Decision Making Workshop, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  1QMMUB4zfl. (Cited on p. 31)
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss,
  Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano.           Learning to summarize
  with human feedback.   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 33, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
  1f89885d556929e98d3ef9b86448f951-Paper.pdf. (Cited on p. 32, 33)
Andreas Stolcke. An efficient probabilistic context-free parsing algorithm that computes prefix
  probabilities. Computational Linguistics, 21(2), 1995. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 J95-2002.pdf. (Cited on p. 23)
Fahim Tajwar, Anikait Singh, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Jeff Schneider, Tengyang Xie, Ste-
  fano Ermon, Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar. Preference fine-tuning of LLMs should leverage
  suboptimal, on-policy data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/tajwar24a.html. (Cited on p. 33)
Zhi Rui Tam, Cheng-Kuang Wu, Yi-Lin Tsai, Chieh-Yen Lin, Hung-yi Lee, and Yun-Nung Chen. Let
  me speak freely? A study on the impact of format restrictions on performance of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02442, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.02442.
  (Cited on p. 33)


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shubham Ugare, Tarun Suresh, Hangoo Kang, Sasa Misailovic, and Gagandeep Singh. SynCode:
  Improving LLM code generation with grammar augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01632,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.01632. (Cited on p. 2, 4, 32)

Tim Vieira, Ben LeBrun, Mario Giulianelli, Juan Luis Gastaldi, Brian DuSell, John Terilla, Timothy J
  O’Donnell, and Ryan Cotterell. From language models over tokens to language models over
  characters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03719, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.03719.
  (Cited on p. 33)

Bailin Wang, Zi Wang, Xuezhi Wang, Yuan Cao, Rif A Saurous, and Yoon Kim. Grammar prompting
  for domain-specific language generation with large language models. In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B4tkwuzeiY&
  noteId=BaPOkLl42Y. (Cited on p. 8, 30, 32)

David Weininger. SMILES, a chemical language and information system. Journal of Chemical
  Information and Computer Sciences, 28(1), 1988. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.
  1021/ci00057a005. (Cited on p. 8, 30)

Brandon T Willard and Rémi Louf. Efficient guided generation for large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.09702, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.09702. (Cited on p. 2,
  4, 32)

Lionel Wong, Jiayuan Mao, Pratyusha Sharma, Zachary S Siegel, Jiahai Feng, Noa Korneev, Joshua B
  Tenenbaum, and Jacob Andreas. Learning adaptive planning representations with natural language
  guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08566, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.08566.
  (Cited on p. 31)

Yaqi Xie, Chen Yu, Tongyao Zhu, Jinbin Bai, Ze Gong, and Harold Soh. Translating natural language
  to planning goals with large-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05128, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.05128. (Cited on p. 31)

Huajian Xin, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Zhizhou Ren, Qihao Zhu, Bo Liu, Chong Ruan, Wenda Li, and
  Xiaodan Liang. Deepseek-prover: Advancing theorem proving in llms through large-scale synthetic
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14333, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.14333.
  (Cited on p. 2, 7)

Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong
 Zhang. Iterative preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for
 RLHF under KL-constraint. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/xiong24a.html. (Cited on p. 33)

Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In
  Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  naacl-main.276/. (Cited on p. 32)

Yi Yang and Jacob Eisenstein. A log-linear model for unsupervised text normalization. In Proceedings
  of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2013. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/D13-1007/. (Cited on p. 32)

Lance Ying, Katherine M Collins, Megan Wei, Cedegao E Zhang, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Adrian Weller,
  Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Lionel Wong. The neuro-symbolic inverse planning engine (NIPE):
  Modeling probabilistic social inferences from linguistic inputs. In Workshop on Theory of Mind in
  Communicating Agents, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UNy5AZkBjy. (Cited
  on p. 31)

Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene
  Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Spider: A large-scale
  human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-SQL task. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D18-1425. (Cited on p. 7)


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Honghua Zhang, Meihua Dang, Nanyun Peng, and Guy Van den Broeck. Tractable control for autore-
  gressive language generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, 2023a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/zhang23g/
  zhang23g.pdf. (Cited on p. 32, 33)
Maosen Zhang, Nan Jiang, Lei Li, and Yexiang Xue. Language generation via combinatorial con-
 straint satisfaction: A tree search enhanced Monte-Carlo approach. In Findings of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.115/. (Cited on p. 33)
Shun Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
  Planning with large language models for code generation. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Lr8cOOtYbfL.
  (Cited on p. 33)
Tianyi Zhang, Li Zhang, Zhaoyi Hou, Ziyu Wang, Yuling Gu, Peter Clark, Chris Callison-Burch, and
  Niket Tandon. PROC2PDDL: Open-domain planning representations from texts. In Proceedings
  of the Workshop on Natural Language Reasoning and Structured Explanations, 2024. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.nlrse-1.2/. (Cited on p. 31)
Stephen Zhao, Rob Brekelmans, Alireza Makhzani, and Roger Baker Grosse. Probabilistic inference
  in language models via twisted sequential Monte Carlo. In Proceedings of the International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhao24c.
  html. (Cited on p. 2, 4, 27, 28, 29, 32, 34)
Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao,
  Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. SGLang:
  Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VqkAKQibpq. (Cited on
  p. 32)
Rui Zheng, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Yuan Hua, Wei Shen, Binghai Wang, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin,
  Qin Liu, Yuhao Zhou, Limao Xiong, Lu Chen, Zhiheng Xi, Nuo Xu, Wenbin Lai, Minghao Zhu,
  Cheng Chang, Zhangyue Yin, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng, Haoran Huang, Tianxiang Sun,
  Hang Yan, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Secrets of RLHF in large
  language models part I: PPO. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04964, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/pdf/2307.04964. (Cited on p. 33)
Tan Zhi-Xuan, Lance Ying, Vikash Mansinghka, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Pragmatic instruction
  following and goal assistance via cooperative language-guided inverse planning. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2024. URL
  https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3635637.3663074. (Cited on p. 31)
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan,
  and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
  2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=92gvk82DE-. (Cited
  on p. 2, 6)
Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, and Jiantao Jiao. Principled reinforcement learning with human
  feedback from pairwise or K-wise comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/zhu23f/zhu23f.pdf. (Cited on p. 33)
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.08593. (Cited on p. 32,
  33)
Max Zuo, Francisco Piedrahita Velez, Xiaochen Li, Michael L Littman, and Stephen H Bach.
 Planetarium: A rigorous benchmark for translating text to structured planning languages. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2407.03321, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.03321. (Cited on p. 7,
 31)


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 4: Downstream accuracy of different methods with a smaller base language model (Llama 3.1 8B in Data
science and Llama 3.2 1B in all other domains). Errors are bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Instruct
model is used for Text-to-SQL.
                                                                                                        Score
 Method
                                                                 Goal inference       Molecular synthesis           Data science            Text-to-SQL
 LM                                                             0.012 (0.01, 0.02)     0.032 (0.02, 0.04)      0.114 (0.09, 0.14)        0.224 (0.207, 0.241)
 w/ grammar constraint (Locally constrained Decoding)           0.046 (0.03, 0.06)     0.031 (0.02, 0.04)              -                 0.250 (0.232, 0.270)
 w/ grammar, weight correction (Grammar-only IS)                0.037 (0.02, 0.06)     0.041 (0.03, 0.05)              -                 0.301 (0.281, 0.323)
 w/ grammar, potential (Sample-Rerank)                          0.087 (0.06, 0.12)     0.119 (0.09, 0.16)              -                 0.299 (0.278, 0.321)
 w/ grammar, correction, and resampling (Grammar-only SMC)      0.052 (0.03, 0.08)     0.050 (0.04, 0.06)              -                 0.302 (0.281, 0.324)
 w/ grammar, potential, and correction (IS)                     0.079 (0.05, 0.11)     0.122 (0.09, 0.16)      0.225 (0.19, 0.26)        0.348 (0.326, 0.372)
 w/ grammar, potential, correction, and resampling (SMC)        0.125 (0.09, 0.16)     0.517 (0.48, 0.55)      0.285 (0.24, 0.34)        0.348 (0.325, 0.374)

Table 5: Downstream accuracy of different methods with a larger (relative to Table 4) base language models
that were used in the main experiments (Llama 3.1 70B in Data science and Llama 3.1 8B in all other domains).
Errors are bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Instruct model is used for Text-to-SQL. This table is identical
to Table 2 in the main text and is repeated in the appendix for easier comparison.
                                                                                                            Score
 Method
                                                                  Goal inference       Molecular synthesis            Data science           Text-to-SQL
 LM                                                              0.063 (0.05, 0.08)     0.132 (0.12, 0.15)          0.213 (0.19, 0.24)     0.531 (0.51, 0.55)
 w/ grammar constraint (Locally constrained Decoding)            0.086 (0.07, 0.11)     0.189 (0.17, 0.21)                  -              0.559 (0.54, 0.58)
 w/ grammar, weight correction (Grammar-only IS)                 0.083 (0.06, 0.11)     0.228 (0.21, 0.25)                  -              0.597 (0.57, 0.62)
 w/ grammar, potential (Sample-Rerank)                           0.289 (0.24, 0.34)     0.392 (0.36, 0.42)                  -              0.581 (0.56, 0.60)
 w/ grammar, correction, and resampling (Grammar-only SMC)       0.401 (0.34, 0.46)     0.205 (0.18, 0.23)                  -              0.596 (0.57, 0.62)
 w/ grammar, potential, and correction (Full IS)                 0.257 (0.21, 0.31)     0.404 (0.37, 0.44)          0.346 (0.31, 0.39)     0.618 (0.59, 0.64)
 w/ grammar, potential, correction, and resampling (Full SMC)    0.419 (0.37, 0.48)     0.577 (0.56, 0.59)          0.407 (0.36, 0.45)     0.620 (0.60, 0.64)


A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

A.1     S MALLER BASE LM S

This section evaluates downstream accuracy across methods using smaller base language models
(relative to Table 2 in the main text, reproduced in Appendix Table 5 for easier comparison). For
the Text-to-SQL, Molecular Synthesis, and Goal Inference domains, which in the §3.2 experiments
used Llama 3.1 (8B), we substitute Llama 3.2 (1B). In the Data Science domain, which used Llama 3
(70B) in the §3.2 experiments, we substitute Llama 3.1 (8B). All experiments were run with N = 10
particles, and the instruct version of Llama 3.2 (1B) was used in the text-to-SQL domain to remain
consistent with the model variants used in the main paper.
We report posterior-weighted accuracy using the smaller LMs across all methods and domains in
Table 4. Although accuracy is significantly lower compared to the larger LMs, we find that weight
corrections, expensive potentials, and resampling steps still improve model performance. We also
find that, in general, the relative gains in accuracy provided by our method are more pronounced for
smaller language models. For easier comparison, Table 5 presents an identical version of Table 2,
showing the results for the larger base LMs which were reported in §3.2. With the exception of
Text-to-SQL, we observe that our approach with the smaller LM outperforms the locally constrained
decoding baseline (LM w/ grammar constraint) using the larger LM. In the Data Science domain, our
Full SMC approach with the smaller LM outperforms the larger base LM. These results suggest that
our approach can dramatically improve the performance of smaller LMs.

A.2     ACCURACY BY N UMBER OF PARTICLES

This section investigates how performance improvements vary with the number of particles. Table 6
reports downstream accuracy for N = 5, N = 10, and N = 50 particles using the Llama 3.1 (8B)
models. Note that we only include methods in which samples are generated from an approximation
that is constructed from a set of importance-weighted particles. For the base LM and locally
constrained decoding baselines, samples are generated through direct ancestral sampling. As a result,
the number of particles does not influence accuracy in these cases (though additional particles can
provide a better estimate of the true model accuracy), so we omit these methods from the analysis.
The main effect we observe is the more efficient use of computational resources by Full SMC
compared to methods that do not incorporate incremental information, such as Full IS: the former
outperforms the latter with one tenth of the particles in 3 out of 4 domains (Data Science, Molecular
Sythesis, Text-to-SQL) and one fifth of the particles in the other domain (Goal Inference, see Fig. 2
in the main text for a visualization). We note an additional patterns of results: in the Text-to-SQL and


                                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 6: Accuracy by number of particles across methods. Errors are bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.
Llama 3.1 8B is used as the base LM for all domains. Instruct model is used for Text-to-SQL.
                                                                                                                    Score
 Method
                                                                               Goal inference      Molecular synthesis        Data science         Text-to-SQL
                                                                                                                 5 Particles
 LM w/ grammar constraint, correction (Grammar-only IS)                       0.106 (0.08, 0.14)    0.239 (0.21, 0.27)              -            0.587 (0.56, 0.61)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential (Sample-Rerank)                          0.214 (0.17, 0.26)    0.407 (0.36, 0.45)              -            0.578 (0.55, 0.60)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, correction, and resampling (Grammar-only SMC)      0.310 (0.26, 0.37)    0.209 (0.18, 0.24)              -            0.599 (0.57, 0.62)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential, and correction (Full IS)                0.216 (0.17, 0.27)    0.411 (0.37, 0.45)      0.204 (0.16, 0.25)   0.611 (0.59, 0.63)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential, correction, and resampling (Full SMC)   0.319 (0.27, 0.37)    0.552 (0.52, 0.58)      0.224 (0.18, 0.27)   0.620 (0.59, 0.64)
                                                                                                                 10 Particles
 LM w/ grammar constraint, weight correction (Grammar-only IS)                0.083 (0.06, 0.11)    0.228 (0.21, 0.25)              -            0.597 (0.57, 0.62)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential (Sample-Rerank)                          0.289 (0.24, 0.34)    0.392 (0.36, 0.42)              -            0.581 (0.56, 0.60)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, correction, and resampling (Grammar-only SMC)      0.401 (0.34, 0.46)    0.205 (0.18, 0.23)              -            0.596 (0.57, 0.62)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential, and correction (Full IS)                0.257 (0.21, 0.31)    0.404 (0.37, 0.44)      0.223 (0.19, 0.27)   0.618 (0.59, 0.64)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential, correction, and resampling (Full SMC)   0.419 (0.37, 0.48)    0.577 (0.56, 0.59)      0.285 (0.26, 0.32)   0.620 (0.60, 0.64)
                                                                                                                 50 Particles
 LM w/ grammar constraint, correction (Grammar-only IS)                       0.069 (0.05, 0.09)    0.211 (0.20, 0.22)              -            0.603 (0.58, 0.63)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential (Sample-Rerank)                          0.416 (0.36, 0.47)    0.382 (0.37, 0.40)              -            0.585 (0.56, 0.61)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, correction, and resampling (Grammar-only SMC)      0.595 (0.54, 0.65)    0.212 (0.20, 0.23)              -            0.599 (0.58, 0.62)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential, and correction (Full IS)                0.393 (0.35, 0.45)    0.389 (0.38, 0.40)      0.218 (0.19, 0.25)   0.626 (0.60, 0.66)
 LM w/ grammar constraint, potential, correction, and resampling (Full SMC)   0.611 (0.56, 0.66)    0.569 (0.56, 0.58)      0.292 (0.25, 0.33)   0.622 (0.60, 0.65)


Table 7: Downstream accuracy comparison with the SMC Steering method from Lew et al. (2023) in the text-to-
SQL domain. Errors are bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Both methods include expensive potentials.
Our method is run with 10 particles. SMC Steering is run with 5 particles and a beam size of 3. Both methods
are run with Llama 3.1 8B Instruct.

                                       Method                                                         Score
                                       Full SMC                                              0.620 (0.60, 0.64)
                                       SMC Steering (Lew et al., 2023)                       0.607 (0.58, 0.63)


Molecular synthesis domains, increasing the number of particles has a marginal impact on downstream
accuracy; however, in Goal inference and Data Science, we observe that a greater number of particles
can lead to significantly better downstream accuracy (though only when increasing from 5 to 10
particles in the Data Science domain). Given that Goal Inference and Data Science are the two tasks
where our expensive potentials are most informative, this pattern of results seems to be reflective of
the fact that richer potentials require more computation to fully exploit.


A.3       R ESAMPLING W ITHOUT R EPLACEMENT (L EW ET AL ., 2023)

This section evaluates our approach using the without-replacement resampling method introduced
in Lew et al. (2023). Specifically, we use our Full SMC algorithm with expensive potential (LM
w/ grammar constraint, potential, correction, and resampling), and replace multinomial resampling
steps with Lew et al. (2023)’s without replacement scheme. For comparison, we ran the without
replacement baseline (SMC Steering) with N = 5 particles and a beam size of 3, alongside our
approach using multinomial resampling with N = 10 particles (and an ESS threshold of 0.9). These
settings effectively give the SMC Steering method a particle count of N = 15, giving it an advantage
in the comparison.
Table 7 reports weighted accuracy for these methods in the text-to-SQL domain (we restricted this
analysis to a single domain because of limitations in computational resources). We observe that
without-replacement resampling steps slightly hurt performance compared to multinomial resampling.


A.4       C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

Though we have shown that practitioners can improve over locally constrained decoding by using
our proposed SMC method, in practice, there is additional computational cost stemming from two
sources: resampling and computing expensive potentials Φexp . The cost of resampling is negligible,
consisting only of simple sum, softmax, and categorical sampling operations at every token. The cost
of computing expensive potentials, on the other hand, is more significant and varies across domains.
Table 8 shows the average per token cost of computing expensive potentials for all of our domains:
we see that it rarely goes above about 30ms.


                                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 8: Average per token cost (in seconds) of computing the expensive potential Φexp for each of our domains.
Intervals are bootstrapped confidences estimated by selecting 10 SMC generations at random for each domain.
 Method                     Goal Inference        Molecular Synthesis         Data Science             Text-to-SQL
 Φexp seconds per token   0.011 (0.007, 0.016)   0.0003 (0.0002, 0.0004)   0.007 (0.0009, 0.023)   0.031 (0.0204, 0.0413)



In general, the computational cost of expensive potentials is lessened by two factors: 1) expensive
potentials often change not at every token, but only at larger, semantically meaningful units (for
instance, the end of a SQL clause or a Python statement)—caching can therefore significantly lessen
computational cost, 2) expensive potentials are often CPU rather than GPU computations (and so the
cost of computation is much cheaper).


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     G RAMMAR -BASED P OTENTIALS AND PARSING A LGORITHMS
We briefly describe how we implemented the parser, i.e., grammar-based potential functions, used
in our experiments (§3). These potentials are derived from a context-free grammar (CFG; see, e.g.,
Hopcroft & Ullman, 1979), a rule-based formalism for assigning non-negative values to strings. In the
setting of our experiments, these are {0, 1}-valued judgments of syntactic validity, e.g., whether or
not a string is a well-formed SQL query. We note, however, that context-free grammars can be easily
generalized to the more general case of assigning nonnegative scores to these sequences (Goodman,
1999), not just boolean values, even though we do not leverage this flexibility in our experiments.
A CFG G defines a boolean-valued function G : Σ∗ EOS → {0, 1}, where Σ is an alphabet of terminal
symbols. We call L(G) = supp(G) the language of G, where supp(G) denotes the support of G.
Intuitively, we can define a grammar-based potential ϕG as a function that evaluates whether a string
y is a prefix of some string in L(G). Formally we write this as ϕG (y) = 1{∃y ′ ∈ Σ∗ EOS | y ⪯
y ′ , y ′ ∈ L(G)}, for every y ∈ Σ∗ ∪ Σ∗ EOS, where y ⪯ y ′ means that y is a prefix of y ′ . In this
work, we assume that the terminal symbols are characters—or, more precisely, bytes8 —so that they
may be aligned to the token vocabulary A used by the language model p.9 This approach assumes
that each token x ∈ A is equivalent to a sequence of bytes.10
We implemented a specialized algorithm11 to efficiently infer grammar-based potentials ϕG (y y ′ ) for
all terminals y ′ ∈ Σ ∪ {EOS} (simultaneously) given a prefix y ∈ Σ∗ . Note that in principle, we could
transform the potential function to have the type (A∗ ∪ A∗ EOS) → {0, 1} by scoring each token
y ∈ AEOS based on its decoded byte sequence; however, the number of tokens is very large, making
too expensive to evaluate the potential for each token’s byte sequence, in practice. In Appendix C.2,
we describe an efficient strategy for (approximately) sampling tokens the locally constrained proposal
distribution (Eq. (4)), which comes with some useful probabilistic guarantees.


8
  This may be achieved by adding additional rules to the CFG that expand each of its terminal symbols into its
  constituent byte sequence.
9
  An alternative approach is to transform a byte-level CFG into a token-level CFG; however, this can make the
  grammar extremely large.
10
   In practice, this may require a lookup table to convert each token identifier to its representation as a byte string.
11
   Our algorithm is based on Earley (1968); Stolcke (1995); Nowak & Cotterell (2023); Opedal et al. (2023).


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     T HE S ET-BASED P ROPOSAL S PEEDUP
This section describes a set-based proposal speedup (Appendix C.1). We instantiate the speedup in
Appendix C.2 for the special case of character-level potential functions, such as parsing.

C.1    F RAMEWORK

The reweight step of our sequential Monte Carlo algorithm requires us to evaluate Leff (x), and
the extend step requires us to sample from the locally constrained distribution ℓeff (· | x). Both of
these operations can be moderately expensive because they require the evaluation of Φeff (x x′ ) for
all tokens x′ ∈ AEOS . In this section, we describe a general scheme for speeding up both steps by
approximately sampling ℓeff (· | x) and approximately evaluating Leff (x). If we are careful about how
we carry out this approximation, it will not change the intermediate targets get (x), defined Eq. (6),
that control the behavior of the sequential Monte Carlo algorithm.
Sequential Monte Carlo with approximate Extend and Reweight steps. The key invariant main-
                                                                                           (i)  (i)
tained by sequential Monte Carlo is that at each step, the distribution of each particle (xt , wt ) is
properly weighted for the intermediate target get .
Definition 1. Let p̃(x) = Zp · p(x) be an unnormalized distribution on a space X, with normalizing
constant Zp . Let q be a probability distribution on weighted pairs (x, w) ∈ X × R≥0 . We say that q
is properly weighted for p̃ if, for any function f ,
                                      E [w · f (x)] = Zp E [f (x)]                                  (8)
                                      (x,w)∼q                         x∼p

                                                                                                   (i)   (i)
The extend and reweight steps of the algorithm, which update a previous particle (x<t , wt−1 ) by
          (i)        (i)
sampling xt ∼ ℓeff (x<t ) and returning the new particle
                                                                        !
                                                                (i) (i)
                            (i) (i)   (i)         (i)    Φexp (x<t xt )
                           x<t xt , wt−1 · Leff (x<t ) ·           (i)
                                                          Φexp (x<t )
                                              (i)
are justified by the fact that if (x<t , wt−1 ) is properly weighted for get−1 , then the new pair is properly
weighted for get . We are looking to improve runtime performance without compromising soundness,
so we seek ways of modifying the extend and reweight steps that do not break this invariant.
                                                             (i)                  (i)
In particular, suppose that instead of sampling xt ∼ ℓeff (· | x<t ) and computing the exact weight
                                                   (i) (i)
          (i) def   (i)         (i)         Φexp (x<t xt )
update wt     = wt−1 · Leff (x<t ) ·                  (i)    , we instead generate (x, W) from a proposal q that
                                              Φexp (x<t )
                                                                   e def         (i)               (i)
is properly weighted for the unnormalized local product of experts ℓ(x) = Leff (x<t ) · ℓeff (x | x<t ),
then compute the alternative weight update
                                                                            (i)
                                            (i) def    (i)         Φexp (x<t x)
                                       wt       = wt−1 · W ·                 (i)
                                                                                                               (9)
                                                                   Φexp (x<t )
The key observation is that, by the fact that q is properly weighted for ℓ,       e we know that for every
                             (i)    (i)
possible previous particle (x<t , wt−1 ) and every function f ,
                                          "                                           #
                                                                   (i)
              (i)     (i)                    (i)         Φexp (x<t x)           (i)
      E [wt · f (x<t x)] =          E       wt−1 · W ·              (i)
                                                                          · f (x<t x)                 (10)
   (x,W)∼q                       (x,W)∼q                  Φexp (x<t )
                                                              "                                     #
                                                                               (i) (i)
                                        (i)                       (i) Φexp (x<t xt )        (i) (i)
                             = Leff (x<t )          E           wt−1              (i)
                                                                                        f (x<t xt )   (11)
                                             (i)         (i)
                                            xt ∼ℓeff (·|x<t )            Φexp (x<t )
                                                 h                      i
                                                    (i)        (i) (i)
                             =          E          wt · f (x<t xt )                                   (12)
                                      (i)             (i)
                                  xt ∼ℓeff (·|x<t )
Therefore, if the overall proper weighting invariant (with respect to the intermediate target get ) holds
for the original update, then it will also hold for this modified extend-and-reweight procedure. For
more on SMC with estimated weights, see Chopin & Papaspiliopoulos (2020) and Lew et al. (2022).
A family of properly weighted updates based on the Horvitz–Thompson estimator. We now
introduce a useful family of properly weighted proposals for our setting. It will allow us to generate


                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


weighted next-token proposals (x, W) while only evaluating the potentials Φeff on a (randomly
chosen) subset S ⊆ AEOS . Our procedure is inspired by the Horvitz–Thompson estimator (Horvitz &
Thompson, 1952).
                                                                                         def
First, to reduce notational clutter, we define the following shorthand: L = Leff (x), and ℓ(x′ ) =
e ′ )/L = ℓeff (x′ | x).
ℓ(x
Definition 2. Given a probability distribution q over subsets of AEOS , we define the set-based proposal
speedup by the following generation procedure:
1. Sample a subset S ∼ q where q is a probability distribution over subsets of AEOS .
                                     def ℓ(x)
                                              of each token x ∈ S where π q (x) is the inclusion
                                         e
2. Compute the local weight w(x) = π(x)
                             [x ∈ S ] = S ′ q(S ′ )1{x ∈ S ′ }, i.e., the probability that x ends up in
                       def         ′
                                         P
   probability π q (x) = Pr′   S ∼q
   any sampled S ′ ∼ q.12
                                                           1{x∈S}
3. Compute the set-conditioned distribution q(x | S) = w(x)W
                                                     def                    P
                                                             S
                                                                  where WS = x∈S w(x).
4. Sample x ∼ q(· | S).
5. Return (x, WS )

Then, as described above, we modify the SMC algorithm to use the sampled token x instead of
x ∼ ℓeff (· | x) in the extend step, and the weight WS instead of Leff (x) in the reweight step.
We justify this approach by showing that it produces properly weighted samples.
Proposition 1. The set-based proposal speedup’s distribution q (Def. 2) is a properly weighted
proposal for ℓ.
             e


Proof. Let f be an arbitrary real-valued function.
                                          X         X
                      E [f (x)WS ] =          f (x)   q(x | S)q(S)WS                                           (13a)
                         (x,WS )∼q
                                                    x              S
                                                    X              X w(x) 1{x ∈ S}
                                                =       f (x)                         q(S)WS                   (13b)
                                                    x
                                                                              WS
                                                                   S

                                                                             1{x ∈ S} q(S)
                                                    X                   X
                                                =       f (x)w(x)                                              (13c)
                                                    x                    S
                                                    X              ℓ(x)
                                                                   e
                                                =       f (x)             π q (x)                              (13d)
                                                    x
                                                                  π q (x)
                                                     X
                                                =L           f (x)ℓ(x)                                         (13e)
                                                        x
                                                = L E [f (x)]                                                  (13f)
                                                     x∼ℓ


C.2       C HARACTER -BASED P ROPOSAL

Our character-based proposal distribution is an instance of the framework of the previous section.
In particular, q samples sets of tokens S by sampling a sequence of characters. We provide the
pseudocode for this algorithm in Alg. 1, and define two key data structures used by this proposal:
Definition 3. Our trie data structure T is a labeled, tree-structured graph that is defined as follows:

• Let AEOS be the LM’s vocabulary of tokens where we represent each token as its strings of characters
  ending with a designated end-of-token marker EOT.13 Let Σ denote the set of characters (or bytes).
                                                            def
• Let P be the prefix closure of the set AEOS : P = {p ∈ Σ∗ | p ⪯ x, x ∈ AEOS } where p ⪯ x denotes
  that p is a prefix of x.
12
     We require q to be such that every token has a positive inclusion probability π q (x) > 0 for all x ∈ AEOS .
13
     Note that EOS is handled specially as it is not a string of characters.


                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                     n                     o
                                                                        a
• Let T = (N, E) be a labeled graph with node P and labeled edges E = p −
                                                                        → p a p, (p a) ∈ P
Definition 4. Let mass be a mapping N → [0, 1], defined as follows.
                        mass(x′ ) = p(x′ | x),     for x′ ∈ AEOS                                                      (14a)
                                    X
                        mass(p) =       mass(p a),       for p ∈ P \ AEOS                                            (14b)
                                        a
                                      p−
                                       →p a∈E

Algorithm 1 Character proposal: This procedure implements a properly weighted proposal distribu-
tion for the unnormalized version of the locally constrained distribution ℓ{ϕG } (· | x).
   1. procedure character_proposal(x)
   2.   mass ← Apply Eq. (14) to p(· | x)
   3.   p←ε                                                                       ▷ start at the trie’s root node
   4.   c←1                                                                           ▷ path weight under cfg
   5.   w ← {}
   6.   S←∅
   7.   π ← {}
   8.   π(ε) ← 1
   9.   while true:
                 n                              o
                           a)        a
  10.     p1 ← a : mass(p
                     mass(p)   for p −
                                     → p a ∈ E
                 n                      o
                    ϕG (x p a)
  11.     p2 ← a : ϕG (x p) for a ∈ Σ
                EOT
 12.     if p −−→ p EOT ∈ E :                                                   ▷ End-of-token available (i.e., p ∈ AEOS )
 13.        w(p) = mass(p   EOT)·c
                         π(p)
 14.        S ← S ∪ {p}
 15.     q ← {a P: p1 (a) · p2 (a) for a ∈ Σ}                                                            ▷ Note: EOT ̸∈ Σ.
 16.     Q ← a∈Σ q(a)
 17.     if Q = 0:                                                                               ▷ cannot continue further
 18.        break
 19.     a ∼ q/Q                                                                ▷ Sample next character proportional to q
 20.     π(p a) ← π(p) · q(a)/Q
 21.     p ← pa                                                        ▷ extend the prefix (i.e., transition to the next node)
 22.     c ← c · p2 (a)
       W ← x′ ∈S w(x′ )
             P
 23.

 24.   x ∼ w(·)/W
 25.   return (x, W)


It is straightforward to verify that the character proposal is an instance of set-based proposal speedup
(Def. 2), which is properly weighted according to Proposition 1.


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Name                                                               Proposal       Target      Inference alg.
  Language model                                                            p             p            Exact
  w/ grammar constraint                                                   ℓeff          ℓeff           Exact
  w/ grammar constraint, weight correction                                ℓeff          geff               IS
  w/ grammar constraint, potential                                        ℓeff      ℓeff · Φexp            IS
  w/ grammar constraint, potential, and correction                        ℓeff            g                IS
  w/ grammar constraint, potential, correction, and resampling            ℓeff            g            SMC
Table 9: Potentials, models, and inference algorithms. Note that geff differs from g, as the former only
incorporates the product of efficient potentials Φeff . Consistent with our approach throughout the paper, we also
assume that the local product of experts ℓeff , only features the product with efficient potentials Φeff .


D     E STIMATING I NFERENCE Q UALITY

The KL divergence KL(q ∥ g) measures how well the distribution q approximates the global product
of experts g. The exact KL(q ∥ g) is generally intractable, for two reasons: g is known only up to a
normalizing constant, and q (which, for us, represents the marginal distribution of a particle at the
end of inference) is not known in closed form. To address the first difficulty, we instead measure the
approximation quality log Z − KL(q ∥ g); because Z is a function only of g and not of the inference
algorithm, as we vary the inference algorithm, the resulting variation in approximation quality is
caused solely by changes to the KL term. To address the second difficulty, we work over extended
state spaces to obtain lower bounds on the approximation quality (Lew et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2024).
In Appendix D.1 we show how to estimate this quantity in a general setting, and in Appendix D.2 we
explain how to adapt this result to the setting where g incorporates hard constraints (making the KL
divergence discussed above potentially infinite).

D.1    I MPORTANCE S AMPLING AND S EQUENTIAL M ONTE C ARLO

We begin by considering the case of a generic importance sampling algorithm, which draws K
particles x(i) ∈ A∗ EOS from a proposal distribution q to approximate the target distribution σ. For
each particle, the algorithm computes an importance weight relative to the unnormalized target
distribution σ̃(x) = Zσ σ(x), where Zσ > 0 is the unknown normalizing constant.
Estimating the quality of 1-particle inference. A very simple inference strategy is to use the proposal
q to generate a single sample x, without further correction. A reasonable measure of inference quality
would be KL(q ∥ σ). However, due to the unknown normalizing constant of σ̃, the quantity that we
can more easily estimate unbiasedly is log Zσ − KL(q ∥ σ) = Ex∼q [log σ̃(x) − log q(x)]. As the
expression suggests, we can estimate this quantity by sampling many sequences x independently
from q and computing the average across samples of log σ̃(x) − log q(x). Because Zσ depends on
only σ̃, and not the inference algorithm, we can compare proposals q by estimating this quantity;
higher is better, implying lower KL(q ∥ σ).
Estimating the quality of K-particle IS. In K-particle IS, we consider the posterior approximation
to be the distribution obtained by running importance sampling and resampling a particular particle
x(k) with probabilities proportional to the normalized particle weights. Formally, let S = A∗ EOS ×
A∗ EOSK−1 be the space of K-particle collections with a distinguished, chosen particle; we write
elements of S as ⟨x(k) , x−k ⟩, where x−k = {x(i) | i = 1 ··· K, i ̸= k} are the K − 1 unchosen
particles. The importance sampling procedure defines the following distribution over S:
                                                                    K
                                                def  w(x(k) ) Y
                            qIS (⟨x(k) , x−k ⟩) = PK                   q(x(i) ),                (15)
                                                        w(x  (i) )
                                                    i=1            i=1
                        (i)
where w(x(i) ) = σ̃(x    )
                  q(x(i) )
                           is the importance weight for particle x(i) . We are interested in the quality
of the marginal posterior approximation
                                       X
                            ∗      def
                           qIS (x) =        qIS (⟨x(k) , x−k ⟩) · 1[x = x(k) ].                    (16)
                                     ⟨x(k) ,x−k ⟩∈S
                                          ∗
Although we can generate samples from qIS   (by running importance sampling and selecting a chosen
particle), we cannot evaluate its density exactly, so we cannot directly compute unbiased Monte


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    ∗
Carlo estimates of log Zσ − KL(qIS    ∥ σ) as before. Instead, we extend the state space of the target
distribution σ to obtain a new distribution σIS over S, following Andrieu & Roberts (2009):

                              def   1                                              def
                                                                                       Y
          σIS (⟨x(k) , x−k ⟩) =       σ(x−k | x(k) )σ(x(k) ), where σ(x−k | x(k) ) =     q(x(i) )     (17)
                                    K
                                                                                            i̸=k
We write σ̃IS = Zσ σ̃IS for the unnormalized extended target.
Note that the marginal distribution of the extended target,
                                       X
                            ∗
                          σIS (x) =          σIS (⟨x(k) , x−k ⟩)1[x = x(k) ]                          (18)
                                        ⟨x(k) ,x−k ⟩∈S
is equal to σ(x). The KL divergence between two joint distributions is lower-bounded by the KL
                                                   ∗
divergence between their marginals, so we have KL(qIS ∥ σ) ≤ KL(qIS ∥ σIS ).
Both qIS and σ̃IS have tractable joint densities, so we can estimate log Zσ − KL(qIS ∥ σIS ) by
repeatedly generating ⟨x(k) , x−k ⟩ ∼ qIS and computing the log density ratio, which simplifies into a
log average particle weight.
                                         ∗
Proposition 2 (Estimating log Zσ − KL(qIS    ∥ σ)). Consider K particles x(i) generated
                               (i)         (i)    (i)
from
  h the Pproposal q and
                      i let w(x ) = σ̃(x )/q(x ) be their importance weights. Then
      1    K      (i)
E log K    i=1 w(x ) is a lower bound on log Zσ − KL(qIS ∥ σ).


Proof.
                              ∗
                 log Zσ − KL(qIS ∥ σ) ≥ log Zσ − KL(qIS ∥ σIS )                                      (19a)
                                            "                          #
                                               σ̃IS ( x(k) , x−k )
                                      = E log                                                        (19b)
                                        qIS    qIS ( x(k) , x−k )
                                                                                            
                                                       1      (k)                  i
                                                                     Q
                                                       K σ̃(x      )    i̸=k  q(x    )
                                      = E log                   (k)
                                                                                                    (19c)
                                        qIS
                                               q(x(k) ) PKw(xw(x)(i) ) i̸=k q(x(i) )
                                                                            Q
                                                            i=1
                                                                                                
                                                        1       (k)                  i
                                                                       Q
                                                        K σ̃(x       )    i̸=k q(x     )
                                      = E log               (k) )/q(x(k) ) Q
                                                                                                    (19d)
                                        qIS
                                               q(x(k) ) σ̃(x
                                                          PK           (i) )    i̸=k   q(x (i) )
                                                             i=1 w(x
                                            "                  #
                                                              1
                                                             K
                                           = E log            1                                      (19e)
                                              qIS        PK       (i) )
                                                          i=1 w(x
                                                    " K
                                                                #
                                                   1 X      (i)
                                           = E log       w(x )                                       (19f)
                                             qIS   K i=1


                     PK
                 1            (i)                                                           ∗
Hence, log       K    i=1 w(x     )  can be seen as a single sample estimate of log Zσ −KL(qIS ∥ σ), with
negative bias. The precise bias can be shown to be −KL(qIS ( x(k) , x−k | x(k) ) ∥ σIS ( x(k) , x−k |
x(k) )), which decreases as the number of particles increase (Lew et al., 2022). As before, the term
log Zσ is a constant that is independent of the inference algorithm, so this estimate can be used as a
measure of inference quality across algorithms, where higher is better.
Estimating the quality of SMC. The same logic as above can be applied to SMC (Andrieu &
Roberts, 2009; Lew et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2024). As in the IS case, we use an extended target σSMC
such that the density ratio works out to exactly the average particle weight at the end of the algorithm.

D.2      E STIMATING I NFERENCE Q UALITY FOR R EJECTION -S AMPLED VARIANTS

When attempting to estimate the discrepancy between samples for algorithms qalg and g, one difficulty
is that KL(qalg ∥ g) can be infinite when g incorporates hard constraints. This is because, in those


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cases, there is positive probability on the outcome that all generated proposals fail to meet the
constraints, and thus have mass 0 under g. A potential solution to this issue, explored by Zhao
et al. (2024), is to instead estimate KL(g||qalg ). But this requires exact samples from g, which are
impractical to obtain in our setting. We thus take a different approach and consider rejection-sampled
                                         r                                 r
versions of each of our algorithms, qalg   , which draw samples x ∼ qalg       repeatedly until qalg > 0. In
this case, we have
                                                          r
                                                         qalg (x)

                                   r
                              KL(qalg ||g) = Eqalg
                                                r   log                                                (20a)
                                                          g(x)
                                                   "                #
                                                          qalg (x)
                                           = Eqalg
                                                r    log         r                                    (20b)
                                                         g(x)Zalg

                                                         qalg (x)            r
                                           = Eqalg
                                                r   log             − log Zalg                         (20c)
                                                          g(x)
          r                              r
where Zalg  is the acceptance rate of qalg  (which we can estimate with standard Monte Carlo), and we
can estimate the first term in Eq. (20c) up to an instance-specific constant by the derivations above.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Table        Columns
                                singer       singer_id, name, ...
                                concert      concert_id, concert_name, ...
                                                  (a) Example schema

            Query                                        Φeff      Φexp              Description
            SELECT song_id FROM singer ...                ✗          ✗             Invalid column name
            SELECT singer_id FROM concert ...             ✓          ✗        Invalid column name for table
            SELECT singer_id FROM singer ...              ✓          ✓         Valid column name for table
                                        (b) Example queries and potential values
Table 10: Overview of potentials used in Spider experiments for a given schema. We condition the base language
model using two potentials. Φeff ensures syntactically valid SQL queries that only include table and column
names present in the schema. Φexp further restricts SQL queries by ensuring a correct correspondence between
column and table names.


E     D OMAIN D ETAILS

This section provides further details on the domains used in the experiments.

E.1    T EXT- TO -SQL (S PIDER )

Spider is a large-scale text-to-SQL dataset of natural language questions and database schemas.
Given a natural language question and schema, the task is to generate a valid SQL query that is
semantically equivalent to a ground-truth query. In this domain, Φeff is used to enforce valid SQL
syntax according to the SQL grammars released by Roy et al. (2024). These grammars include
schema-specific constraints that limit table and column names to those present in the given schema
but do not ensure correct table-column associations. Thus, we use Φexp to verify whether the (partial)
SQL query references a column that exists in a table, returning 0 in the case that it does not and 1
otherwise. Table 10 provides an example of Φeff and Φexp applied to an SQL query. Since Φexp is
only semantically meaningful when a generated query has fully specified the necessary table or alias
information to check correspondences, we only run the table-column verification at clause boundaries
once the FROM clause has been completed. We evaluate on the development split of Spider with
execution accuracy, which checks whether the predicted SQL query’s output matches that of the
ground-truth query. We define p(x) by prompting Llama-3.1 (8b) instruct with 3 examples followed
by a rendering of the database and the natural language question.

E.2    M OLECULAR S YNTHESIS (GBD-17)

A recent line of work has applied LMs to the problem of molecular synthesis, with the aim of
generating candidate molecules with properties similar to molecules from known databases (see
Oliveira et al., 2022, for review)—most commonly (e.g. Flam-Shepherd et al. (2022); Wang et al.
(2024)) by prompting with examples of molecules in SMILES format (Weininger, 1988). We
follow this approach, constructing prompts from random subsets of 20 molecules from the GDB-
17 dataset (Ruddigkeit et al., 2012). We evaluate generations using the standard molecule fitness
function Quantitative-Estimated Drug-likeness (QED; Bickerton et al., 2012) implemented in the
Python RDKit library (Landrum, 2024). This metric combines eight physicochemical properties
of a compound: Molecular weight, LogP, H-bond donors, H-bond acceptors, Charge, Aromaticity,
Stereochemistry, and Solubility. Here, Φeff enforces SMILES syntax. To enforce properties not
encoded by this syntax, we define Φexp using a molecule validator that can be applied to partial
SMILES strings, implemented in the Python partialsmiles library (O’Boyle, 2024). The validator
checks the SMILES prefix to ensure that the atom’s valences are in a list of allowed valences, and
attempts to find alternating patterns of single and double bonds to cover all aromatic systems in the
partial string. The additional metrics reported in Fig. 4 are Validity (proportion of valid SMILES),
Weight (exact molecular weight), De Novo Similarity (average pairwise Tanimoto similarity to the
target distribution, excluding exact duplicates), and Diversity (inverse average pairwise Tanimoto
similarity among compounds generated by a particular method).


                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   G OAL I NFERENCE (P LANETARIUM )

Recent work has explored using LMs for planning with languages like the Planning Domain Definition
Language (PDDL) (Ghallab et al., 1998), by either generating plans directly (Silver et al., 2022; Wong
et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Zhi-Xuan et al., 2024), or generating descriptions
of a task’s initial and/or goal conditions, which classical planning algorithms can use to search
for plans (Liu et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023; Guan et al., 2023). In the spirit of the latter, we use
the Blocksworld tasks from the Planetarium benchmark (Zuo et al., 2024), which provides natural
language descriptions of a task’s initial and goal conditions along with their ground-truth symbolic
representations in the STRIPS subset of PDDL (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971). The original dataset is
extremely challenging, requiring the LM to output a full STRIPS description of tasks with up to 100
objects—Zuo et al. (2024) report fewer than 2% of the outputs of Gemma 1.1 7B to be even parseable.
We therefore simplify the task by limiting our evaluation to examples with fewer than 10 objects, and
requiring the LM to generate only the goal conditions by appending the ground-truth initial conditions
to the pre-prompt. Here, Φeff encodes STRIPS syntax for goals within Planetarium’s Blocksworld
domain definition; Φexp uses a gold-standard plan known to satisfy the ground-truth task description,
and calls the VAL plan validator (Howey et al., 2004) to test whether partial goal descriptions are valid
according to that plan. The gold-standard plans for each instance were derived using the fast downward
algorithm (Helmert, 2006). Note that it is only possible to apply this Φexp potential to partial strings
if goal descriptions are monotonic, that is, if any goal prefix describes a superset of the states that
the full goal describes. This is the case for STRIPS, where goals must be described as conjunctions
of literals, so that we can evaluate the potential after each literal in the conjunction is completed.

E.4   DATA S CIENCE (DS1000)

DS-1000 (Lai et al., 2023) is a challenging code generation benchmark on data science problems in
Python, split into subsets requiring the use of six popular libraries: Pandas, NumPy, Scikit-Learn,
SciPy, TensorFlow, and PyTorch. For each problem instance, the language model is prompted with
an English description of the problem and a sample test case in Python and is tasked with generating
code that solves the problem and passes the test case. Each test case includes a result variable, and
success depends on the execution. In preliminary experiments, we observed that our language model
was able to generate syntactically correct Python programs for every sample. We, therefore, set
Φeff = 1 for our experiments in this domain. Thus, unlike the other three domains, the proposal
distribution for all evaluations of DS1000 was simply p. In this domain, Φexp simply executes the
test cases provided in the prompts from Lai et al. (2023) on generated (partial) Python programs, and
returns 1 if no errors are produced and 0 otherwise (in particular, we did not make use of the output
of test cases). Note that it is only possible to execute Python code when the generated sequence x
consists entirely of well-formed Python statements, thus in this domain Φeff can only be meaningfully
applied at the boundary of statements—this motivates aligning SMC particles using statements as
their steps, as explained in the “Further extensions" section in (§2).


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     R ELATED W ORK

Our contributions are primarily situated among several bodies of work.
First, there is a large body of work leveraging LMs for semantic parsing or code generation tasks,
while forcing adherence to a grammar or other constraints (Shin et al., 2021; Scholak et al., 2021;
Poesia et al., 2022; Shin & Van Durme, 2022; Geng et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024; Moskal et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024; Ugare et al., 2024). Closely related is a series of algorithmic advances
that enable the efficient construction and application of grammar constraints for sequential inference
problems via compilation to automata (Deutsch et al., 2019; Willard & Louf, 2023; Kuchnik et al.,
2023; Koo et al., 2024). This space is further discussed in Appendix F.1.
Second, there is a large body of work that aims to generate from LMs subject to hard or soft constraints.
Many such strategies are based in reinforcement learning (RL) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al.,
2020; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022), classifier-guided control (Cheng et al., 2024), efficient
probabilistic inference through tractable proxy models (Zhang et al., 2023a), and locally applied logit
biasing or masking based on domain-specific potential functions (Pascual et al., 2021; Huang et al.,
2024). This is further discussed in Appendix F.2. In addition, there is a growing set of approaches
that cast constrained sequential generation as probabilistic conditioning, leveraging the toolkit of
probabilistic inference to derive principled generation strategies (Miao et al., 2020; Yang & Klein,
2021; Lew et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025; Puri et al., 2025). These works themselves
are motivated by a rich history of conditioning autoregressive models in NLP, often in combination
with particle-based inference methods (Börschinger & Johnson, 2011; Dubbin & Blunsom, 2012;
Yang & Eisenstein, 2013; Buys & Blunsom, 2015; Lin & Eisner, 2018). A discussion of the most
relevant works is expanded in Appendix F.3.
In this work, our algorithms aim to unify and improve on each of these bodies of preceding work,
tackling semantic parsing and code generation tasks with a combination of grammar constraints
(Φeff ), expensive potentials (Φexp ), and asymptotically correct inference (via SMC).

F.1   G RAMMAR -C ONSTRAINED S EMANTIC PARSING WITH LM S

Shin et al. (2021) presented a system allowing LMs to be locally intersected with (boolean) CFGs to
restrict generations to conform to target formal languages, and that with only a few in-context exam-
ples, such an inference-time strategy could outperform more substantial fine-tuning. Concurrently,
PICARD (Scholak et al., 2021) presented an approach for intersecting LMs with an incremental
parsing algorithm and showed how additional context-sensitive constraints could be imposed, such
as requiring table-column matching for SQL generation via the use of programmable “guards”.
Synchromesh (Poesia et al., 2022) generalized these frameworks and extended the idea of incremental
guards that can impose semantic restrictions during generation—such as typing and scoping rules—by
dynamically constructing constraints as regular expressions on the fly. A great deal of other work
has explored variants of LM-grammar intersection including the effectiveness of pre-training models
on code for these settings (Shin & Van Durme, 2022), the runtime compilation of individual task
instances into highly specific, task-specialized grammars (Geng et al., 2023), and even using the LM
to generate grammars directly at runtime, that then restrict their own generation to solve a task (Wang
et al., 2024). Other work has focused more closely on the standard syntactic-constraint problem but
with an emphasis on optimizing efficient data structures and algorithms for fast LM-CFG intersection
(Ugare et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Moskal et al., 2024).
A parallel line of work in this space has been concerned with the efficient construction and application
of constraints for sequential inference problems. Deutsch et al. (2019) first noted that regular and
context-free grammar constraints could be pre-compiled to automata—these could then be used
during sequential inference to impose constraints with near-zero runtime overhead. This approach
was independently developed and efficiently implemented in the context of restricting LM generations
to regular expressions by the Outlines (Willard & Louf, 2023) and ReLM libraries (Kuchnik et al.,
2023). Similar work was later developed by Koo et al. (2024), who extended several formal automata-
theoretic characteristics of these constructions.
This work has noted the complications of efficiently intersecting grammars whose atoms are terminals
and LMs whose atoms are tokens, which we refer to as the token–terminal alignment problem. An
efficient and accurate solution to this problem space was one of several desiderata for our proposal


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


algorithm (see Alg. 1 in Appendix C for more details). These works have also discussed considerations
that arise in the construction of automata, whose arcs are tokens, in the assignment of probabilities to
strings. Namely, there are exponentially many latent token trajectories that correspond to a generated
sequence. While the correct method for assigning string probabilities involves marginalizing over
these trajectories (Cao & Rimell, 2021), in practice, simply using the canonical tokenization accounts
for the overwhelming majority of the probability mass and can be justified (Chirkova et al., 2023;
Kuchnik et al., 2023; Berglund et al., 2024; Vieira et al., 2024). In the present work, we do not
enforce this assumption and allow all token trajectories.

F.2   C ONDITIONAL G ENERATION S UBJECT TO C ONSTRAINTS

Language models pre-trained on a next-word objective reflect the distribution of their pre-training
corpora, but often the inference-time needs of tasks necessitate that LMs modify this base distribution.
One approach to this class of problems is fine-tuning or reinforcement learning via some set of data
that more closely mirrors the target task, such as via reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022), but this
method comes with challenges such as hyperparameter sensitivity and distributional collapse (Zheng
et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2024). Some of these drawbacks can be mitigated by
utilizing on-policy data (Tajwar et al., 2024) and imposing a KL penalty that penalizes shifting an LM
too far from its prior distribution, casting optimization as a variational inference problem (Korbak
et al., 2022; Amini et al., 2025).
Another inference-time approach to controlled generation for an LM is via direct modification to the
LM’s sampling distribution. This may be done via controlling intermediate layer activations with
classifier guidance (Cheng et al., 2024), guiding autoregressive generation with a proxy probabilistic
model for which estimation of the conditional density is tractable (Zhang et al., 2023a), or most
commonly by directly intervening on the final logits before sampling to impose intersection with a
potential function. Pascual et al. (2021) presented an early variant of such logit-biasing to encourage
the presence of predefined guide words in generations.
This pattern is employed more broadly for hard constraints via logit-masking, setting the probability
associated with particular tokens to zero, forcing the LM to sample from a subset of its distribution
over sequences. This approach is used in most of the grammar-constrained semantic parsing work
outlined in the previous section. Most recently, there have been attempts to restrict and re-weight
generations not only via grammars but through additional expensive potentials such as grounded
affordances in robotics settings (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024). However, in all of these works,
constraints are imposed greedily, resulting in a local product of experts construction, and care is not
taken to appropriately target the implied global product of experts. It should then come as no surprise
that while standard approaches to grammar-constrained generation have been successful, they have
been far from a silver bullet (Tam et al., 2024).

F.3   A PPROXIMATE P OSTERIOR I NFERENCE IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS VIA S AMPLING

This leads to a third line of work that formulates constrained generation from language models as
posterior inference (Zhang et al., 2023a), and employs approximate inference to sample from the
desired target distribution. This is in contrast to yet another line of work that views constrained
decoding as an optimization problem, and tackles it via search (Meister et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2023b) or continuous optimization (Dathathri et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2021).
Several approximate inference algorithms have been explored for generating constrained samples
from LMs, including rejection sampling (Poesia et al., 2022), as well as MCMC (Miao et al., 2019;
Hie et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2022; Du et al., 2024). A weakness
of MCMC-based approaches is that they do not fully exploit the autoregressive factorization of
modern language models; each edit to a candidate sequence requires re-evaluating the entire sequence
(or at least the entire suffix) to compute a new target density.
Lew et al. (2023) propose SMC steering of LMs via probabilistic programming specifications. This
work enables provably accurate posterior sampling from such conditional targets, globally steering
generation while only ever computing local constraints. Our approach builds on their work.


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shortly thereafter, Zhao et al. (2024) independently developed a framework for expressing various
LM tasks as probabilistic inference problems that can be tackled with SMC. Similar to our work,
Zhao et al. (2024) guide SMC with intermediate targets—in their case, learned twist functions via
a novel contrastive method—that enable estimation of the expected future value of each candidate
partial sequence. Their work also developed methods for evaluating LM inference algorithms via
bi-directional bounds on the log-partition function that can be used to estimate the KL divergence
between the inference and target distribution. In contrast to this prior work, our approach to SMC
leverages incremental static and dynamic analyses to inform our proposal distributions and twist
functions, as opposed to learning components of these algorithms via a costly contrastive fine-tuning
procedure. In addition, our results directly relate the quality of our posterior approximation to
improved performance on a series of standard, difficult benchmark tasks.
Concurrent with our work, Park et al. (2025) have highlighted the distinction between the prevalent
locally constrained decoding approach and the more accurate targeting of the global distribution
that arises from combining language models with constraints. Park et al. (2025)’s approach to
approximate the global distribution is based on the concept of expected future grammaticality, which
is the probability that the completion to be sampled from the LM will be compliant with the given
grammar. The authors describe an iterative algorithm that approximates the global distribution by
refining the estimates of the expected future grammatically. However, the proposed strategy shows
relatively slow convergence, was specifically designed for a CFG constraint, and may not be easily
adaptable to constraining with multiple potential functions.


                                                 34
