Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T IGHTER P RIVACY AUDITING OF DP-SGD
IN THE H IDDEN S TATE T HREAT M ODEL

 Tudor Cebere∗                                                          Aurélien Bellet
 Inria, Université de Montpellier                                       Inria, Université de Montpellier
 tudor.cebere@inria.fr                                                  aurelien.bellet@inria.fr

 Nicolas Papernot
 University of Toronto & Vector Institute
 nicolas.papernot@utoronto.ca



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Machine learning models can be trained with formal privacy guarantees via dif-
             ferentially private optimizers such as DP-SGD. In this work, we focus on a threat
             model where the adversary has access only to the final model, with no visibility
             into intermediate updates. In the literature, this “hidden state” threat model exhibits
             a significant gap between the lower bound from empirical privacy auditing and the
             theoretical upper bound provided by privacy accounting. To challenge this gap, we
             propose to audit this threat model with adversaries that craft a gradient sequence de-
             signed to maximize the privacy loss of the final model without relying on intermedi-
             ate updates. Our experiments show that this approach consistently outperforms pre-
             vious attempts at auditing the hidden state model. Furthermore, our results advance
             the understanding of achievable privacy guarantees within this threat model. Specif-
             ically, when the crafted gradient is inserted at every optimization step, we show that
             concealing the intermediate model updates in DP-SGD does not enhance the privacy
             guarantees. The situation is more complex when the crafted gradient is not inserted
             at every step: our auditing lower bound matches the privacy upper bound only for
             an adversarially-chosen loss landscape and a sufficiently large batch size. This
             suggests that existing privacy upper bounds can be improved in certain regimes.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Machine learning models trained with non-private optimizers such as Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) have been shown to leak information about the training data (Shokri et al., 2017; Yeom et al.,
2018; Balle et al., 2022; Haim et al., 2022). To address this issue, Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006) has been widely accepted as the standard approach to quantify and mitigate privacy
leakage, with DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016) as the defacto algorithm to train machine learning models
with DP guarantees. DP-SGD follows the same steps as standard SGD but clips the gradients’ norm
to a threshold before perturbing them with carefully calibrated Gaussian noise, providing differential
privacy guarantees for each gradient step.
As the practical importance of differential privacy grew, the need to track the privacy loss efficiently
across the entire training process (privacy accounting) became critical: indeed, optimal utility is
obtained by adding the minimum amount of noise required to achieve the desired privacy guarantee.
Existing privacy accounting techniques rely on privacy composition (Kairouz et al., 2015; Abadi
et al., 2016; Gopi et al., 2021; Doroshenko et al., 2022) to derive the overall privacy guarantees of a
training run of DP-SGD from the guarantees of each gradient step. Privacy amplification techniques
(Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011; Feldman et al., 2018; Erlingsson et al., 2019; Cyffers and Bellet,
2022; Altschuler and Talwar, 2022) can further decrease the overall privacy loss by exploiting
the non-disclosure of certain intermediate computations. For instance, privacy amplification by
subsampling relies on the secrecy of the randomness used to select the mini-batches.
    ∗
        Part of this work was done while visiting University of Toronto & Vector Institute


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Despite recent improvements in privacy accounting, training over-parameterized neural networks
from scratch with differential privacy typically results in either weak privacy guarantees or significant
utility loss (Tramèr and Boneh, 2021). While a possible explanation could be that the privacy
accounting of DP-SGD based on composition is overly conservative, (Nasr et al., 2021; 2023) refuted
this hypothesis using privacy auditing. Leveraging the fact that differential privacy upper bounds the
success rate of any adversary that seeks to infer private information from the output of DP-SGD, they
showed that it is possible to instantiate adversaries that achieve the maximal success rate allowed by
the privacy accounting upper bound. This negative result suggests that the only hope to improve the
privacy-utility trade-offs of DP-SGD is to relax the underlying threat model, i.e., to make additional
assumptions limiting the adversary’s capabilities. We focus on one capability granted to the adversary
in prior work, namely that all intermediate models (i.e., training checkpoints) are released.
In this work, we consider a natural relaxation where intermediate models are concealed and only the
final model is released. This threat model, often referred to as hidden state, is particularly relevant
in practice, encompassing scenarios such as open-sourcing a trained model by publishing its weights.
From a theoretical perspective, recent work has demonstrated that the hidden state model can
yield significantly improved privacy upper bounds for DP-SGD compared to those derived through
standard composition (Ye and Shokri, 2022; Altschuler and Talwar, 2022). This improvement can be
attributed to the phenomenon of privacy amplification by iteration (Feldman et al., 2018; Balle et al.,
2019): in a nutshell, the privacy of a data point used at earlier stages of the optimization process
improves as subsequent steps are performed. However, these results only hold for convex problems,
leaving a pivotal question unanswered: Does the privacy of non-convex machine learning problems
improve when intermediate models are withheld? Empirical lower bounds obtained through privacy
auditing (Nasr et al., 2021; 2023; Steinke et al., 2023) suggest that indeed, concealing intermediary
model amplifies privacy, exposing a gap between the empirical lower bound and the theoretical
upper bound in the hidden state threat model. However, it remains unclear whether this gap arises
from genuine privacy amplification (i.e., a loose upper bound) or from the suboptimality of existing
adversaries (i.e., a loose lower bound). This raises another crucial question: How can one design
worst-case adversaries when the intermediate models are concealed?
Our contributions. We adapt the gradient-crafting adversarial approach of Nasr et al. (2021) to align
with the hidden state model, leveraging the key observation that all privacy accounting techniques
for DP-SGD are designed to protect against worst-case gradients. Instead of crafting a data point
(canary) that gets added to the training set as in prior attempts to audit the hidden state model (Nasr
et al., 2023; Steinke et al., 2023), our adversaries craft a sequence of gradients prior to the execution
of the algorithm (i.e., without knowledge of the intermediate models). The crafted gradients are
then added to gradients computed on real training points to yield the highest possible privacy loss
for the final model. In other words, our adversaries abstract away the canary and directly decide
the gradient it would have produced when inserted at a given step of DP-SGD. But how do we pick
the gradient sequence leading to the worst-case leakage?
In the scenario where crafted gradients are inserted at every iteration of DP-SGD, we demonstrate
that gradient-crafting adversaries which allocate the maximum magnitude permitted by DP-SGD
to a single gradient dimension are optimal: they imply privacy lower bounds that match the known
upper bounds given by the privacy accountant of Gopi et al. (2021). Therefore, our results reveal that
releasing only the final model does not amplify privacy in this regime. In the case of small models,
we achieve these tight privacy auditing results by carefully selecting the gradient dimension, whereas
for over-parameterized models, the dimension selection can be arbitrary.
When the crafted gradient is not inserted at every step, we find that the above adversaries still
outperform canary-crafting adversaries by a significant margin but cannot reach the privacy upper
bounds. We show that part of the gap can be attributed to the inability of our adversaries to influence
the gradients on real training data in steps where the crafted gradient is not inserted. To address this
gap, we design an adversary that crafts both the gradient and the loss landscape. Our results uncover
two distinct regimes: (i) when the batch size is large compared to the noise variance, our adversary
proves to be optimal, yielding a privacy lower bound that matches the known upper bound and thus
demonstrating the absence of privacy amplification; and (ii) when the batch is small relative to the
noise variance, we show strong evidence of privacy amplification for non-convex problems, although
the effect is qualitatively weaker than in the convex case. Our findings advance the understanding of
privacy guarantees in the hidden state model, and lay the groundwork for the design of better privacy
accounting techniques for this threat model.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY AND DP-SGD

Differential Privacy (DP) has become the de-facto standard in privacy-preserving machine learning
thanks to the robustness of its guarantees, its desirable behaviour under post-processing and composi-
tion, and its extensive algorithmic framework. We recall the definition below and refer to Dwork and
Roth (2014) for more details. Here and throughout, we denote by D the space of datasets.
Definition 1 ((ε, δ)-Differential Privacy). A randomized mechanism M is (ε, δ)-DP if for all neigh-
boring datasets D ∈ D and D′ = D ∪ {x} ∈ D and for all events O:

                              P [M(D) ∈ O] ≤ eε P [M(D′ ) ∈ O] + δ.                                   (1)

In the above definition, δ ∈ (0, 1) can be thought of as a very small failure probability, while ε > 0 is
the privacy loss (the smaller, the stronger the privacy guarantees).
The workhorse of private machine learning is the Differentially Privacy Stochastic Gradient Descent
(DP-SGD) algorithm (Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016). Let D be the training
dataset, θPthe model parameters and consider the standard empirical risk minimization objective
       1
minθ |D|     x∈D ℓ(θ; x) where ℓ is a loss function differentiable in its first parameter. DP-SGD
follows similar steps as standard SGD but ensures differential privacy by (i) bounding the contribution
of each data point to the gradient using clipping and (ii) adding Gaussian noise to the clipped gradients.
Formally, starting from some initialization θ0 , DP-SGD performs T iterative updates of the form:

                        θt+1 = θt − |Bηt |
                                             P
                                               x∈Bt clip(∇θt ℓ(θt ; x), C) + Zt ,                     (2)

where η > 0 is the learning rate, Bt ⊆ D is a mini-batch of data points, clip(g, C) =
g · min(1, C/∥g∥2 ) with C > 0 the clipping threshold, and Zt ∼ N (0, σ 2 C 2 I).

2.2   T HREAT M ODELS FOR DP-SGD

DP protects against an adversary that observes the output of either M(D) or M(D′ ) and seeks to
predict whether the dataset was D or D′ = D ∪ {x}, i.e., whether x was included in the input dataset
(a.k.a., a membership inference attack) (Homer et al., 2008; Shokri et al., 2017). In this context,
the threat model specifies which information is observable/known by the adversary. For DP-SGD,
in addition to the final model θT , threat models typically consider that the adversary has access to
(and potentially controls) the model architecture, the loss ℓ, the initialization θ0 , the dataset (up to
the presence of x) and differ in which internal states of DP-SGD are observable by the adversary.
Below, we recall the two threat models relevant to our work.
Standard threat model. Standard privacy accounting techniques analyze DP-SGD as a composition
of (potentially subsampled) Gaussian mechanisms (Abadi et al., 2016; Gopi et al., 2021; Doroshenko
et al., 2022). Composition allows the adversary to observe all intermediate models θ1 , ..., θT −1 (in
addition to θ0 and θT ). Previous work has shown that existing privacy accounting techniques are
tight in this threat model (Nasr et al., 2021; 2023). However, revealing intermediate models is often
unnecessary in practical deployment scenarios (particularly in centralized settings where a single
entity conducts the training process) and may degrade the privacy-utility trade-off, thereby motivating
the study of the hidden state threat model.
Hidden state threat model. Our work studies the scenario where intermediate models θ1 , ..., θT −1
are concealed from the adversary, who observes only the final model θT . This threat model has at-
tracted much attention recently, with theoretical work proving better privacy upper bounds than in the
standard threat model in some regimes (Feldman et al., 2018; Balle et al., 2019; Ye and Shokri, 2022;
Altschuler and Talwar, 2022). A fundamental phenomenon underlying these results is “privacy ampli-
fication by iteration” (Feldman et al., 2018), which shows that repeatedly applying noisy contractive
iterations enhances the privacy guarantees of data used in earlier steps. Unfortunately, applying this
general result to DP-SGD is only possible for convex problems, ruling out deep neural networks. The
existence of privacy amplification for non-convex problems in this threat model is an open problem
(Altschuler and Talwar, 2022) that we study in this work through the lens of privacy auditing.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.3   AUDITING D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

Privacy accounting only provides upper bounds on the privacy loss captured by the DP parameters
(ε, δ), and these bounds are not always tight. Leveraging the relation between DP and the performance
of membership inference attacks, privacy auditing aims to produce lower bounds on the DP parame-
ters by instantiating concrete adversaries permitted within a given threat model (Jagielski et al., 2020;
Nasr et al., 2021). When these lower bounds match the upper bounds given by privacy accounting, we
can conclude that the privacy analysis is tight; when they do not, it is possible to improve the privacy
accounting and/or the attacks. A privacy auditing pipeline can be broken down into two components:
an adversary and an auditing scheme. The high-level process is shown in Algorithm 1.
Adversary. Auditing a mechanism M first requires the design of an adversary A, which seeks
to predict the presence or absence of a canary point x∗ from the information available in the
considered threat model. Typically, an adversary A consists of two subroutines RankSample
and RejectionRule. RankSample gives a confidence score that the observed output was
generated by sampling from M(D) rather than from M(D ∪ {x∗ }), which can interpreted as the
two hypotheses of a binary test. RejectionRule applies a threshold to the confidence scores
generated across multiple random runs of M to decide when to reject the first hypothesis. It then
compares these decisions to the ground truth to produce binary test statistics: True Negatives (TN),
True Positives (TP), False Negatives (FN), and False Positives (FP).
Auditing scheme. The auditing scheme takes Algorithm 1 Privacy auditing
as input the hypothesis testing statistics of
an adversary and a privacy parameter δ, and        Input: Audited mechanism M, adversary A,
outputs a high-probability lower bound ε̂ on       dataset D, canary point x∗ , number of auditing
the privacy loss of the mechanism M. It            runs R, privacy parameter δ
comprises two subroutines: ConfInterval            S ← [], b ← []
and ConvertToDP. ConfInterval con-                 D0 ← D
verts the adversary statistics to high probabil-   D1 ← D ∪ {x∗ }
ity lower bounds for the False Negative Rates      for i = 1 to R do
α and False Positive Rates β. ConvertToDP             bi ← Ber(1/2)          ▷ draw a random bit
then converts these lower bounds into ε̂ for the      S i ←  A.RankSample(M(D       bi ), D0 , D1 )

specified δ by leveraging the fact that DP implies end   for
an upper bound on any adversary’s performance.     TN, TP, FN, FP ← A.RejectionRule(S, b)
Our experiments will rely on the recently pro-
posed auditing scheme based on Gaussian DP         α, β ← ConfInterval(TN, TP, FN, FP)
(Nasr et al., 2023), which we describe for com-    ε̂ ← ConvertToDP(α, β, δ)
pleteness in Appendix A.                           return ε̂

To obtain the tightest possible ε̂, one should perform auditing using a worst-case canary x∗ and a
worst-case adversary A. This proves to be especially challenging in the hidden state model as the
adversary cannot rely on the knowledge of intermediate models. In this paper, we will obtain tighter
lower bounds ε̂ by abstracting away the canary and using adversaries that directly craft gradients.

3     R ELATED W ORK IN D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY AUDITING

The goal of differential privacy auditing is to create worst-case adversaries that maximally exploit
the underlying threat model, even if the information used by the adversary might not be available
in practical scenarios.1 A rich line of work has designed adversaries that can tightly and efficiently
audit the privacy of learning algorithms when intermediate models are released (Nasr et al., 2021;
Maddock et al., 2023; Nasr et al., 2023; Steinke et al., 2023). The first adversarial construction (the
malicious dataset attack in Nasr et al. (2021)) to reach the theoretical upper bound given by privacy
accounting for DP-SGD used a restrictive threat model in which the adversary controls the entire
learning process, including the dataset, the mini-batch ordering, all hyperparameters and intermediate
models. In follow-up work by Nasr et al. (2023), a nearly matching lower bound was obtained
for a gradient-crafting adversary that does not need to control the dataset, the minibatches or the
hyperparameters but still requires access to intermediate models.
   1
     This is in contrast to membership inference attacks seeking feasibility against real systems (Shokri et al.,
2017; Yeom et al., 2018; Carlini et al., 2022; Zarifzadeh et al., 2023).


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prior attempts at auditing the hidden state model used adversaries employing a loss-based attack that
targets a canary obtained by flipping the label of a genuine data point (Nasr et al., 2021; 2023; Steinke
et al., 2023; Annamalai and Cristofaro, 2024). The idea is to generate an outlier from an in-distribution
data point so that the loss of the model on this canary is high when it is not part of the training
set but drops significantly when used during training. Auditing the hidden state model with these
adversaries yields privacy lower bounds that exhibit a significant gap compared to privacy accounting
upper bounds for the standard threat model (Nasr et al., 2021; 2023; Steinke et al., 2023; Annamalai
and Cristofaro, 2024). This gap has two possible explanations: (i) these adversaries are suboptimal
and stronger adversaries exist in the hidden state model; and/or (ii) the upper bounds are not tight.
Understanding the reasons for this gap, so as to gain better knowledge of the properties of DP-SGD
in the hidden state model, is the main motivation for our work. We demonstrate that gradient-crafting
adversaries can provide tighter auditing results, thereby proving the validity of hypothesis (i). We show
that in certain regimes, our auditing results match the privacy upper bounds, indicating that releasing
intermediate models does not increase the privacy loss. However, we also identify regimes where
a gap remains, thus providing compelling evidence in support of hypothesis (ii). Specifically, our
findings suggest the presence of a privacy amplification by iteration phenomenon in the non-convex
setting, albeit weaker compared to what is theoretically established for the convex case (Feldman
et al., 2018; Balle et al., 2019; Bok et al., 2024), but less restrictive than the results of Asoodeh and
Diaz (2023). The latter require projecting the iterates onto a convex set of bounded diameter or a
strong enough decay term on the parameters, which are unrealistic assumptions in practical scenarios
involving non-convex and over-parameterized models like the ones considered in our work.
In Table 1 (Appendix B), we provide a summary of prior auditing results for DP-SGD, highlighting
in particular whether the considered adversaries are compatible with the hidden state threat model.

4       G RADIENT-C RAFTING A DVERSARIES FOR THE H IDDEN S TATE M ODEL
In all threat models, DP-SGD enjoys a simplified interpretation as a sequence of T sum queries with
bounded terms, where the t-th query corresponds to summing the clipped gradients over the mini-batch
Bt in Equation 2. From this perspective, privacy accounting techniques for DP-SGD are designed to
accommodate any possible gradients with a bounded norm C, irrespective of whether they originate
from a fixed dataset. This highlights a key limitation of adversaries used so far in the hidden state
model: due to the non-convexity of the objective function, any sequence of gradients for the canary
x∗ is likely to be possible, but how to craft a worst-case x∗ is unclear (and in fact out of scope for
privacy auditing). Instead, we allow the adversary to directly craft any gradient sequence, considering
that there could be a data point that would generate that sequence. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no theoretical restriction on the gradients that neural networks can produce; therefore, we
cannot rule out the possibility that some input point could generate an arbitrary sequence of gradients.
Threat model. As per the hidden state, only the final model θT is revealed while the intermediate
models θ1 , . . . , θT −1 are kept hidden. We assume that the adversary knows the model architecture, the
loss function ℓ, the initialization θ0 , the dataset D and the mini-batches B0 , . . . , BT −1 .2 Considering
the mini-batches to be known, as done for instance in Feldman et al. (2018), allows to isolate the
impact of concealing the intermediate models from other factors (such as privacy amplification by
subsampling). We consider the hyperparameters of DP-SGD (η, C, σ) to be fixed and identical for
all optimization steps to avoid uninteresting edge cases (e.g., setting the learning rate η to 0 in all
optimization steps that do not use the crafted gradients). This requirement can be lifted by switching
to Noisy-SGD as in Feldman et al. (2018); Altschuler and Talwar (2022), where hyperparameters like
the learning rate or the batch size are part of the privacy definition.
Gradient-crafting adversaries. Following the above threat model, we allow the adversary to craft
an arbitrary gradient sequence as long as it is not a function of the intermediate models. In other
words, the adversary must decide on a sequence of gradients before training starts, in an offline way,
to audit a complete, end-to-end training run of DP-SGD. We stress that this is in stark contrast to
Nasr et al. (2023), who use gradient-crafting adversaries to audit each step of DP-SGD and then
leverage composition to derive a privacy lower bound for the overall training run. Their approach
thus explicitly relies on the adversary having access to all intermediate models, whereas ours does
not make this assumption nor use this information in any way.
    2
        When inserted, the crafted gradient is added to the genuine gradients of the mini-batch.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our construction helps to understand the hidden state threat model and its properties by decoupling the
privacy leakage induced by a worst-case sequence of gradients from the craftability of a canary that
could produce that sequence. Allowing the adversary to craft a gradient sequence directly circumvents
two issues in prior attempts to audit the hidden state model (Nasr et al., 2023; Steinke et al., 2023):
     • Saturating the gradient norm: The canary point crafted by prior adversaries is not guaranteed
       to saturate the gradient clipping threshold throughout training. The adversary’s performance
       becomes architecture-dependent: for example, a small convolutional neural network has a small
       canary norm at the start of the training compared to a ResNet, as observed in Figure 8 of the
       Appendix. Thus, for a tight audit, one must tune the clipping threshold according to the canary
       gradient norm, which the adversary cannot access in our threat model.
     • Hypothesis testing: Prior adversaries need to test the presence of a sequence of gradients
       they cannot access, so they use the model’s loss as a proxy confidence score (RankSample
       in Algorithm 1): a lower loss implies a higher confidence that a sample was used during
       training. By allowing the adversary to pick the sequence of gradients, we can align the choice
       of confidence score to the way adversarial information is encoded in the gradients (as will be
       evident in the adversaries we propose below), thereby achieving superior testing performance.
Concrete adversary instantiations. We propose two instantiations of our gradient-crafting
adversaries, which we will use to perform privacy auditing in the next section (see ):
    1. Random Biased Dimension (AGC -R): The adversary picks a random dimension and crafts
       gradients with magnitude C in this dimension. To test whether crafted gradients were inserted
       (RankSample in Algorithm 1), the adversary uses the difference between θT and θ0 in that
       dimension as the confidence score (RankSample in Algorithm 1).
    2. Simulated Biased Dimension (AGC -S): The adversary simulates the training algorithm and
       picks the least updated dimension. Then, it crafts gradients with magnitude C in that dimension.
       To test the presence of crafted gradients, the adversary uses the same confidence score as AGC -R.
These two adversaries are designed to be as simple as possible. Other gradient constructions can be
used, such as crafting a random gradient following the method proposed by Andrew et al. (2024) (see
Figure 7 of the appendix for a comparison with the adversaries we use). However, recent findings
on privacy backdoors can further justify our choice of adversaries, where the model architecture and
parameters are chosen adversarially to leak certain input points. Specifically, Feng and Tramèr (2024)
propose a specific construction of architecture and initialization in which a well-chosen input point
generates gradients nearly concentrated in a single dimension throughout training. This demonstrates
that in some cases, our adversaries AGC -R and AGC -S can be instantiated by inserting a canary point.
For more details on our two gradient-crafting adversaries, see Appendix C, and refer to Algorithm 4
for the corresponding auditing procedure, adapted from Algorithm 1.


5     P RIVACY AUDITING R ESULTS ON R EAL DATASETS

5.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

+Training details. We perform auditing on two datasets: we choose CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) as
a representative dataset for the state-of-the-art in differentially private training (Tramèr and Boneh,
2021; De et al., 2022), and Housing (Pace and Barry, 1997) to underline the hardness of auditing
smaller models in the hidden state. We use fixed hyperparameters for each dataset: on CIFAR10,
the batch size is 128, and the learning rate is 0.01, while on Housing, the batch size is 400, and the
learning rate is 0.1. Training is done with DP-SGD with no momentum. We use three models: a fully
connected neural network (FCNN) for the Housing dataset (Pace and Barry, 1997), a convolutional
neural network (CovNet) (LeCun et al., 1989) and a residual network (ResNet) (He et al., 2016) for
CIFAR10. A detailed description of the models can be found in Appendix D.
Baseline adversary. As baseline, we adopt an adversary used in prior related research (Nasr et al.,
2023; Steinke et al., 2023). This adversary selects a point from the training dataset and flips its label
to generate an outlier which serves as the canary x∗ . The loss of the model on this canary is used as
confidence score to test whether it was inserted or not. We refer to this baseline as the "loss-based
adversary", denoted by AL .


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                AGC -R, C=1        AL, C=1                AGC -R, C=1        AL, C=1
                                                AGC -R, C=2        AL, C=2                AGC -R, C=2        AL, C=2
ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)               AGC -R, C=4        AL, C=4                AGC -R, C=4        AL, C=4             AGC -R        AGC -S           AL


                                    20                                        20                                        20


                                    15                                        15                                        15


                                    10                                        10                                        10


                                     5                                         5                                         5


                                            5        10       15      20              5        10       15      20              5         10      15       20
                                         ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)        ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)        ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)

                                          (a) Auditing ConvNet                        (b) Auditing ResNet                        (c) Auditing FCNN.

Figure 1: Auditing results for AGC (ours) and AL on ConvNet (Fig. 1a) and ResNets (Fig. 1b) at
periodicity k = 1 and C ∈ {1, 2, 4}. In Fig. 1c we present the results for AGC -R (ours), AGC -S
(ours) and AL on FCNN (Housing dataset) at periodicity k = 1.


Privacy accounting & auditing. We compute privacy upper and lower bounds for the crafted gradient
(for AGC ) or canary (AL ) as follows. The theoretical privacy upper bound is given by the accountant
of Gopi et al. (2021). We audit three scenarios where the accountant gives equivalent privacy
guarantees for the crafted gradient or canary by inserting it at different periodicity k ∈ {1, 5, 25},
accounting only for the steps where the insertion occurs and adjusting the time horizon T accordingly.
When k = 1, the model is trained for T = 250 steps, and the crafted gradient or canary is inserted
at every step; when k = 5, the model is trained for 1250 steps and insertion occurs every 5 steps; and
similarly for k = 25. We report both the theoretical and empirical epsilons at a fixed δ = 1e−5 , but
note that we can generate the complete privacy curve (ε, δ(ε)), see Figure 11 of the appendix. For
auditing, we rely on the recently proposed scheme based on Gaussian DP (described in Appendix A
for completeness) as it allows accurate auditing with a small number of auditing runs (Nasr et al.,
2023). Details on training and auditing parameters can be found in Appendix D.
Remark 1 (On the impact of known initialization). As explained in our threat model of Section 4, we
consider the initialization θ0 known to the adversary. This is a standard assumption made explicitly
or implicitly by virtually all privacy accounting techniques, including those tailored to the hidden
state (Feldman et al., 2018). Nevertheless, we show in Figure 12 of the appendix that commonly used
random initializations like Kaiming (He et al., 2015) or Xavier (Glorot and Bengio, 2010) do not
significantly affect our auditing results, as they only add a bit of variance at initialization.
Remark 2 (On pre-trained models). While we consider here that models are trained from scratch
on private data, our techniques and results also apply to the scenario where a model pre-trained on
public data defines a new (potentially smaller) model to be fine-tuned on private data. We illustrate
this by fine-tuning a pre-trained AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) model by training only the last fully
connected layer of the classifier on CIFAR10, see Figure 13 of the appendix.

5.2                                      AUDITING RESULTS FOR PERIODICITY k = 1

Over-parameterized models. The results in Figure 1 show that our adversary AGC -R achieves tight
auditing results in the hidden state model when the crafted gradient is inserted at every step, a result
that had been achieved until now only when the adversary could pick a worst-case dataset D = {∅}
(Nasr et al., 2021) and set the learning rate to 0 in steps where the canary is not inserted, or when the
adversary had access to the intermediate models (Nasr et al., 2023). Note that the baseline loss-based
adversary AL is indeed not tight and even very loose in some regimes.
The fact that a tight audit can be achieved by our simplest adversary AGC -R (random biased
dimension) may seem surprising. We provide a high-level explanation of this phenomenon. As we are
auditing over-parameterized models, which are highly redundant, we can expect a genuine gradient
to assign on average a magnitude of O( C|minibatch|
                                                p     ) to each dimension, where p is the number of
parameters of the model. As p is typically orders of magnitude larger than the commonly used batch
sizes, genuine gradients in a mini-batch contribute a negligible magnitude to any dimension compared


                                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   AGC -R, ConvNet            AL, ConvNet                                                          AGC -R, ConvNet            AL, ConvNet
                                                   AGC -R, ResNet             AL, ResNet                                                           AGC -R, ResNet             AL, ResNet
ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)


                                                                                                 ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)
                                    10                                                                                               10

                                     8                                                                                                8

                                     6                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                      4
                                     4
                                                                                                                                      2
                                     2
                                                                                                                                      0
                                               5             10           15            20                                                     5             10            15           20
                                                   ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)                                                              ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)

                                           (a) Canary insertion periodicity k = 5                                                         (b) Canary insertion periodicity k = 25

Figure 2: Auditing results for AGC (ours) and AL on ConvNet and ResNet (CIFAR10) at privacy
parameters C = 1 at periodicity k = 5 (Figure 2a) and k = 25 (Figure 2b).


to the magnitude of C inserted at a single dimension by AGC -R (or AGC -S). Therefore, genuine
gradients do not interfere with the contribution of the adversary, regardless of the selected dimension.
We see below that this no longer holds when auditing low-dimensional models.
Low-dimensional models. Auditing smaller models is more challenging because the ratio between
the mini-batch size and the number of parameters is larger. To evaluate our adversaries in this regime,
we switch to the Housing dataset with the FCNN model, which has only 68 parameters. We report the
performance of our two adversaries over five runs in Figure 1c. We observe that randomly selecting
a dimension (AGC -R) no longer achieves tight results, although it still outperforms the baseline loss-
based adversary. Remarkably, our second adversary, which simulates the training algorithm to select
an appropriate dimension (AGC -S), recovers nearly tight results with small variance between runs.
To conclude, the tightness of our adversaries implies a novel negative result.
Implication 1. If a data point is used at every optimization step of DP-SGD, hiding intermediate
models does not amplify its privacy guarantees.

5.3                                      AUDITING R ESULTS AT P ERIODICITY k > 1

We now study how our adversaries perform when the crafted gradient is inserted at a higher periodicity
k ∈ {5, 25}. We observe in Figure 2 that (i) we still outperform the baseline loss-based adversary AL
by a large margin, but (ii) we no longer match the privacy upper bound, and our adversary becomes
weaker as we increase k. Intuitively, the latter is due to the accumulation of the noise added on genuine
gradients during the k − 1 iterations between each crafted gradient insertion. However, privacy ac-
counting (i.e., the upper bound) does not take advantage of this accumulated noise: as the insertion of a
crafted gradient at a given step could bias subsequent genuine gradients towards a particular direction,
the best one can do is to resort to the post-processing property of DP, which ensures that subsequent
genuine gradients do not weaken the privacy guarantees. In the next section, we investigate whether it
is possible to match the privacy accounting upper bound in this setting, which amounts to designing
an adversary capable of crafting gradients that maximally influence subsequent genuine gradients.
Remark 3. Using auditing via Gaussian DP (Nasr et al., 2023) for k > 1 implies approximating the
trade-off function of the mechanism with a Gaussian one (see Appendix A for definitions). While this
approximation can underestimate the privacy guarantees in certain cases like subsampled or shuffled
mechanisms (see Dong et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2024)), in our context it is justified by the Central
Limit Theorem (Dong et al., 2022), and has been used before when auditing the hidden state (Nasr
et al., 2023). Appendix E (Figure 6a) shows the approximation error is indeed negligible in our case.

6                                        T OWARDS A W ORST-C ASE A DVERSARY FOR THE H IDDEN S TATE

In this section, we investigate whether reducing (and potentially closing) the gap with the theoretical
upper bound observed in Section 5.3 is possible. For simplicity, we consider the case where a crafted
gradient is inserted only in the first optimization step, and then T − 1 subsequent steps are performed


                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                      B=1          B=4         B=16
                      B=2          B=8         Accounting ε                                        1.0


                                                                                                         Amplification Rate ε̂t=25/ε̂t=1
                                                                      1 0.91 0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00
            4.5
                      σ=1                     σ=8
                                                                      2 0.69 0.91 0.99 1.00 1.00   0.8
                                   0.4                                3 0.54 0.80 0.97 1.00 1.00
                                                                      4 0.44 0.70 0.91 0.99 1.00   0.6


                                                                  σ
            4.0                                                       5 0.39 0.60 0.86 0.98 1.00
       ε̂                          0.2                                6 0.33 0.54 0.80 0.96 1.00
                                                                                                   0.4

                                                                      7 0.31 0.49 0.75 0.94 1.00   0.2
            3.5                    0.0                                8 0.25 0.43 0.68 0.91 0.99
                  0           20         0            20                                           0.0
                                                                          1    2    4    8   16
                          T                     T                                  B
       (a) Evolution of the auditing performance across time           (b) Privacy amplification rate
                                                              ∗
Figure 3: Auditing performance of our adversary AhS across T = 25 steps. Figure 3a shows the
evolution of the auditing performance across time for σ ∈ {1, 8} and batch size B ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}.
Figure 3b gives the privacy amplification rate, i.e., the ratio ε̂t=25 /ε̂t=1 between the privacy auditing
lower bounds at step 25 (ε̂t=25 ) and at step 1 (ε̂t=1 ).


without inserting crafted gradients. This corresponds to the scenario studied by privacy amplification
by iteration (Feldman et al., 2018), but we do not restrict ourselves to convex losses.
We introduce a new class of adversaries AS that crafts the gradient and the loss landscape itself,
thereby controlling the distribution of all T updates. Therefore, AS can pick a (non-convex) loss
landscape such that the crafted gradient inserted at step T = 1 maximally biases subsequent genuine
gradients, thereby yielding the highest possible privacy loss for the final model. Note the underlying
principle is the same as in Section 4: instead of requiring the adversary to craft a dataset, model
architecture and loss function, we allow the adversary to select the loss landscape directly, considering
that there could be a dataset that would generate this landscape. As long as the loss landscape is
selected before training starts, this is covered by the hidden state threat model we consider.
We formalize the above using the following pair of one-dimensional stochastic processes:
                               1                                       1
                θt+1 = θt − (g(θt ) + Zt+1 ) ,          θt+1 = θt −        g(θt ) + Zt+1 ,            (3)
                               B                                      B
where the first step is either θ1 = Z1 (a process that did not use the crafted gradient) or θ1 = ∇∗ + Z1
(a process that used the crafted gradient ∇∗ ), with Zi ∼ N (0, C 2 σ 2 ), and g : R → [−BC, BC] is
a function that abstracts the sum of gradients of the loss on a batch of size B in the DP-SGD update
(Equation 2). The goal of the adversary is to choose the function g and the gradient ∇∗ , without know-
ing the intermediate updates, making the distribution of θT and θT as “distinguishable” as possible.
Example 1 (Constant g). Consider the simple case where g outputs a constant c, independent of the
input. This implies that the Gaussian noise accumulates√at every step, and the privacy loss ε for the
last iterate converges to 0 as T → ∞ at a rate of O(1/ T ).
As illustrated by Example 1, it is easy to design a function g that amplifies privacy over time. However,
the converse objective, i.e., designing a function that provides no or minimal privacy amplification
for the final step T , appears much more challenging.
                                                                  ∗
A worst-case proposal. We propose a concrete adversary AhS which selects ∇∗ = C and the function
gϕ∗ (X) = BC if ϕ∗ (X) = 1 and gϕ∗ (X) = −BC otherwise, where ϕ∗ : R → {0, 1} is the linear
threshold function that achieves the minimal False Positive Error Rate α + False Negative Error Rate
β for distinguishing between θ1 and θ1 (i.e., testing if the model after 1 step was generated using
the crafted gradient ∇∗ ). More precisely, ϕ∗ (X) = 1 if X > h∗ and ϕ∗ (X) = 0 otherwise, with
         ∗
h∗ = |∇2 | = C2 (see Appendix F for a numerical validation). The resulting non-convex loss landscape
adheres to the intuition that the crafted gradient maximally biases subsequent steps (see Appendix F).
                      ∗                                                                                 ∗
Auditing with AhS . Figure 3a shows the auditing performance of our adversary AhS for T ∈
{1, . . . , 25} steps, batch sizes B ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16} and noise variances σ ∈ {1, 8} (for more values
see Figure 14 in the appendix).3 Figure 3b gives the ratio between the privacy auditing lower bound
  3
    As in Section 5, we need to approximate the trade-off function of our mechanism with a Gaussian one (see
Remark 3). In practice, the approximation error is again negligible (see Figure 6b in Appendix E).


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ε̂t=25 at the last step and the one obtained after the first step, to measure the extent of the privacy am-
plification phenomenon for various batch sizes B and values of σ. When this ratio is equal to 1, there
is no amplification and the audit is tight, while values smaller than 1 indicate the existence of a privacy
amplification effect. We observe two general trends: the amplification rate increases with σ and
decreases with B. This can be explained as follows. Higher noise variance (σ) helps forget initial con-
ditions in the stochastic processes (3). Conversely, a larger batch size (B) allows subsequent updates to
be larger, enabling the initial conditions to propagate better across iterations despite the noise. Indeed,
as gradient updates are bounded by [−BC, BC] and the noise remains independent of B, increasing
B allows the adversary to retain more “signal” about the canary’s presence in subsequent gradients.
Unlike the case where the crafted gradient is inserted at every step (see Implication 1), the above
results reveal two distinct two regimes, as highlighted in Implications 2 and 3 below. On the one hand,
                                                                                           ∗
when the batch size B is large enough relative to the noise variance σ, our adversary AhS achieves a
tight audit. In this regime, this adversary is thus optimal and there is no privacy amplification.
Implication 2. For a sufficiently large batch size relative to the noise variance, the privacy accounting
of DP-SGD is tight in the hidden state model: hiding intermediate updates does not amplify privacy.

On the other hand, privacy amplification seems to occur when the batch size is small enough relative
                                                                        ∗
to the noise variance. As seen from Figure 3a, the privacy loss of AhS converges to a constant: this
is because the privacy loss distributions become sufficiently far away and stop mixing over time. This
constant is smaller than the upper bound from privacy accounting, but remains positive, indicating
that this potential amplification must be qualitatively weaker than in the convex case.
Implication 3. In the non-convex regime, for a sufficiently small batch size relative to the noise
variance, hiding intermediate updates may amplify the privacy guarantees of DP-SGD. However, the
privacy loss of a sample does not go to 0 as subsequent
                                                √       steps are performed, in contrast to the convex
case where the privacy loss decreases in O(1/ T ) (Feldman et al., 2018).
Remark 4 (Comparison to parallel work). Implication 2 was independently established in a recent
concurrent work by Annamalai (2024). Their worst-case construction differs from ours, and in
particular implicitly assumes that the batch size is large relative to the noise variance. As a
consequence, their results overlook the fact that privacy amplification can occur under small batch
sizes, which is a practically important regime where stronger privacy guarantees may be achievable.


7    D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Our work allows tighter auditing of DP-SGD in the hidden state model, and our results yield sev-
eral implications that advance the understanding of this threat model. For instance, Implication 3
means that the property of converging privacy loss of DP-SGD as T → +∞ recently established by
Altschuler and Talwar (2022) in the convex case cannot hold for non-convex models without additional
constraints. Beyond this negative result, our work suggests that a (weaker) form of privacy amplifica-
tion does occur for non-convex problems when the batch size is small relative to the noise variance.
Beyond differential privacy, our results have consequences for machine unlearning (Bourtoule et al.,
2021), which aims to remove a specific data point from a trained model as if it had never been used
for training. A popular definition for unlearning is inspired by DP (Guo et al., 2020; Neel et al., 2021;
Gupta et al., 2021), with recent work relying on noisy training and privacy amplification by iteration
to provide unlearning guarantees (Chien et al., 2024). Implication 3 shows that this approach cannot
completely unlearn a data point when considering non-convex models like neural networks.
An intriguing open question arises from the gap between our empirical results on real datasets (Section
5) and the adversary crafting the loss landscape (Section 6) when the canary is not inserted at every
step. While recent work on privacy backdoors shows that certain architectures can be manipulated
to make a specific data point produce the desired gradient sequence throughout training (Feng and
Tramèr, 2024), it seems unlikely that this point could also maximally bias subsequent gradients of gen-
                                                                    ∗
uine training points in the same way as our worst-case adversary AhS . Investigating the extent to which
this is feasible in commonly used architectures would enhance our understanding of privacy leakage
in deep learning, and could ultimately lead to better privacy accounting for the hidden state model.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Pierre Stock and Alexandre Sablayrolles for numerous helpful discussions and feedback
in the early stages of this project and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin for observing the need to fix the
hyperparameters for DP-SGD in our threat model. We want to thank members of the CleverHans Lab
for their feedback.
The work of Tudor Cebere and Aurélien Bellet is supported by grant ANR-20-CE23-0015 (Project
PRIDE) and the ANR 22-PECY-0002 IPOP (Interdisciplinary Project on Privacy) project of the
Cybersecurity PEPR. This work was performed using HPC resources from GENCI–IDRIS (Grant
2023-AD011014018R1).
The work of Nicolas Papernot and Tudor Cebere (while visiting the University of Toronto and Vector
Institute) is supported by Amazon, Apple, CIFAR through the Canada CIFAR AI Chair, DARPA
through the GARD project, Intel, Meta, NSERC through the Discovery Grant, the Ontario Early
Researcher Award, and the Sloan Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2016.
Jason M. Altschuler and Kunal Talwar. Privacy of noisy stochastic gradient descent: More iterations
  without more privacy loss. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Galen Andrew, Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, Alina Oprea, H. Brendan McMahan, and Vinith Suriyaku-
  mar. One-shot empirical privacy estimation for federated learning. In ICLR, 2024.
Meenatchi Sundaram Muthu Selva Annamalai. It’s our loss: No privacy amplification for hidden
 state dp-sgd with non-convex loss, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.06496.
Meenatchi Sundaram Muthu Selva Annamalai and Emiliano De Cristofaro. Nearly tight black-box
 auditing of differentially private machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14106, 2024.
Shahab Asoodeh and Mario Diaz. Privacy loss of noisy stochastic gradient descent might converge
  even for non-convex losses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09903, 2023.
Borja Balle, Gilles Barthe, Marco Gaboardi, and Joseph Geumlek. Privacy amplification by mixing
  and diffusion mechanisms. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Borja Balle, Giovanni Cherubin, and Jamie Hayes. Reconstructing training data with informed
  adversaries. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P), 2022.
Raef Bassily, Adam D. Smith, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Private Empirical Risk Minimization:
  Efficient Algorithms and Tight Error Bounds. In FOCS, 2014.
Jinho Bok, Weijie J Su, and Jason Altschuler. Shifted interpolation for differential privacy. In
   Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin Travers,
  Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
  on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 141–159. IEEE, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramer.
  Membership inference attacks from first principles. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
  (S&P), pages 1897–1914. IEEE, 2022.
Eli Chien, Haoyu Wang, Ziang Chen, and Pan Li. Stochastic gradient langevin unlearning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.17105, 2024.
C. J. Clopper and E. S. Pearson. The use of Confidence or Fiducial Limits Illustrated in the Case of
  the Binomial. Biometrika, 1934.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edwige Cyffers and Aurélien Bellet. Privacy amplification by decentralization. In AISTATS, 2022.

Soham De, Leonard Berrada, Jamie Hayes, Samuel L Smith, and Borja Balle. Unlocking high-
  accuracy differentially private image classification through scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13650,
  2022.

Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, and Weijie J. Su. Gaussian differential privacy. Journal of the Royal
   Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 84(1):3–37, 2022.

Vadym Doroshenko, Badih Ghazi, Pritish Kamath, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. Connect
  the dots: Tighter discrete approximations of privacy loss distributions. In Privacy Enhancing
  Technologies Symposium (PETS), 2022.

Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy. Foundations
  and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.

Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Shai Halevi and Tal Rabin, editors, Theory of Cryptography, pages
  265–284, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-32732-5.

Úlfar Erlingsson, Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep
  Thakurta. Amplification by shuffling: From local to central differential privacy via anonymity. In
  SODA, 2019.

Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Privacy amplification by
  iteration. In FOCS, 2018.

Shanglun Feng and Florian Tramèr. Privacy backdoors: Stealing data with corrupted pretrained
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00473, 2024.

Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, 2010.

Sivakanth Gopi, Yin Tat Lee, and Lukas Wutschitz. Numerical composition of differential privacy. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.

Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Y. Hannun, and Laurens van der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. In ICML, 2020.

Varun Gupta, Christopher Jung, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi, and Chris Waites.
  Adaptive machine unlearning. In NeurIPS, 2021.

Niv Haim, Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, Ohad Shamir, and Michal Irani. Reconstructing training data
  from trained neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2022.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pages 1026–1034, 2015.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  2016.

Nils Homer, Szabolcs Szelinger, Margot Redman, David Duggan, Waibhav Tembe, Jill Muehling,
  John V. Pearson, Dietrich A. Stephan, Stanley F. Nelson, and David W. Craig. Resolving individuals
  contributing trace amounts of dna to highly complex mixtures using high-density snp genotyping
  microarrays. PLOS Genetics, 2008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000167.

Matthew Jagielski, Jonathan Ullman, and Alina Oprea. Auditing differentially private machine
 learning: How private is private sgd? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 22205–22216, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. The composition theorem for differential
  privacy. In ICML, pages 1376–1385. PMLR, 2015.
Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, Homin K. Lee, Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam
  Smith. What can we learn privately? SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(3):793–826, 2011.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems - Volume 1. Curran Associates Inc., 2012.
Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel.
  Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition. Neural Computation, 1(4):541–551,
  1989. doi: 10.1162/neco.1989.1.4.541.
Fred Lu, Joseph Munoz, Maya Fuchs, Tyler LeBlond, Elliott Zaresky-Williams, Edward Raff, Francis
  Ferraro, and Brian Testa. A general framework for auditing differentially private machine learning.
  In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 4165–4176. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.
Samuel Maddock, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and Pierre Stock. CANIFE: Crafting canaries for empirical
  privacy measurement in federated learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Milad Nasr, Shuang Songi, Abhradeep Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Nicholas Carlin. Adversary
 instantiation: Lower bounds for differentially private machine learning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
 on security and privacy (SP), pages 866–882. IEEE, 2021.
Milad Nasr, Jamie Hayes, Thomas Steinke, Borja Balle, Florian Tramèr, Matthew Jagielski, Nicholas
 Carlini, and Andreas Terzis. Tight auditing of differentially private machine learning. In USENIX
 Security, 2023.
Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi. Descent-to-delete: Gradient-based methods
  for machine unlearning. In ALT, 2021.
Jerzy Neyman, Egon Sharpe Pearson, and Karl Pearson. Ix. on the problem of the most efficient tests
   of statistical hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A,
  Containing Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character, 231(694-706):289–337, 1933. doi:
  10.1098/rsta.1933.0009.
R Kelley Pace and Ronald Barry. Sparse spatial autoregressions. Statistics & Probability Letters, 33
  (3):291–297, 1997.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks
  against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages
  3–18, 2017. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.41.
Shuang Song, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Anand D. Sarwate. Stochastic gradient descent with
  differentially private updates. In 2013 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
  Processing, pages 245–248, 2013. doi: 10.1109/GlobalSIP.2013.6736861.
Thomas Steinke, Milad Nasr, and Matthew Jagielski. Privacy auditing with one (1) training run. In
  NeurIPS, 2023.
Florian Tramèr and Dan Boneh. Differentially private learning needs better features (or much more
  data). In ICLR, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chendi Wang, Buxin Su, Jiayuan Ye, Reza Shokri, and Weijie Su. Unified enhancement of privacy
  bounds for mixture mechanisms via f -differential privacy. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024.
Jiayuan Ye and Reza Shokri. Differentially private learning needs hidden state (or much faster
   convergence). Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:703–715, 2022.
Samuel Yeom, Irene Giacomelli, Matt Fredrikson, and Somesh Jha. Privacy risk in machine learning:
  Analyzing the connection to overfitting. In 2018 IEEE 31st computer security foundations
  symposium (CSF), pages 268–282. IEEE, 2018.
Ashkan Yousefpour, Igor Shilov, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Davide Testuggine, Karthik Prasad, Mani
  Malek, John Nguyen, Sayan Ghosh, Akash Bharadwaj, Jessica Zhao, Graham Cormode, and
  Ilya Mironov. Opacus: User-friendly differential privacy library in PyTorch. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.12298, 2021.
Santiago Zanella-Béguelin, Lukas Wutschitz, Shruti Tople, Ahmed Salem, Victor Rühle, Andrew
  Paverd, Mohammad Naseri, Boris Köpf, and Daniel Jones. Bayesian estimation of differential
  privacy, 2023.
Sajjad Zarifzadeh, Philippe Liu, and Reza Shokri. Low-cost high-power membership inference by
  boosting relativity, 2023. arXiv:2312.03262.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ETAILS ON AUDITING VIA G AUSSIAN DP

For completeness, in this section we present the privacy auditing approach proposed by Nasr et al.
(2023), which we use in our experiments. We start by introducing some necessary concepts on f -DP
and Gaussian DP in Section A.1. Then, in Section A.2, we present an overview of how auditing is
performed and how all the elements of the general auditing pipeline (Algorithm 1) are implemented.

A.1   f -D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY AND G AUSSIAN D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

f -DP and Gaussian DP (Dong et al., 2022) are based on a characterization of DP as binary hypothesis
testing. We recall the main concepts below.
Definition 2 (Error rates). Let P and Q be two arbitrary distributions and O a sample drawn from
either P or Q. Let a binary hypothesis test be defined by the following two hypotheses: H0 : “the
output O is drawn from P ” or “H1 : the output O is drawn from Q”. Consider a rejection rule
ϕ : Rd → [0, 1] that outputs the probability that we should reject H0 . We define the Type I (or false
                                                    ∆
positive) error rate of this rejection rule ϕ as αϕ = E[ϕ] and the Type II (or false negative) error rate
                                                        P
      ∆
as βϕ = 1 − E[ϕ].
              Q

Definition 3 (Trade-off functions). Let P and Q be two arbitrary distributions. We define the
trade-off function between P and Q as:
                                  T (P, Q)(α) = inf {βϕ : αϕ ≤ α}.                                    (4)
                                                   ϕ


We can now introduce f -DP.
Definition 4 (f -Differential Privacy). Let f be a trade-off function. Then a mechanism M is
f -Differentially Private (f -DP) if for all neighbouring datasets D and D′ :
                                       T (M (D), M (D′ )) ≥ f.                                        (5)

Trade-off functions describe the lowest Type II error rate achievable by any adversary at any Type I
error rate . We say that a mechanism M1 is strictly less private than M2 if T (M1 (D), M1 (D′ ))(α) ≤
T (M2 (D), M2 (D′ ))(α) for all α ∈ [0, 1]. Dong et al. (2022) show (ε, δ)-DP can be formulated as
f -DP as follows:
                               fε,δ (α) = max{0, 1 − δeε , e−ε (1 − δ)}                            (6)

Gaussian Differential Privacy (GDP) is a specialized formulation of f -DP where f is the trade-off
function of two Gaussian distributions.
Definition 5 (Gaussian Differential Privacy). Let Φ be the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
N (0, 1) and Φ−1 its associated quantile function. A mechanism M is µ-GDP if it is Gµ -DP, where
                              ∆
                      Gµ (α) = T (M (D), M (D′ ))(α) = Φ(Φ−1 (1 − α) − µ).                            (7)

The following result is crucial for auditing: it shows that the error rates of an adversary give a lower
bound on the GDP guarantees.
Lemma 1 (Relating error rates to GDP). Assume that an adversary has error rates αM , βM in the
binary test defined by P = M (D) and Q = M (D′ ) where M is a mechanism and D and D′ are two
neighboring datasets. Then, if M satisfies µ-GDP, then
                                     µ ≥ Φ−1 (1 − α) − Φ−1 (β).                                       (8)

Finally, we can convert µ-GDP to (ε, δ)-DP.
Corollary 1 (From µ-GDP to (ε, δ)-Differential Privacy.). If a mechanism M is µ-GDP then it
satisfies (ε, δ)-DP, where:
                                            ε  µ          ε µ
                               δ(ε) = Φ(−     + ) − eε Φ(− − ).                                       (9)
                                            µ  2          µ 2

                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    AUDITING VIA GDP

Auditing a mechanism M via GDP follows the general approach outlined in Algorithm 1, and
amounts to instantiating its different primitives:

      1. RankSample: We first generate R outputs of M , half of them sampled from M (D), the
         rest from M (D′ ), where D′ = D ∪ {x∗ }. For each output i ∈ {1, . . . , R}, a score Si is
         computed to the adversary’s confidence that either D or D′ were used as input for M . The
         precise computation of this confidence score depends on the considered adversary and is
         abstracted by the RankSample method in Algorithm 1. We refer to Sections 4-5 for details
         about the RankSample method used by the adversaries we consider.
      2. RejectionRule: Each Si is then augmented with its associated ground truth label bi ,
         reflecting if a particular sample has been generated from D or D′ . The adversary selects a
         classifier (RejectionRule in Algorithm 1) that receives the set S as input and needs to
         classify it against the ground truth label b. We stress that DP holds against any choice of
         such a classifier. Commonly used ones are linear threshold classifiers (Nasr et al., 2023).
         Once a threshold classifier has been selected, we evaluate the error rates of the classifier
         using S and b as the ground truth labels, evaluating the False Negative (FN), False Positive
         (FP), True Negative (TN), and True Positive (TP) of the classifier.
      3. ConfInterval: Using these statistics, we employ the Clopper Pearson (Clopper and
         Pearson, 1934) confidence intervals over binomial distributions to get a high-probability
         lower bound on the Type I error rate (α) and Type II error rate (β) for the adversary’s
         performance. We note that other techniques exist to compute such confidence intervals
         (Zanella-Béguelin et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2022); however, the benefits we observed practically
         were negligible in our case.
      4. ConvertToDP: Finally, given access to the lower bounds on the error rates of the adversary,
         we can compute the lower bound on the privacy loss of a mechanism M in GDP by using
         Lemma 1, and translate the result to (ε, δ)-DP using Corollary 1.

We stress that this technique offers a lower bound on the privacy loss, while techniques like privacy
accounting (Abadi et al., 2016; Gopi et al., 2021; Doroshenko et al., 2022) or composition (Dwork
et al., 2006; Kairouz et al., 2015; Dong et al., 2022) offer upper bounds on the privacy loss. We call a
mechanism tight if a lower bound offered by auditing match the upper bound

B     S UMMARY OF P RIOR W ORK ON P RIVACY AUDITING OF DP-SGD

We provide in Table 1 a list of adversaries used in prior work on privacy auditing of DP-SGD along
with their key properties: whether they are compatible with the hidden state, whether they achieved a
tight audit, and the type of canary they used.

C     D ETAILS ABOUT OUR A DVERSARIES AGC

The algorithmic description of our adversaries AGC -R and AGC -S are given in Algorithms 2-3.
We discuss different strategies to select the biased dimension for our adversary AGC -S. The general
idea is to explore how the different dimensions are updated by simulating the training process, as all
the required knowledge is available to the adversary. We have considered two types of simulations:
(i) Noisy simulation, in which we use the same noise variance as the simulated process, and (ii)
Noiseless simulation, in which we run the training algorithm without noise or clipping. Note that for
the noiseless simulation, the training algorithm is deterministic, as the initialization and the batches
are fixed and known to the adversary, while in the noisy simulation, the stochasticity of DP-SGD is
concealed for the adversary. We use four simulations of the training process. We then proceed to
choose how to rank the most suitable dimension to bias, for which we have explored two options: (i)
Per Step (PS): selecting the dimension that has the lowest gradient norm accumulated over all the
training runs or (ii) Final Model (FM): selecting the dimension that is the closest to initialization
at the end of the training run. We experiment with these design choices, resulting in 4 dimension
selection strategies. The results in Figure 4 show that the Noiseless-PS strategy performs best.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Paper                                     Adversary                                                                 HS        TA                  CT
        Jagielski et al. (2020)                       Poisoned Backdoor                                                             ✓          ✗               Sample
                                                          API Access                                                                ✓          ✗               Sample
                                                       Static Adversary                                                             ✓          ✗               Sample
                                                  Intermediate Poison Attack                                                        ✓          ✗               Sample
            Nasr et al. (2021)
                                                  Adaptive Poisoning Attack                                                         ✗          ✗               Sample
                                                       Gradient Attack                                                              ✗          ✗               Gradient
                                                      Malicious Datasets                                                            ✗         ✓                Gradient
                                                        Experiment 1                                                                ✓          ✗               Sample
  Zanella-Béguelin et al. (2023)
                                                        Experiment 2                                                                ✓          ✗               Sample
        Maddock et al. (2023)                            Algorithm 1                                                                ✗          ✗               Gradient
                                                         Algorithm 1                                                                ✓          ✗               Sample
            Nasr et al. (2023)
                                                         Algorithm 2                                                                ✗         ✓                Gradient
                                                         Algorithm 2                                                                ✓          ✗           Sample or Gradient
         Andrew et al. (2024)
                                                         Algorithm 3                                                                ✗          ✗               Gradient
                                                     audit-type=whitebox                                                            ✗          ✗           Sample or Gradient
         Steinke et al. (2023)                       audit-type=blackbox                                                            ✓          ✗               Sample
                                                        AGC -R, k = 1                                                               ✓         ✓                Gradient
                  Ours
                                                        AGC -R, k > 1                                                               ✓          ✗               Gradient


Table 1: Summary of adversaries used in prior privacy auditing of DP-SGD. We report whether the
adversary is compatible with the hidden state (HS), if the adversary achieves tight audit in the threat
model it operates (TA) and the type of canary (CT) used by the adversary (gradient canaries or sample
space canaries).


         AGC -R    AGC -S - Noiseless - FM    AGC -S - Noisy - FM
         AL        AGC -S - Noiseless - PS    AGC -S - Noisy - PS
                                                                    ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)


                                                                                                                                                                     AGC -S, ConvNet, k=1
20                                                                                                      20                                                           AGC -R, ConvNet, k=1
                                                                                                                                                                     AGC -S, ResNet18, k=1
                                                                                                                                                                     AGC -R, ResNet18, k=1
                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                     AGC -S, ConvNet, k=5
                                                                                                                                                                     AGC -R, ConvNet, k=5
10                                                                                                      10                                                           AGC -S, ResNet18, k=5
                                                                                                                                                                     AGC -R, ConvNet, k=5

                                                                                                         5


                                                                                                                  5            10            15             20
              5         10               15         20                                                                ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)
        ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)
                                             Figure 5: Auditing results for AGC -S compared to
Figure 4: Auditing results of AL , AGC -R AGC -R at k ∈ {1, 5} on ConvNet and ResNet18. We
and AGC -S on the Housing dataset. We observe that the two adversaries are equivalent for these
consider 4 variants of AGC -S, depending on over-parameterized models, demonstrating that AGC -S
whether the noisy or noiseless simulation is only enhances our attack against under-parameterized
used and whether we rank dimensions based models.
on accumulating per-step updates (PS) or on
the final model norm difference (FM).



In Figure 5, we show that AGC -S using the best strategy is equivalent with AGC -R on our studied
over-parameterized models.


Algorithm 2 Gradient Generation for AGC -R (Random Biased Dimension)
     Input: dataset D, initialization θ0 ∈ Rp , clipping threshold C
     d ← random element from {1, . . . , p}
     ∇∗ ← (0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rp
     ∇∗ [d] ← C
     return ∇∗ , d


                                                                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Noisy gradient generation for AGC -S (Simulated Biased Dimension)
  Input: dataset D, initialization θ0 ∈ Rp , clipping threshold C, noise variance σ 2 , mini-batches
         {B1 . . . BT }, number of runs r, parameter selection rank ∈ {PerStep, FinalModel},
         simulation ∈ {Noisy, Noiseless}
  S = [0]p
  for j = 1 to r do
    for i = 1 to T do
       Zt ∼ N (0, C 2 σ 2 I)

       θt+1 ← θt − |Bηt |
                               P
                                   clip ∇θt ℓ(θt ; x), C
                            x∈Bt
       if simulation = Noisy then
          θt+1 = θt+1 + |Bηt | Z, where Z ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
       end if

      if rank = PerStep then
                             2
         S ← S + (θi − θi−1 )
      end if
    end for

    if rank = FinalModel then
       S ← |θT − θ0 |
    else     √
       S← S
    end if
  end for
  d ← argmin S
  ∇∗ ← (0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rp
  ∇∗ [d] ← C
  return ∇∗ , d


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 Privacy auditing with our gradient-crafting adversaries
    Input: dataset D, mini-batches {B1 . . . BT }, periodicity k, number of auditing runs R,
           privacy parameter δ, noise variance σ 2 , clipping norm C, initial parameters θ0 ∈ Rp ,
           standard Gaussian CDF Φ, gradient-crafting adversary AGC
    ∇∗ , d ← AGC                                  ▷ get crafted gradient and biased dimension from adversary
    S ← [], b ← []
    for j = 1 to R do
      bi ← Ber( 21 )                                                                                 ▷ draw a random bit
      for t ∈ {1, · · · , T } do                                                !
         θt+1 = θt − |Bηt |                                                         , Zt ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
                                    P
                                           clip (∇θt ℓ (θt ; x) , C) + Zt
                                  xi ∈Bt

         if t mod k = 0 AND bi = 0 then
            θt+1 = θt+1 − |Bηt | ∇∗                                                                      ▷ Canary is inserted
         end if
      end for
      Si ← θT [d] − θ0 [d]                                       ▷ Retrieve the model value at biased dimension d
    end for
    Ssorted n← sort(S)                                                          o
    H←       hi = Ssorted [i]+S2 sorted [i+1] : i = 1, . . . , |Ssorted | − 1

    for hi ∈ H do
      b̂ ← {1 [Si ≤ hi ] : i = 1, . . . , |S|}
      TN, TP, FN, FP ← ConfusionMatrix(b̂, b)
      αi , βi ← ClopperPearson(TN, TP, FN, FP)
      µi ← Φ−1 (1 − αi ) −    −1
                             Φ (βi )
      ε̂i ← argmin δ − Φ − µεi + µ2i + eε Φ − µεi − µ2i                                 ▷ Minimization via binary search
                 ε
    end for
    return max{ε̂i : i = 1, . . . , R}


D      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS ON T RAINING & AUDITING

In our experimental section, we audit three neural network architectures, a ConvNet and a ResNet
on the CIFAR10 dataset and a Fully-Connected Neural Network on the Housing dataset. These
models were implemented using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), and the DP-SGD optimizer was
Opacus (Yousefpour et al., 2021). The hyperparameters for training, privacy guarantees, and privacy
auditing parameters for each audited machine learning model are meticulously outlined in Table 2.
The ConvNet and ResNet have been audited when trained for 250, 1250, and 6250 optimization steps,
totaling approximately 3500 GPU hours.
For clarity, in Algorithm 4 we detail the Gaussian DP-based auditing procedure used for our gradient-
crafting adversaries (AGC -R or AGC -S). For each experiment, we audit R = 5000 machine learning
models using GDP auditing (see Appendix A). For the Clopper Pearson confidence intervals, we use
a confidence of 95% (consistent with prior work (Jagielski et al., 2020; Nasr et al., 2021)) to get a
lower bound on the Type I error rate (α) and Type II error rate (β) for the adversary’s performance.
RejectionRule is computed by selecting the best linear threshold classifier on S. While, in
practice, the adversary should pick the classifier on a set of held-out scores S, we select the classifier
directly on S to save the computational resources required to compute the held-out set S. We stress
that it is not an issue, as differential privacy guarantees hold against any choice of classifier.

E     A PPROXIMATION E RRORS FOR GDP AUDITING

As explained in Remark 3, using auditing via Gaussian DP (Nasr et al., 2023) (see Appendix A)
implies approximating the trade-off function of our mechanism with a Gaussian one (Dong et al.,


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             H YPERPARAMETER                      F ULLY-C ONNECTED NN                                       C ONV N ET           R ES N ET 18
                                                                −2                                               −2
             L EARNING RATE (η)                             10                                               10                     10−2
             BATCH SIZE                                      400                                              128                    128
             T RAINABLE PARAMS                                68                                            62006                 11173962
             L OSS F UNCTION                      B INARY C ROSS E NTROPY                              C ROSS E NTROPY         C ROSS E NTROPY
             C LIPPING NORM C                                1.0                                       { 1.0, 2.0, 4.0 }       {1.0, 2.0, 4.0 }
             N OISE VARIANCE σ                                4                                                4                       4
             FAILURE PROBABILITY δ                          10−5                                             10−5                   10−5
             AUDITING RUNS                                  5000                                             5000                   5000
             C ONFIDENCE I NTERVAL                          0.95                                             0.95                    0.95

                                                 Table 2: Hyperparameters used per model


                                      Observed tradeoff curve                                                            Observed tradeoff curve
                                      Our approximation via GDP                                                          Our approximation via GDP
                        1.0                                                                            1.0

                        0.8                                                                            0.8
 Type II Error Rate β


                                                                                Type II Error Rate β
                        0.6                                                                            0.6

                        0.4                                                                            0.4

                        0.2                                                                            0.2

                        0.0                                                                            0.0
                          0.0   0.2      0.4       0.6    0.8        1.0                                 0.0       0.2       0.4       0.6    0.8    1.0
                                      Type I Error Rate α                                                                 Type I Error Rate α
(a) The approximation error of approximating the trade-                         (b) The approximation error of approximating the trade-
                                                                                                                                ∗
off function of the observations via GDP for AGC -R                             off function of the observations via GDP for AhS when
when auditing a ConvNet on CIFAR10 when k = 5 at                                the T = 25 case at privacy parameter C = 1 and
step 1250.                                                                      σ = 4.


2022). In this section, we present some samples of the privacy trade-off curves that we observe when
                                        ∗
auditing both AGC in Figure 6a and AhS in Figure 6b. For AGC , we show the case where T = 1250
                                                                                                   ∗
when auditing a ConvNet at canary gradient insertion periodicity k = 5 on CIFAR10, while for AhS
we present the approximation when T = 25. We see that the approximation errors are negligible, and
the approximation technique is representative.
This good behaviour is due to the Central Limit Theorem for f -DP composition (Dong et al., 2022),
which, in a nutshell, states that while individual mechanisms are not well approximated by a Gaussian
Mechanism, their composition has a decaying error in the number of compositions performed when
approximated via a Gaussian Mechanism.

F                        D ETAILS ON OUR ADVERSARY A∗h
Visualization of the loss landscape. Figure 10 shows the loss landscape corresponding to our
adversary A∗h defined in Section 6. One can see how the crafted gradient can bias subsequent steps.
Note that the discontinuity is not essential and can be removed by appropriate scaling.
Numerical validation of optimality of h∗ . In this section, we numerically validate that the choice of
                      ∗
threshold h∗ in AhS is indeed optimal for T = 2 by comparing it with all possible threshold functions.
To search for these functions, we discretize the Type I error rate α ∈ [0, 1] into {α1 . . . αd }, and each
αi we look for the rejection rule ϕi that achieves the lowest Type II error rate βi . Given that, in this
case, our function g distinguishes between two Gaussian distributions via Neyman-Pearson (Neyman
et al., 1933), it is well known that the optimal classifier with a fixed type I error rate is achieved by its


                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                             ∗
                                                                                                                           AhS               Threshold Search           ε Privacy Accounting



                                                                                                              4


                                                                                        Privacy Guarantee ε
Algorithm 6 Lower bound search routine over                                                                   3
multiple threshold classifiers.                                                                               2
                                                                     C
                                    {α1 . . . αd } = linspace(0, Φ( 2σ 2 ), d)                                1
                                    for αi ∈ {α1 . . . αd } do
                                      hi = Φ−1 (1 − αi )                                                             1.0         1.5   2.0       2.5    3.0     3.5
                                                                                                                                                 Noise Variance σ 2
                                                                                                                                                                       4.0    4.5    5.0

                                      ε̂ = Audit(gϕhi )
                                    end for                                             Figure 6: Comparison between the privacy ac-
                                    return max(ε̂)                                      counting upper bound and the auditing perfor-
                                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                        mance of AhS and our threshold search algorithm
                                                                                        when T = 2. All results are averaged across five
                                                                                        training runs


                                               AGC -S           ACotS             AL
ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)


                                                                                                                                                  ResNet                ConvNet

                                    20                                                                              102
                                                                                               Canary Sensitivity

                                    15

                                                                                                                    101
                                    10

                                     5
                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                            0          500       1000      1500       2000    2500      3000
                                               5        10         15        20                                                                   Number of Steps
                                           ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)
                                                 Figure 8: The gradient norm of the canary varies
Figure 7: Comparison of privacy auditing perfor- along the optimization path and for different ar-
mance for AGC -R (ours), AL and ACotS (An- chitectures. We report the mean and ±2 standard
drew et al., 2024) when auditing a FCNN model deviations across 30 random runs.
on the Housing dataset.


associated threshold classifier hi = Φ(1 − αi ), where Φ is the CDF of N (0, σ 2 ). With {h1 . . . hd } at
hand, we can define multiple gϕi , and implicitly multiple adversaries AhSi that use gϕi as a candidate
for g in Eq. 3 which we use to audit, resulting in {ε̂1 . . . ε̂d }, out of which we pick the maximum. A
detailed description is provided in Algorithm 6.
                                                                                   ∗
The results shown in Figure 6 confirm that AhS employs the optimal threshold classifier to distinguish
the input distributions.


G                                        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we present additional experimental results mentioned in various parts of the main text.
Alternative gradient-crafting strategy. The adversaries that we propose in Section 4 and use in Sec-
tion 5 construct a gradient biased in a single dimension chosen by the adversary. We investigate here
an alternative approach inspired by the auditing method of Andrew et al. (2024). In their approach, the
crafted gradient is randomly sampled from the unit sphere and then scaled by the sensitivity C. For
the confidence score (RankSample in Algorithm 1), the adversary computes the cosine similarity
between the canary gradient and the change in model parameters θT −θ0 , which is compatible with the
hidden state model. For completeness, Algorithms 7-8 formally show how the generation of the gra-
dient and the computation of the confidence score is performed. We denote this adversary by ACotS .


                                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 7 RankSample for ACotS                       Algorithm 8 Gradient Generation for ACotS
                               p
 1: Input: Model θT ∈ R , Initialisation θ0 ,           1: Input: dataset D, initialization θ0 ∈ Rp ,
                       ∗
            canary ∇                                               clipping threshold C
 2: U ← θT − θ0                                         2: ∇ ← N (0, Ip )
 3: return ⟨∇∗ , U ⟩/(∥∇∗ ∥2 × ∥U ∥2 )                  3: ∇∗ ← ∇/∥∇∥2
                                                        4: return C × ∇∗

Figure 9: Algorithms used for auditing via ACotS : (a) RankSample and (b) Gradient Generation.


We observe experimentally that AGC outperform ACotS , and that both approaches outperform the
loss based adversary AL , see the results in Figure 7.
Experiments on auditing with unknown initialization. As common in differential privacy, we
consider throughout the paper that the initialization θ0 . We discuss here the impact of considering the
initialization to be unknown. First, we note that standard initialization techniques like Glorot (Glorot
and Bengio, 2010) or Xavier (He et al., 2015), which are commonly used to stabilize the training
process by preventing the vanishing or exploding gradients phenomena, sample random parameters
from a uniform or normal distribution with a small variance. Therefore, such initializations only add
a bit of variance. Figure 12 shows the results of using AGC -R to audit a CNN model on CIFAR-10
with unknown initialization from Xavier. We observe no quantitative difference in the performance
of AGC -R compared to the case where the initialization is fixed and known.
Experiments on auditing pre-trained models. In Figure 12 we present the results of AGC -R to
audit pretrained models. We audit an AlexNet model (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), a model pre-trained
on ImageNet (treated as public data) and fine-tuned on CIFAR-10 (treated as private data), compared
to a CNN trained from scratch directly on CIFAR-10 with no frozen parameters. We see that AGC -R
performs tight auditing for k = 1 in this scenario as well.
Privacy profiles. While in all of our experiments, we report both the theoretical epsilon provided
by the privacy accounting and the empirical epsilon at a fixed δ = 1e−5 , we can generate the entire
privacy profile curve ε 7→ δ(ε) and thus produce auditing results at an arbitrary δ. Indeed, our auditing
technique computes a lower bound on the µ-GDP parameter (see Section A for more details). Using
the lower bound on µ in Corollary 1, we can compute any δ(ε). To compute ε at a fixed δ, we use a line-
search algorithm like the bisection method, as the function δ(ε) is monotonically increasing in ε. In
Figure 11, we present three privacy profile curves ε 7→ δ(ε) corresponding to the performance of AGC -
R when auditing a CNN with k ∈ {1, 5, 25}. This confirms that for the case k = 1, we are indeed tight
in all privacy regimes, while for k > 1 AGC -R is not tight for all ε ≥ 0, as discussed in Section 5.
                           ∗
Detailed results for AhS . In Figure 14 we present all the training curves that generated the heatmap
                                                                            ∗
in Figure 3b by computing the empirical privacy loss generated by AhS for all σ ∈ {1, . . . , 8}
and B ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}. As a reference, we display the theoretical epsilon provided by privacy
accounting at each σ. In all plots we observe that the regime B = 16 yields tight auditing, and this is
also the case for larger batch sizes (not shown to avoid clutter).


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          Gradient Value             Loss Landscape                                                                 k=1            k=5            k=25             Accounting Upperbound
                                                                                                                         1.0
                                    1.0

                                    0.5
                                                                                                                         0.8

                                    0.0                                                                                  0.6


                                                                                                                     δ
                             −0.5
                                                                                                                         0.4
                             −1.0
                                                                                                                         0.2
                             −1.5
                                                                                                                         0.0
                             −2.0                                                                                                                                   10−2               10−1         100                      101
                                                                                                                                                                                         Privacy Loss ε
                             −2.5
                                                 −2           −1           0              1           2
                                               Figure 11: Privacy profiles of AGC -R for k ∈
                                                                           θ

                                               {1, 5, 25}, C = 1 on CNN trained on CIFAR10
Figure 10: Visualization of the loss landscape on the last step of training (T = 250 for k = 1,
                   ∗
corresponding to Ah for C = 1.                 T = 1250 for k = 5, T = 6150 for k = 25).
                                                                S
ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)


                                                 AGC -R, Known Init
                                                                                                                           ε̂ (Privacy Auditing Lower Bound)
                                    20           AGC -R, Unknown Init                                                                                                     AOG-R, finetuning
                                                                                                                                                               20         AOG-R, full training
                                    15
                                                                                                                                                               15
                                    10
                                                                                                                                                               10
                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                5
                                     0
                                         0            5             10               15             20                                                                        5              10              15              20
                                                          ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)                                                                                        ε (Privacy Accounting Upper Bound)


Figure 12: Auditing results for AGC on CNN                                                                                Figure 13: Auditing results for AGC -R when
trained on CIFAR10 when the initialisation of                                                                             k = 1 on a pre-trained AlexNet model is fine-
the neural network is unknown to the adversary,                                                                           tuned on CIFAR10.
compared to the case of known initialisation.


                                                              B=1                B=2                      B=4                                       B=8                              B=16                         Accounting ε
                                                       σ=1                                     σ=2                                                                        σ=3                                         σ=4
                                     4.5                                       2.0                                   1.5                                                                           1.0


                                     4.0                                       1.5                                   1.0                                                                           0.5
ε̂


                                     3.5                                       1.0                                   0.5                                                                           0.0
                                             0                     20                 0                    20                                            0                           20                  0                         20
                                                       σ=5                                     σ=6                                                                        σ=7                                         σ=8
                                     1.0                                       1.0                                   1.0                                                                           1.0


                                     0.5                                       0.5                                   0.5                                                                           0.5
ε̂


                                     0.0                                       0.0                                   0.0                                                                           0.0
                                             0                     20                 0                    20                                            0                           20                  0                         20
                                                          T                                         T                                                                      T                                             T
                                                                                                ∗
Figure 14: Auditing performance of AhS over time T = 25 for various batch sizes B ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}
and noise levels σ ∈ {1 · · · 8}, used to generate Figure 3b.



                                                                                                                23
