Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Q UALITY OVER Q UANTITY IN ATTENTION L AYERS :
W HEN A DDING M ORE H EADS H URTS
 Noah Amsel1 , Gilad Yehudai1 & Joan Bruna1,2
 1                                                                          2
   Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University              Flatiron Institute
 {noah.amsel,gy2219,jb4496}@nyu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Attention-based mechanisms are widely used in machine learning, most promi-
         nently in transformers. However, hyperparameters such as the number of attention
         heads and the attention rank (i.e., the query/key dimension) are set nearly the same
         way in all realizations of this architecture, without theoretical justification. In this
         paper, we prove that the rank can have a dramatic effect on the representational
         capacity of attention. This effect persists even when the number of heads and
         the parameter count are very large. Specifically, we present a simple and natural
         target function based on nearest neighbor search that can be represented using a
         single full-rank attention head for any sequence length. We prove that it cannot
         be approximated by a low-rank attention layer even on short sequences unless the
         number of heads is exponential in the embedding dimension. Thus, for this tar-
         get function, rank is what determines an attention layerвҖҷs power. We show that,
         for short sequences, using multiple layers allows the target to be approximated by
         low-rank attention; for long sequences, we conjecture that full-rank attention is
         necessary regardless of depth. Finally, we present experiments with standard mul-
         tilayer transformers that validate our theoretical findings. They demonstrate that,
         because of how all standard transformer implementations set the rank, increasing
         the number of attention heads can severely decrease accuracy on certain tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Attention-based architectures are ubiquitous in contemporary machine learning. The most promi-
nent examples are transformers, which are invaluable tools for processing images, audio, time series,
PDEs, and biological data in addition to natural language. The basic transformer architecture leaves
the user free to set several hyperparameters, but few of these have been carefully studied. In fact, in
the thousands of papers that use this architecture, certain hyperparameters are almost always kept the
same as in the original work of Vaswani et al. (2017) that introduced transformers. (See Appendix A
for a comparison.) In this paper, we study one of these hyperparameters: the attention rank.
The rank of an attention layer refers to the dimension of the query and key vectors formed by each
attention head. The capacity of an attention layer is determined by its rank (r) and its number of
heads (H). When the input is a sequence of embedding vectors in Rd , its total number of param-
eters is of order dHr. Most transformers in the literature still use a small rank of between 64 and
128, even though the embedding dimension has grown dramatically from d = 512 in the original
transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) to d = 8, 192 in LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a). It is not clear
whether the expressive power of transformers is weakened by maintaining a fixed rank as the di-
mension is increased. In addition, nearly all work on transformers sets the number of heads to be
H = d/r (see Appendix A). In fact, this scaling is so standard that it is hard-coded into libraries
like PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and xFormers (Lefaudeux et al., 2022), a fact which has likely
discouraged experimentation with other scalings. The original motivation for this scaling in Vaswani
et al. (2017) was simply to match the parameter count of multi-head attention with that of earlier
architectures, which used one full-rank attention head (H = 1, r = d). We know of no a priori
reason or experimental evidence that favors this scaling over any other, as the trade-offs between the
rank and the number of heads are still not well-understood. This paper raises doubts about whether
the universal practice of setting r вүӘ d and H = d/r is always a wise choice.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To demonstrate how impactful these hyperparameters can be, we reproduce the influential experi-
ment of Garg et al. (2022), which shows that transformers can be trained to perform linear regression.
This experiment is widely studied by both empiricists and theoreticians as an archetype of in-context
learning (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023; AkyuМҲrek et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024). The original paper set H = 8. In Figure 1, we show that simply reducing H while
maintaining the scaling H = d/r yields significantly better accuracy without changing the number
of parameters in the model. (See Appendix B.1 for details.)
The first step towards understanding such
hyperparameter scalings in transformers is
to focus on their expressive power. Our ap-
proach is analogous to a long line of work
in the theory of deep learning that has ana-
lyzed the relative importance of width and
depth in determining the expressive power
of feedforward neural networks (FNNs).
For FNNs, depth two suffices for univer-
sal approximation (Cybenko, 1989), but
greater depth may be required for efficient
approximation. That is, some functions
can be efficiently represented by a three-
layer FNN, but cannot be represented by
a two-layer FNN unless its width is ex-
ponentially wide in the input dimension
(Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Daniely, 2017;
Safran & Shamir, 2017). This shows that Figure 1: For the in-context learning task of Garg et al.
width and depth are not exchangeable; (2022), transformers with fewer heads (that is, higher
even very large width does not compensate rank) perform significantly better despite having the
for the depth being too small. It is natural same number of parameters. See Appendix B.1 for de-
to ask similar questions about attention- tails.
based architectures: Does using low rank
(r вүӘ d) weaken the expressive power of
attention? Does using a large number of heads H compensate for this weakness? What is the most
parameter-efficient way to scale up our models?
In this paper, we study precisely these trade-offs in the expressive capacity of attention layers. We
present a simple target function based on nearest neighbor search which can be efficiently approx-
imated by a single-head, full-rank attention layer (hence with a total of O(d2 ) parameters), but not
by a low-rank attention layer. This separation in expressive power persists even if the total number
of parameters satisfies Hdr вү« d2 . This shows that rank, rather than the total number of parameters,
can be the main factor influencing an attention layerвҖҷs capacity. Stacking multiple layers of low-rank
attention can yield a moderately-efficient approximation of our target too, at least for short context
lengths. We complement these theoretical results with experiments on fully-featured transformer
architectures as implemented in PyTorch.

1.1   O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS
       вҖў In Section 4, we prove a rank separation for representing the nearest neighbor function
         using multi-head attention. This function can be approximated to any accuracy using
         only a single full-rank head. Yet in the high-dimensional regime, at least в„Ұ (d/r)1/Пө
         heads of rank r are required to achieve relative squared error Пө. Moreover, in the high-
         accuracy regime (Пө going to zero with d fixed), the required number of heads is exponential:
         в„Ұ(exp(d вҲ’ r log(d/r))).
       вҖў In Section 5, we establish an exponential separation in both regimes by combining multiple
         biased nearest neighbor functions. This combined target function can be approximated to
         any accuracy using polynomially-many full-rank heads, but в„Ұ(exp(d вҲ’ r)) rank-r heads
         are required to approximate it with better than a constant error.
       вҖў In Section 6, we explore ways to circumvent the weakness of low-rank attention. We show
         that augmenting the attention architecture and adding a second, non-linear layer can achieve


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         this using polynomially many heads, but unlike full-rank attention, such constructions may
         not scale to long sequence lengths.
       вҖў In Section 7, we support our theoretical results with experiments on standard transformer
         architectures with multiple layers of attention and MLPs. We show that the full rank models
         easily learn the target to high accuracy вҖ” even recovering our main construction вҖ” but the
         low rank models struggle to do so. For the well-known in-context learning task of Garg
         et al. (2022), larger rank likewise yields higher accuracy with fewer parameters. Users of
         standard transformers may not realize that setting H = 2 could be much worse than H = 1,
         but in some cases, it is.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Theory of transformers A growing line of work has sought to provide theoretical analysis of
transformers and the attention mechanism. Training dynamics, inductive biases, generalization, and
in-context learning have all received significant attention. However, papers in these areas nearly
always assume that full-rank attention is used (Bietti et al., 2023; Cabannes et al., 2024; Fu et al.,
2023; Sanford et al., 2024a; Edelman et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Jelassi et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2024; Deora et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023), even though many also assume there
are multiple heads. Our work provides important context for these results, showing that full-rank
models may not be good proxies for the low-rank transformers used in practice.

Expressive power of transformers Our work belongs to a body of research studying the repre-
sentational capacity of transformers. Unlike other topics in transformer theory, results in this area
often do apply to low-rank attention. Yun et al. (2019) prove that (exponentially deep) transformers
are universal approximators even with rank one. Wei et al. (2022) and Merrill & Sabharwal (2023)
show that transformers can simulate Turing machines if their size is allowed to grow with the se-
quence length. Kim et al. (2022) and Kajitsuka & Sato (2023) show that transformers are capable of
memorizing data. Bhattamishra et al. (2024) show that transformers can efficiently implement a ver-
sion of the nearest neighbor algorithm for in-context classification of points on the sphere, but their
construction uses attention that is full-rank with respect to the input dimension. Our formulation
of the nearest neighbor task is slightly different and can be solved with full-rank attention almost
trivially (see Fact 1). Finally, an important line of work analyzes the representational capacity of
transformers using classes of formal languages, finite automata, and circuits (Hahn, 2020; Liu et al.,
2022; Hao et al., 2022; Merrill et al., 2022; Strobl et al., 2024), but it does not capture separations
in capacity due to rank.

Limitations of low-rank attention Several other studies have investigated the role of the rank of
the attention mechanism. Bhojanapalli et al. (2020) present experiments that challenge the canonical
H = d/r scaling. They argue that fixing d and r based on the context length N and setting H
independently leads to more powerful and efficient models. They also prove that a full-rank attention
head can produce any attention pattern from any input (for some setting of the weights), but a low-
rank attention head cannot; however, this implies nothing about the representational power of low-
rank attention or how it relates to the number of heads. In addition, Likhosherstov et al. (2023) show
that even rank r = log(N ) suffices to represent any sparse attention pattern. Mahdavi et al. (2024)
ask how many input-output pairs a low-rank multi-head attention layer can exactly memorize. For
their problem, it is not worth setting r > N ; furthermore the memorization capacity depends on rH
rather than on r or H, supporting the standard scaling. We study the more realistic and practically
motivated setting of approximating a natural function over data drawn from a natural distribution.
Unlike Likhosherstov et al. (2023) and Mahdavi et al. (2024), we show that high rank is sometimes
essential, irrespective of H.
The paper closest to our own is Sanford et al. (2024b), which proves two separations related to
rank. First, they present a function that can be well-approximated by a single attention head if and
only if its rank is sufficiently large. This result prompts the following question: can using multiple
heads compensate for the weakness of low-rank attention? We answer this question in the negative.
Second, they present a one-dimensional function on N inputs that is impossible to represent exactly
unless rHp > N , where p is the bits of precision. We extend this result in that our lower bounds
apply (1) even for N = 2, (2) for infinite or finite precision (3) to function approximation over a nat-


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ural distribution, not just exact representation. Additionally, our target function engenders a stronger
separation: while H вүҘ в„Ұ(1/r) suffices in their setting, ours requires H to grow polynomially or
even exponentially in d/r to overcome the weakness of low-rank attention. However, their target
functions are more closely akin to the kinds of structured reasoning tasks to which transformers are
often applied. In particular, they highlight how attention is naturally suited to capturing pairwise
interactions; recurrent architectures struggle to do this efficiently, while transformers struggle to
capture third-order interactions.
Finally, an important reference to the dangers of low rank appears in Yang et al. (2022), which
introduced the highly influential ВөP method for hyperparameter transfer. They find that as d and r
decrease, transformers start to behave badly. Thus, they set r > d/H in some cases. See Appendix
D.4 and E.2.

Low rank compression and fine-tuning Much recent work in model compression (Lv et al.,
2023; Hajimolahoseini et al., 2021; Ben Noach & Goldberg, 2020) and fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022)
is based on the empirical observation that the weight matrices of pretrained transformers (like those
of other neural networks) can be replaced or fine-tuned by lower-dimensional proxies without sacri-
ficing performance, and in some cases even helping it (Sharma et al., 2024). Such results contextu-
alize our work by showing that full-rank is not always better than low-rank.

Depth-width trade-offs in neural networks Many previous papers have proved separations be-
tween neural networks of different depths and between neural networks and kernel methods. Several
studies (Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Daniely, 2017; Safran & Shamir, 2017; Venturi et al., 2022) con-
structed functions that can be approximated efficiently with a 3-layer neural network, but for which
2-layer networks require the width to be exponential in the input dimension. Telgarsky (2016) and
Chatziafratis et al. (2019) show depth separation for networks with constant input dimension and
varying depths. Our lower bounds are also closely related technically to separation results between
neural networks and kernel methods. Yehudai & Shamir (2019) prove that random features (or any
other kernel method) cannot learn even a single neuron unless the number of features or magnitude
of the weights is exponential in the input dimension. Kamath et al. (2020) improved on their result
by removing the dependence on the magnitude of the weights. Ghorbani et al. (2021) and Misi-
akiewicz & Montanari (2023) study upper and lower bounds in approximating polynomials with
kernel methods. They show that essentially, it is necessary and sufficient for the number of features
to be exponential in the degree of the approximated polynomial. Our lower bounds are inspired by
this work.

3   S ETTING AND N OTATIONS
Attention layers A rank-r attention head is parameterized by the weight matrices Q, K, V , O вҲҲ
RdГ—r . (Some authors call these WQ , WK , WV , and WO .) A multi-head attention layer is simply
the sum of H such attention heads. The input to a multi-head attention layer is a sequence of vectors
x1 , . . . xN вҲҲ Rd called the target points and a sequence y1 . . . yM called the source points. (Note
that the name вҖңtarget pointsвҖқ is unrelated to that of the вҖңtarget functionвҖқ we wish to approximate.)
If the columns of X вҲҲ RdГ—N and Y вҲҲ RdГ—M are the target and source points, respectively, then a
softmax multi-head attention layer is a function of the form
                             XH
                                 Oh VhвҠӨ X sm X вҠӨ Kh QвҠӨ                M Г—d

                                                          hY вҲҲ R           ,                       (1)
                            h=1
where sm(В·) computes the softmax of each column of its input; that is, for each y, it outputs a
probability distribution over [N ] based on the scores X вҠӨ Kh QвҠӨ        N
                                                               h y вҲҲ R . A hardmax attention
layer is the same, except that the hardmax function hm(В·) outputs eiвҲ— , where iвҲ— is the index of
the maximum score. Note that hardmax heads are often considered to be a special case of softmax
heads, since limcвҶ’вҲһ sm(X вҠӨ cKh QвҠӨ                   вҠӨ      вҠӨ
                                      h Y ) = hm(X Kh Qh Y ) in pointwise convergence.

Above, we have described so-called cross-attention, which takes both source points and target points
as input. The familiar self-attention layers are a special case in which the source points and target
points are identical: X = Y . A given multi-head attention function can be applied to any number
of source or target points, since no part of this definition depends on N or M . In addition, it is
invariant to permutations of the target points and equivariant to permutations of the source points.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generalized attention We prove our lower bounds against a class of functions that generalizes
multi-head attention. Rather than computing the attention distribution as sm(X вҠӨ Kh Qh Y ), we al-
low any function depending on y and a rank-r projection of X that outputs a probability distribution
over [N ]. In addition, we replace Oh Vh with a single matrix Vh вҲҲ RdГ—d . Thus, our model is
                                        H
                                        X
                                             Vh XП•h KhвҠӨ X, Y

                                                                          ,                        (2)
                                       h=1

where Kh вҲҲ RdГ—r , the function П•h : RrГ—N Г—Rd вҶ’ вҲҶN вҲ’1 is applied column-wise to Y , and вҲҶN вҲ’1
is the simplex. Note that the function П•h may vary between heads. Moreover, we allow Vh вҲҲ RdГ—d
to be full-rank. Note that this class captures, beyond standard transformer architectures, the use of
biases, additive positional encodings, and other encoding schemes like RoPE (Su et al., 2024) and
ALiBi (Press et al., 2022) in the attention layer. We also capture architectures from early works on
attention (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2015), which used feedforward networks to compute the
attention scores instead of the вҖңmultiplicativeвҖқ or вҖңdot productвҖқ attention scores X вҠӨ KQY used in
transformers.

Nearest neighbor function The input to the nearest neighbor function consists of a sequence of
N target points from the unit sphere x1 , . . . , xN вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 (also denoted by X вҲҲ RdГ—N ) and a source
point y вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 .
The nearest neighbor function outputs the target point that is closest to the source:
                            f (x1 , . . . , xN ; y) :=       arg min вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ2 .                    (3)
                                                         xвҲҲ{x1 ,...xN }

This function is analogous to performing a semantic search, in which the goal is to retrieve the entry
or word in a database or context window that most closely matches a query. This function is highly
symmetric. Like multi-head attention itself, it is defined for any N and is invariant to permutations
of the target points. It is also invariant to simultaneous orthogonal transformations of X and y, so it
has no principal directions, subspaces, or scales.

Data distribution We draw target and source points uniformly from the sphere. For our lower
bounds, it is convenient to assume that the target points are orthogonal. For N вүӨ d, let DN (SdвҲ’1 )
denote the uniform distribution over the set of sequences x1 , . . . xN вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 for which i Мё= j =вҮ’
xi вҠҘ xj . Such samples can be generated by taking the first N columns of a random orthonormal
matrix. Note that this is similar in essence to drawing the data points independently from the unit
sphere, as isotropic random vectors in high dimension are nearly orthogonal. This distribution is
invariant to orthogonal transformations of X and of y.

4   L OW-R ANK S EPARATION FOR N EAREST N EIGHBORS
In this section, we study the capacity of multi-head attention to represent the nearest-neighbor func-
tion. We show a separation in representational power based on rank. The target can be represented
efficiently using full-rank attention, but under the assumptions below, approximating it using low-
rank attention requires a much larger model. We begin with the upper bound using a single full-rank
attention head:
Fact 1 (Full-rank Efficient Approximation, Equivariant Case). For the target function from Equa-
tion (3), any Пө > 0, N, d вҲҲ N there exist K, Q, V вҲҲ RdГ—d such that:
                                        h                                      2
                                                                                 i
                           E              f (X, y) вҲ’ V X sm(X вҠӨ KQвҠӨ y)             вүӨПө.             (4)
                y,x1 ,...,xN вҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )


The construction is straightforward. Consider for simplicity the hardmax case. Set V = KQвҠӨ = I
so that вҲҘxi вҲ’ yвҲҘ2 = 2 вҲ’ xвҠӨ          вҠӨ                вҠӨ      вҠӨ                  вҲ—
                            i KQ y. Then hm(X KQ y) = eiвҲ— where i = arg miniвҲҲ[N ] вҲҘxi вҲ’
yвҲҘ2 and ei is the ith standard basis vector. Note that this construction using hardmax works for any
input distribution on SdвҲ’1 and any number of points N , as it represents the target function exactly.
The softmax case is similar; for the formal statement see appendix Appendix C.1. This construction
(or one very similar to it) is easily learned by gradient descent; see Figure 5.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now turn to the lower bound. We show that approximating the target function with rank-r heads
requires the number of heads to be large unless r вҲј d. For technical convenience, we set the
number of target points to two and draw them from the distribution D2 (SdвҲ’1 ) in which they are
always orthogonal. Our main result establishes a strong quantitative separation between full-rank
and low-rank self-attention layer, even when the total number of parameters is of the same order:
Theorem 2 (Low-Rank Approximation Lower Bounds, Equivariant Case). There exist universal
constants c, cвҖІ , C and C вҖІ such that if either of the following sets of assumptions hold:
                                               c
      1. High-accuracy regime: r вүӨ d вҲ’ 3, Пө вүӨ d+1 , and

                                           H вүӨ C В· 2dвҲ’(r+1) log2 (2d/r) .                          (5)
                                                           вҖІ
                                               c
      2. High-dimensional regime: d вүҘ 5, Пө вүҘ dвҲ’2e 2 В·r and

                                                                      C вҖІ /Пө
                                             1       1     d
                                          HвүӨ           В·                       .                   (6)
                                             2       2e r + C вҖІ /Пө

Then, for any choice of H rank-r generalized attention heads П•h : RrГ—2 вҶ’ вҲҶ1 , Vh вҲҲ RdГ—d , Kh вҲҲ
RdГ—r the error of approximating the nearest neighbor function is bounded as follows
                                                     H                                 2
                                                     X
                                                           Vh XП•h KhвҠӨ X, y

                           E            f (X; y) вҲ’                                         вүҘПө,     (7)
                   x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )                h=1                               2
                    yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

where f is defined as in Equation (3).

For the proof of Theorem 2, see Appendix C. Intuitively, the approximation problem becomes harder
as d вҶ’ вҲһ and as Пө вҶ’ 0. Theorem 2 combines guarantees in two different regimes. In the first
regime, the desired accuracy Пө is small. In this case, the necessary number of heads grows expo-
nentially with d вҲ’ r. In the second regime, the dimension d is be large. In this case, the necessary
number of heads grows polynomially with d/r. Informally, both regimes show that the error is at
least Пө whenever H вүІ (d/r)1/Пө .
We emphasize that the data distribution is вҲҡ1d -close to the uniform product measure in Wasserstein
distance, and we expect our main proof techniques to generalize to this uniform measure, as well as
to other rotationally invariant distributions. Additionally, while N = 2 is sufficient for our goal of
establishing the separation, we also believe the framework should extend to the general setting of
N > 2, although this is out of the present scope.
Our proof uses tools from harmonic analysis on the sphere. It is reminiscent of the original depth
separation work of Eldan & Shamir (2016) and Daniely (2017), which also exploited the inability of
ridge functions to approximate radially-symmetric targets with substantial high-frequency energy.
Due to the rotational symmetry of the target function, attention function, and data distribution, we
can transform our problem to depend on a pair of points x = x1 вҲ’ x2 and y drawn uniformly from
the sphere, rather than x1 , x2 and y. Our target is essentially given by a step function of the form
(x, y) 7вҶ’ sgn(xвҠӨ y), which has a slowly decaying spectrum with respect to the appropriate basis.
We construct this basis using spherical harmonics, and like them, our basis functions are organized
into orthogonal subspaces based on degree в„“ polynomials. Due to rotational symmetry, the energy
of the target function is uniformly spread within each harmonic subspace. In contrast, each attention
head is tied to a few principal directions given by the span of Kh . As a result, each head is spanned
by only a fraction of the basis functions in each subspace. Thus, with a limited number of heads, it
is impossible to capture a substantial fraction of the energy of the target function.
We now comment on the tightness of this lower bound, focusing on the canonical setting of r = 1.
In this case, our lower bound simplifies and strengthens  slightly. For fixed Пө and large d, the error
of approximation is at least Пө whenever H = O d1/(4Пө) . We can construct an upper bound for our
problem by considering rank-1 heads to be random features. In Appendix C.8, we argue that we
                          function in the RKHS associated with the feature map (x1 вҲ’ x2 , y) 7вҶ’
can approximate our target
sgn (x1 вҲ’ x2 )вҠӨ kq вҠӨ y , where k and q are drawn uniformly from the unit sphere. The associated


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


kernel integral operator diagonalizes in the same basis of tensorized spherical harmonics used to
decompose the target function above, and thus the kernel ridge regression approximation can be
explicitly analysed by bounding the spectral decay of the kernel. Then, via standard arguments from
random feature expansions (Bach, 2017b), one can transfer the approximation guarantees from the
RKHS to the random feature model, provided that H = в„Ұ(d     e 2/Пө2 ). Thus, for r = 1 and fixed Пө,
the approximation lower bound of Theorem 2 captures the qualitatively correct behavior, though its
precise dependence on d may not be tight.

5    E XPONENTIAL S EPARATION FOR L OW-R ANK ATTENTION
In the previous section, we proved a polynomial separation between low-rank and full-rank trans-
formers in the constant accuracy regime (part 2 of Theorem 2). That is, to achieve error smaller than
Пө, where Пө is a constant not depending on d or r, the number of heads must be at least poly dr .

In this section, we prove a stronger, exponential separation in this regime. That is, we find a target
function that cannot be approximated by low-rank transformers to O(1)-error unless the number of
heads is exp(в„Ұ(d вҲ’ r)). This new target function is defined as
                                          2
                                        2d
                                         X  +1                                              1X  N
                                                                                   2
          f вҲ— (x1 , . . . , xN , y) =          (вҲ’1)t arg max             d вҲҘxi вҲ’ yвҲҘ + bt,i вҲ’       xj ,       (8)
                                         t=1          iвҲҲ{1,...,N }                           2 j=1

                t i=1
where bt,i =              . This function can be viewed as a sum of polynomially many nearest
                0 o.w.
neighbors functions, each with a different bias term. Using this target function, we can show the
following exponentially-strong separation between full-rank and low-rank attention:
Theorem 3. The function f вҲ— defined above satisfies the following:
      1. For any N вүҘ 2 and Пө > 0, there exists a full-rank transformer T with 2d2 + 2 biased
         attention heads such that: h                                         i
                                                                                                     2
                                E                вҲҘT (x1 , . . . , xN , y) вҲ’ f вҲ— (x1 , . . . , xN , y)вҲҘ   вүӨПө   (9)
                     x1 ,...,xN вҲјDN (SdвҲ’1 )

                          yвҲјN 0, вҲҡ1 I
                                    d


      2. For any rank-r transformer T with r < d, there exists a universal constant c > 0 such that
                                 2
         if dH В· maxhвҲҲ[H] вҲҘVh вҲҘ < exp(c(d вҲ’ r)) then:
                                            h
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    i  1
                                 E           вҲҘT (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ f вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ >           (10)
                         x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1
                                          )                                           40

                              yвҲјN 0, вҲҡ1 I
                                           d


The full proof can be found in Appendix D. The above theorem states that the function f вҲ— defined
above can be approximated by a full-rank transformer with polynomially many heads, but rank-
r transformers need exponentially-many heads to approximate it up to a constant. This result is
reminiscent of the exponential separation between 2- and 3-layer networks from Eldan & Shamir
(2016); Daniely (2017), in which the target function requires polynomially many neurons to be
approximated by a 3-layer network, but exponentially many neurons for a 2-layer network.
Theorem 3 achieves a stronger separation than Theorem 2 but uses a more complicated target func-
tion. In addition, the full rank construction here requires attention to have a bias term inside the soft-
max. Another difference is that y is drawn from a Gaussian instead of the uniformly from sphere,
but in sufficiently high dimension, this difference is insignificant. Note also that E ||f вҲ— || = O(1), so
our separation holds for the relative error too (see the discussion in Appendix D.2).
Remark 4 (Bound on the weights). Note that unlike Theorem 2, the bound in Theorem 3 does not
apply to the number of heads per se; either H or the norm of the output weight matrix Vh must be
exponential to overcome the hardness. A similar bound is found in Yehudai & Shamir (2019) which
inspires our proof. In Kamath et al. (2020) the authors were able to remove the dependence on the
scale of the weights by applying a more intricate analysis involving the SQ-dimension; however, in
our case it is not clear how to extend their technique because of the dependence on r. We conjecture
that it is still possible to remove this dependence and leave it for future work.


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof of the lower bound (part 2 of Theorem 3) is inspired by and extends the proof technique of
Yehudai & Shamir (2019), which separates kernel methods from 2-layer networks. For the intuition
behind the proof, see Appendix D.1. We note that to achieve exponential separation with constant
error, we used a target that contains polynomially-many nearest neighbor functions. In fact, pre-
vious results (Hsu et al., 2021; Safran et al., 2019) imply that such a strong separation cannot be
achieved with just a single nearest neighbor function. For a more in-depth discussion of this issue,
see Appendix D.2.

6   E FFICIENT A PPROXIMATION U SING D EPTH
In the previous sections, we showed that a single layer of low-rank attention fails to represent the
target unless the number of heads is very large. In this section, we take up the question of whether
additional layers of depth can overcome this weakness. We present a construction that approximates
the target function (with slightly modified inputs) using two layers and only polynomially many
rank-1 heads. However, we present constructions only for the case where the context length N = 2,
which is also the setting of our lower bounds. We conjuncture that any construction using low-rank
heads introduces an unfavorable dependence on N , a significant weakness compared to full-rank
attention.
Our constructions are based on the strategy we call вҖңmajority votingвҖқ, which we briefly describe
here. Consider the case of N = 2 target points and hardmax attention. The output of each head,
like the target function itself, is either x1 or x2 . A random rank-1 head is вҲҡ
                                                                              weakly correlated with
the target; the probability that it outputs the correct answer is 1/2 + в„Ұ(1/ d). Thus, combining
many such random heads together, their mode (the output with the most вҖңvotesвҖқ) matches the target
function with high probability. We use a second layer to calculate the вҖңmajority voteвҖқ of the heads
in the attention layer.
Standard attention mechanisms make it difficult to count the number of votes each target point
receivedвҖ”or even to remember what the target points x1 and x2 wereвҖ”since the next layer gets
only a linear combination of them with unknown coefficients. Therefore, we slightly modify the
attention layer to facilitate the majority voting strategy. We concatenate labels to the vectors that
allow us to count how many times x1 and x2 appear in the sum. We then use a second layer
of attention to look up the full vector corresponding to the majority label. This labeling can be
implemented by concatenating positional encodings to the     input
                                                                 points.
                                                                        That
                                                                             is, instead of inputting
                  dвҲ’1                                       x1          xN
x1 , . . . xN вҲҲ S     to the transformer, we now input          ,...,        for bi вҲҲ Re . A linear
                                                            b1          bN
transformation can be used to map the output of this (d + e)-dimensional transformer back to Rd .
Note that our target function is permutation-invariant, so the order of the points is irrelevant to the
task at hand. Thus, these concatenated вҖңpositional encodingsвҖқ function more like a modification to
the architecture. They provide extra input dimensions that serve as scratch space in which the model
can perform discrete operations like counting and indexing without corrupting the input data. Also
note that, because they change the dimension of the inputs and of the transformer, these concatenated
positional encodings are different from the positional encodings used in practice such as RoPE (Su
et al., 2024) and ALiBi (Press et al., 2022), which are included under our framework of generalized
attention.
The following theorem describes our majority voting construction using a two-layer transformer
with rank-1 heads, concatenated positional encodings, and self-attention. Because we use self-
attention, the source and target points are now the same. For the precise definition of this model and
the proof of this theorem, see Appendix E.1 and Appendix E.4.
Theorem 5. There exist universal constants c1 , c2 such that for all d > c1 , and Пө вҲҲ 0, 12 , and

           3
H вүҘ c2 В· dПө2 , there exists a 2-layer, rank-1 transformer T with H heads and 2-dimensional positional
encodings (as defined in Definition 33) for which
                                                                                  2
                               E             вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ T ([x1   x2   y])вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пө .         (11)
                   x1 ,x2   ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

One might wonder whether the concatenated positional encodings are necessary to make this con-
struction work, especially since they break permutation invariance in order to represent a permu-
tation invariant target. In Appendix E, we present an alternative construction (Theorem 32) that is


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Standard transformers trained on the farthest neighbor function. The dimension is d = 64
and the number of input points is N = 16. Line shows best of five runs (see Appendix B.2 for the
spread). Across different numbers of layers, high-rank models significantly outperform low-rank
models that have the same number of parameters.


permutation invariant. However, it modifies the architecture by concatenating the outputs of the at-
tention heads together instead of summing them, and it passes the result (which has dimension dH)
to an MLP layer instead of a second attention layer.
Although these constructions assume N = 2 source points, it seems feasible to generalize them to
larger N . However, the major drawback of such a generalization is that the size of the transformer
will depend on N . Even the simple step of calculating the majority between N possible terms
does not seem to be possible without at least a linear dependence on N . On the other hand, Fact 1
shows that the target function can be approximated for any N using a single full rank attention. We
conjecture that such a dependence on N is necessary when using low-rank attention:
Conjecture 6. There is no multi-layer transformer (with fixed size and weight matrices) of rank
r < d that approximates the target of Equation (3) for all N .

That is, while it may be possible to construct a transformer that approximates the target for a given
fixed N (as we do above), we conjecture that there is no such construction that is independent of N .
Proving or refuting the above conjecture would have very different implications. A counterexample
would mean that the the weakness of low-rank can be compensated by depth, and thus the rank
does not play a decisive role in the expressive power of multi-layer transformers. A proof would
show that, even in the multi-layer case, low-rank attention is fundamentally weaker than high-rank
attention.

7       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we complement our theoretical results with experiments on a more realistic archi-
tectures.1 We train fully-featured transformer encodersвҖ”which include multiple layers of self-
attention, MLPs, skip connections, and normalizationвҖ”on our nearest neighbor target function.
Relaxing the assumptions of our theory, we draw N > 2 input points uniformly and i.i.d. from SdвҲ’1
without constraining them to be orthogonal, and we make no distinction between source and target
points. To test our predictions, we modify the attention layers by allowing the number of heads to
be different from the standard setting H = d/r.
Our first experiment studies the influence of rank on the performance of the transformer for various
numbers of heads (H) and layers (L). We fix the dimension d = 64 and the number of points
N = 16. We use three different scaling rules for the number of heads: H = dc /r for c вҲҲ {1, 1.5, 2};
in other words, we set number of parameters per attention layer to be of order rdH = dc+1 . In this
    1
        Our code is available at https://github.com/NoahAmsel/attention-formers.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


experiment, we use no positional encodings. Figure 2 plots the results, showing the best of five
runs for each setting. Each line corresponds to one choice of c (that is, one choice of scaling rule
for the number of heads) so the number of parameters per layer is constant along each line. When
L = 1, the results suggest that using full-rank (r = d = 64) is necessary and sufficient to learn
the target function accurately; even d2 /2 heads of rank d/2 fails. For L > 1, the trade-off between
rank and accuracy is more favorable, but full-rank attention still significantly outperforms low-rank
attention, even using fewer parameters. The best low-rank model we trained (L = 5, c = 2, r = 32)
performs no better than the worst full-rank model (L = 1, c = 1, r = 64) despite having 80x fewer
parameters in its attention layers. (Here we are excluding the models with L = 5, c = 1, which
seem to suffer from optimization difficulties on this problem.) In short, a standard transformer with
H = 1 (full-rank) performs much better on this task than one with even slightly larger H (lower
rank).
In Appendix B.2, we present additional experiments exploring the solution learned by full rank
heads (cf. Fact 1), the use of positional encodings (cf. Theorem 5), and the role of the number of
points N . In each case, the empirical results support the assumptions and conclusions of our theory.
We also give full details of our models and training procedure.



8   C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS

In this paper, we have investigated the role of rank in attention mechanisms. We question the
nearly universal practice of using low-rank attention and setting the number of heads according
to H = d/r. We show that for a simple and natural target function inspired by semantic search,
low-rank attention is fundamentally weaker than full-rank attention, even when H вү« d/r. We
demonstrate this strict separation between the low-rank and high-rank regimes both theoretically,
by proving hardness of approximation in the shallow setting, and empirically, through experiments
with standard multilayer transformers. Our results suggest that using a larger rank can improve the
expressivity and parameter-efficiency of attention.
That said, our theoretical analysis is inherently limited to the study of shallow transformers, and
the results of Section 6 illustrate how adding depth may overcome the limitations of low-rank self-
attention in some cases. However, we hope that our findings will motivate theoreticians and prac-
titioners to more carefully consider the settings and scalings of transformer hyperparameters. In
particular, they show that if theoreticians assume attention is full-rank, their analyses may fail to
accurately describe the transformers used in practice. Moreover, increasing the rank or number
of heads beyond their standard settings may have practical benefits that allow SOTA models to be
smaller overall. Such benefits may have been obscured by overreliance on heuristics like H = d/r,
which prevent us from isolating the effects of any one hyperparameter. Clearly, much remains to be
understood about the successes and failure modes of attention-based architectures.
Our findings suggest several promising directions for future work. The basic transformer architec-
ture of Vaswani et al. (2017) allows the user to set a variety of hyperparameters. However, trans-
formers have been scaled almost exclusively by increasing the embedding dimension and number of
layers, without significantly changing the other hyperparameters (see Table 1). While considerable
prior work has studied scaling laws for the dimension and number of layers, we believe that fu-
ture research should also consider the other hyperparameters and seek to understand the trade-offs,
dependencies, and scaling laws that govern them. Here, we focus on the query/key rank and its
relationship to the number of heads, but the depth and width of the MLPs and the value/output rank
are also of interest.
Additionally, the rotational invariance of the input data distribution is instrumental in establishing
our lower bounds. Given the inherently discrete nature of text-based transformers, a natural question
is to understand how to generalize our techniques beyond the rotationally-invariant setting. Another
direction for future work is to understand the relationship between the rank and the context length.
Focusing on the N = 2 case suffices for us to prove rank separation, but we believe a similar
result should hold at least for all N вүӨ d; Figure 7 provides preliminary experimental evidence.
Understanding the N > 2 case may also help address a final open question: What is the relationship
between rank and depth? In particular, does Conjecture 6 hold?


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements: This work was partially supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and
awards NSF RI-1816753, NSF CAREER CIF 1845360, NSF CHS-1901091 and NSF DMS-MoDL
2134216. We thank Ohad Shamir for useful discussions while this work was being completed.

Reproducibility Statement: Assumptions of all our theoretical results are described in the main
text, and complete proofs are given in Appendices C to E. Details of all experiments are given in
Appendix B, and our source code is included in the supplementary material and available at https:
//github.com/NoahAmsel/attention-formers. All data used in our experiments in
synthetic.


R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS вҖҷ23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023.
 Curran Associates Inc.

Ekin AkyuМҲrek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=0g0X4H8yN4I.

Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629вҖ“681, 2017a.

Francis Bach. On the equivalence between kernel quadrature rules and random feature expansions.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(21):1вҖ“38, 2017b.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. CoRR abs/1409.0473, 2014. doi: abs/1409.0473.

Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisti-
  cians: Provable in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. In A. Oh, T. Nau-
  mann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 57125вҖ“57211. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/b2e63e36c57e153b9015fece2352a9f9-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Matan Ben Noach and Yoav Goldberg. Compressing pre-trained language models by matrix decom-
 position. In Kam-Fai Wong, Kevin Knight, and Hua Wu (eds.), Proceedings of the 1st Conference
 of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 10th Inter-
 national Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pp. 884вҖ“889, Suzhou, China, De-
 cember 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/2020.aacl-main.88.

Satwik Bhattamishra, Michael Hahn, Phil Blunsom, and Varun Kanade. Separations in the rep-
  resentational capabilities of transformers and recurrent architectures, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.09347.

Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Chulhee Yun, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Low-
  rank bottleneck in multi-head attention models. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 864вҖ“873. PMLR, 2020.

Alberto Bietti, Vivien Cabannes, Diane Bouchacourt, Herve Jegou, and Leon Bot-
  tou.    Birth of a transformer: A memory viewpoint.     In A. Oh, T. Naumann,
  A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 1560вҖ“1588. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/0561738a239a995c8cd2ef0e50cfa4fd-Paper-Conference.pdf.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.

Vivien Cabannes, Elvis Dohmatob, and Alberto Bietti. Scaling laws for associative memories.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Tzh6xAJSll.

Vaggos Chatziafratis, Sai Ganesh Nagarajan, Ioannis Panageas, and Xiao Wang. Depth-width trade-
  offs for relu networks via sharkovskyвҖҷs theorem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04378, 2019.

Siyu Chen, Heejune Sheen, Tianhao Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Training dynamics of multi-head
  softmax attention for in-context learning: Emergence, convergence, and optimality. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.19442, 2024.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sashank Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay,
  Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope,
  James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm
  Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra,
  Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Bar-
  ret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: scaling language modeling with pathways.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 24(1), mar 2024. ISSN 1532-4435.

George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of control,
  signals and systems, 2(4):303вҖ“314, 1989.

Amit Daniely. Depth separation for neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 690вҖ“
 696. PMLR, 2017.

Puneesh Deora, Rouzbeh Ghaderi, Hossein Taheri, and Christos Thrampoulidis. On the optimization
  and generalization of multi-head attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12680, 2023.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4171вҖ“4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  N19-1423.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.

Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, and Cyril Zhang. Inductive biases and variable
  creation in self-attention mechanisms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5793вҖ“5831. PMLR, 2022.

Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Conference
  on learning theory, pp. 907вҖ“940. PMLR, 2016.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Christopher Frye and Costas J Efthimiou. Spherical harmonics in p dimensions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1205.3548, 2012.
Hengyu Fu, Tianyu Guo, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. What can a single attention layer learn? a study
  through the random features lens. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wX8GuzDSJR.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant.      What can trans-
  formers learn in-context?    a case study of simple function classes.   In S. Koyejo,
  S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30583вҖ“30598. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/c529dba08a146ea8d6cf715ae8930cbe-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Behrooz Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Linearized two-
  layers neural networks in high dimension. The Annals of Statistics, 49(2):1029 вҖ“ 1054, 2021. doi:
  10.1214/20-AOS1990. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/20-AOS1990.
Yuan Gong, Yu-An Chung, and James Glass. AST: Audio Spectrogram Transformer. In Proc.
  Interspeech 2021, pp. 571вҖ“575, 2021. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2021-698.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Ananya Harsh Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. Olmo: Accelerating the
  science of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838, 2024.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156вҖ“171, 2020.
Habib Hajimolahoseini, Mehdi Rezagholizadeh, Vahid Partovinia, Marzieh Tahaei, Omar Mohamed
  Awad, and Yang Liu. Compressing pre-trained language models using progressive low rank de-
  composition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention trans-
  formers: Perspectives from circuit complexity. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 10:800вҖ“810, 2022.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Thomas
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Au-
  relia Guy, Simon Osindero, KareМҒn Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack Rae, and Lau-
  rent Sifre. An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30016вҖ“30030. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/c1e2faff6f588870935f114ebe04a3e5-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Daniel Hsu, Clayton H Sanford, Rocco Servedio, and Emmanouil Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis.
  On the approximation power of two-layer networks of random relus. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, pp. 2423вҖ“2461. PMLR, 2021.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Samy Jelassi, David Brandfonbrener, Sham M Kakade, and Eran Malach. Repeat after me: Trans-
  formers are better than state space models at copying. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01032, 2024.
Tokio Kajitsuka and Issei Sato. Are transformers with one layer self-attention using low-rank weight
  matrices universal approximators?, 2023.
Pritish Kamath, Omar Montasser, and Nathan Srebro. Approximate is good enough: Probabilistic
  variants of dimensional and margin complexity. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2236вҖ“
  2262. PMLR, 2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Junghwan Kim, Michelle Kim, and Barzan Mozafari. Provable memorization capacity of transform-
  ers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Beatrice Laurent and Pascal Massart. Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional by model selec-
  tion. Annals of statistics, pp. 1302вҖ“1338, 2000.
Benjamin Lefaudeux, Francisco Massa, Diana Liskovich, Wenhan Xiong, Vittorio Caggiano, Sean
  Naren, Min Xu, Jieru Hu, Marta Tintore, Susan Zhang, Patrick Labatut, Daniel Haziza, Luca
  Wehrstedt, Jeremy Reizenstein, and Grigory Sizov. xformers: A modular and hackable trans-
  former modelling library. https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers,
  2022.
Valerii Likhosherstov, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Adrian Weller. On the expressive flexibility
  of self-attention matrices. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 37(7):
  8773вҖ“8781, Jun. 2023. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i7.26055. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/
  index.php/AAAI/article/view/26055.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10749, 2022.
Xiuqing Lv, Peng Zhang, Sunzhu Li, Guobing Gan, and Yueheng Sun. LightFormer: Light-weight
  transformer using SVD-based weight transfer and parameter sharing. In Anna Rogers, Jordan
  Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics: ACL 2023, pp. 10323вҖ“10335, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.656. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.findings-acl.656.
Sadegh Mahdavi, Renjie Liao, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Memorization capacity of multi-head
  attention in transformers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=MrR3rMxqqv.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expresssive power of transformers with chain of
 thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07923, 2023.
William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-depth
 threshold circuits. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:843вҖ“856,
 2022.
Theodor Misiakiewicz and Andrea Montanari. Six lectures on linearized neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.13431, 2023.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables
  input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748вҖ“8763. PMLR,
  18вҖ“24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.
  html.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.

Itay Safran and Ohad Shamir. Depth-width tradeoffs in approximating natural functions with neural
   networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2979вҖ“2987. PMLR, 2017.

Itay Safran, Ronen Eldan, and Ohad Shamir. Depth separations in neural networks: what is actually
   being separated? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2664вҖ“2666. PMLR, 2019.

Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Transformers, parallel computation, and loga-
  rithmic depth, 2024a.

Clayton Sanford, Daniel J Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Representational strengths and limitations of
  transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.

Ohad Shamir. Distribution-specific hardness of learning neural networks. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 19(1):1135вҖ“1163, 2018.

Pratyusha Sharma, Jordan T. Ash, and Dipendra Misra. The truth is in there: Improving reasoning
  in language models with layer-selective rank reduction. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  ozX92bu8VA.

Lena Strobl, William Merrill, Gail Weiss, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. What Formal Lan-
  guages Can Transformers Express? A Survey. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 12:543вҖ“561, 05 2024. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00663. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00663.

Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.

Matus Telgarsky. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In Vitaly Feldman, Alexander Rakhlin,
 and Ohad Shamir (eds.), 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, volume 49 of Proceed-
 ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1517вҖ“1539, Columbia University, New York, New
 York, USA, 23вҖ“26 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v49/
 telgarsky16.html.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Vin-
  cent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Pranesh
  Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi,
  Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
  Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee,
  Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton,
  Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak,
  Ed Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications, 2022.

Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Beidi Chen, and Simon S Du. Scan and snap: Understanding train-
  ing dynamics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:71911вҖ“71947, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, TimotheМҒe
  Lacroix, Baptiste RozieМҖre, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  ЕҒ ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Luca Venturi, Samy Jelassi, Tristan Ozuch, and Joan Bruna. Depth separation beyond radial func-
  tions. Journal of machine learning research, 23(122):1вҖ“56, 2022.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, JoaМғo Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICMLвҖҷ23.
  JMLR.org, 2023.
Colin Wei, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Statistically meaningful approximation: a case study on
  approximating turing machines with transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:12071вҖ“12083, 2022.
Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho, Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich
  Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual at-
  tention. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2048вҖ“2057,
  Lille, France, 07вҖ“09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/
  xuc15.html.
Greg Yang, Edward J. Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ry-
  der, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2203.03466.
Gilad Yehudai and Ohad Shamir. On the power and limitations of random features for understanding
  neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank J Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar.
  Are transformers universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.10077, 2019.
Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich.      Root mean square layer normalization.      In H. Wal-
  lach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'AlcheМҒ-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
  file/1e8a19426224ca89e83cef47f1e7f53b-Paper.pdf.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L. Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-
  context. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(49):1вҖ“55, 2024. URL http://jmlr.
  org/papers/v25/23-1042.html.


A    H YPERPARAMETERS OF T RANSFORMER
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) leaves the user free to set the following hyper-
parameters:

      вҖў The embedding dimension (d)
      вҖў The number of layers (L)
      вҖў The width of the MLPs (w)
      вҖў The depth of the MLPs (D)

                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        вҖў The rank of the WQ and WK matrices for each head (r)
        вҖў The rank of the WV and WO matrices for each head (r2 )
        вҖў The number of attention heads in each layer (H)

In this paper, we consider the dimension d to be given by the domain of the target function, rather
than being a hyperparameter as in language modeling. As Table 1 shows, only d and L have been
significantly changed relative to the original model. For all models of which we are aware, w lies
within a factor of two from Vaswani et al. (2017), r lies within a factor of four, and D and r2 are not
changed at all. H has been scaled, but always according to the standard scaling (up to a factor of 2).

Table 1: Hyperparameter settings of popular transformer models (largest versions reported). Except
for d and L, they are strikingly consistent. See text of Appendix A for notation.

 Year     Model                                                        d        L      w     D    r     r2      H
 2017     Attention is all you need (Vaswani et al., 2017)            512         6    4d    2    64     r      d/r
 2018     GPT, GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2018; 2019)                     768        12    4d    2    64     r      d/r
 2019     Bert-Large (Devlin et al., 2019)                           1,024       24    4d    2    64     r      d/r
 2020     GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)                                12,288       96    4d    2   128     r      d/r
 2021     ViT-Huge (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)                        1,280       32    4d    2    80     r      d/r
          CLIP (text encoder) (Radford et al., 2021)                  768       12     4d    2    64     r      d/r
          CLIP (image encoder) (Radford et al., 2021)                1,024      24     4d    2    64     r      d/r
          Jurassic-1                                                13,824      76     4d    2   144     r      d/r
          Gopher 280B (Rae et al., 2021)                            16,384      80     4d    2   128     r      d/r
          AST (audio) (Gong et al., 2021)                            1,024      24     4d    2    64     r      d/r
          LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022)                             8,192      64     8d    2   128     r      2d/r
 2022     Chinchilla 70B (Hoffmann et al., 2022)                     8,192       80    4d    2   128     r      d/r
 2023     PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2024)                             18,432      118    4d    2   256     r     2d/3r
          LLaMA, Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023a;b)                  8,192       80    8d/3   2   128     r      d/r
 2024     OLMo (Groeneveld et al., 2024)                             8,192      80    8d/3   2   128     r      d/r



B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND D ETAILS

B.1     I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING OF L INEAR F UNCTIONS

We reproduce a striking experiment from Garg et al. (2022) that demonstrates the ability of trans-
formers to perform in-context learning. In this task, the prompt is a sequence of input-output pairs
from a randomly selected function it has not seen before, plus one additional input point. The model
is trained to predict the output corresponding to this final point. That is, given the sequence
                                   x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xN , f (xN ), xquery                          (12)

the desired output is f (xquery ). In the linear version of this task, f (x) = wвҠӨ x. The input points
x1 , . . . , xN , the query point xquery , and the target weight w are all drawn from the isotropic Gaussian
distribution in 20 dimensions. The model consists of a linear embedding layer mapping from R20 to
Rd , a 12-layer transformer, and a linear unembedding layer from Rd to R.
We use this experiment as a benchmark to demonstrate the importance of rank in attention-based
models, specifically the consequences of using a rank that is too small for the task. We run the exact
code of Garg et al. (2022), changing nothing in the data, model, or training procedure except for the
embedding dimension d and the number of heads H. As is standard, the rank is given by r = d/H.
The original paper uses a model with embedding dimension d = 256, which is quite large relative
to the intrinsic dimension of the inputs, and H = 8, r = 32. We show that we can still achieve good
performance with much smaller models, such as d = 48, but only if the rank is sufficiently large.
Figure 3 plots the performance of these models. Figure 1 shows the same data, but focusing only on
the d = 48, N = 40 case. Across different embedding dimensions, the high-rank models (H = 1 or
2) significantly outperform the low-rank ones (H = 8 or 16).


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Performance of 12-layer transformers on in-context learning of linear functions in 20
dimensions. Top panel shows the error on a prompt of N = 40 input-output pairs for various
embedding dimensions d. Bottom panel shows d = 48 given various context-lengths N . Across
different choices of embedding dimension and context length, performance is significantly improved
by reducing the number of attention heads H. Due to the standard scaling rule r = d/H, this is
equivalent to increasing the attention rank.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Copy of Figure 2 with the addition of a shaded region showing the range over five runs.
With a few exceptions, these ranges are quite narrow.


B.2    N EAREST N EIGHBOR TASK

In this section, we provide details about the models and training procedure used for the experiments
in Section 7 and present additional experiments on our nearest neighbor target function.

Model and training details We use the PyTorch implementation of transformer encoders (Paszke
et al., 2019) with two modifications. First, we generalize the standard scaling H = d/r, allowing
H to be any multiple of d/r. (In particular, we try H = d1.5 /r and H = d2 /r.) Second, we
replace the layer normalization with RMSNorm (Zhang & Sennrich, 2019), a standard choice in
modern transformers (Touvron et al., 2023a; Chowdhery et al., 2024) that is also better suited to
our target function. We train with biases, but preliminary experiments showed that these make little
difference.2 We run each experiment on a single Nvidia GPU (usually a V100) for no more than a
few hours.
Since we are using self-attention, there is no distinction between the source and target points. The N
input points are drawn uniformly and i.i.d. from SdвҲ’1 , and they are not constrained to be orthogonal.
We change our target function accordingly. For each input point, the target now outputs whichever
of the other points is farthest from it. We output the farthest instead of the nearest point because
otherwise, each point would map to itself. The loss function is the average mean squared error
over the N points. We do not use any attention mask. In particular, we allow points to attend to
themselves. Our dataset is synthetic, so we train and test on a stream of freshly generated samples
that never repeat. We train on 105 batches of size 256 each. For all experiments, we use AdamW
with the same learning rate of 0.01 and a learning rate schedule of cosine annealing with a linear
warm-up.

Statistical consistency of main experiment Our focus in this paper is on representational capacity
rather than learnability or generalization. However, for completeness, we reproduce Figure 2 with
the addition of a shaded region showing the range over five runs (Figure 4). In most cases the results
are strikingly consistent between runs. Optimization difficulties were observed for the regimes L =
3, params = d3 and L = 5, params = d2 . In the first case, we mostly overcame these by performing
three additional runs each (so eight instead of five) for the settings r = 16 and r = 32.

Full-rank solution In the full-rank case the transformer learns the target, but what representation
has it learned? Figure 5 suggests that, in some cases, it is very nearly the construction of Fact 1.
   2
     Note that biases in the key, query, and value transformations have a different role from additive positional
encodings. These biases differ between heads but are constant across tokens; in contrast, the positional encod-
ings differ between tokens but not heads. The biases implemented by PyTorch are also slightly different from
those studied in Section 5.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Properties of learned KQвҠӨ matrices for full-rank models with one layer. Boxplots show
distribution over heads from five runs, each on a model which has between 1 and 64 full-rank
                                                                                            heads.
Left panel plots Frobenius angle with the identity: arccos KQвҠӨ , I F /(вҲҘKQвҠӨ вҲҘF вҲҘIвҲҘF ) . Results
show that KQвҠӨ nearly equals вҲ’cI for c > 1000 in all cases.


Figure 6: Standard 3-layer transformers with positional encodings on the the farthest neighbor task
(d = 64, H = 512/r, N = 16). Line shows best of five runs; shaded region shows range over five
runs. Concatenating 6-dimensional learned absolute positional encodings to the input points im-
proves performance somewhat, but does not ameliorate the low-rank bottleneck. Additive positional
encodings do not improve performance because they do not increase the embedding dimension.


Recall that in Fact 1, we use a hardmax attention head with Kh QвҠӨ        h = I. In our experiments
however, we use the farthest neighbor target function and softmax heads, so the corresponding
construction is Kh QвҠӨ  h = вҲ’cI for c вү« 1. The first panel shows the median Frobenius angle
between the matrices Kh QвҠӨ     h and I learned by the full-rank, single layer models in the previous
experiment. This shows that Kh QвҠӨ    h very nearly equals вҲ’I up to a constant factor. Moreover, as the
second panel shows, the norm of this matrix is large, which causes the softmax to act like a hardmax.
Results are similar for three layer networks with a single full-rank head, but when L > 1 and H > 1,
it seems the network learns some other, less interpretable strategy to represent the target.

Positional encodings Since our target function is permutation-invariant, no positional information
exists in the data. However, in Section 6, we showed that concatenated positional encodings can
help low-rank attention succeed when L > 1 by giving the model extra dimensions of scratch space.
The positional encoding schemes used in practice, like additive encodings (Vaswani et al., 2017),
RoPE (Su et al., 2024) and ALiBi (Press et al., 2022), cannot be used in this way, being versions
of the generalized attention heads studied in this paper. In Figure 6, we experiment with positional


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Effect of the number of points (N ) on the difficulty of learning the farthest neighbor
function. Full-rank attention learns an accurate representation across many N s, but the performance
of low-rank attention degrades as N grows. Dimension is 64. All models have two layers with
H = d2 /r heads each. Line shows best of five runs; shaded region shows range over five runs.


encodings. As expected, additive encodings fail to improve performance at all. Concatenated 6-
dimensional positional encodings help a little bit, since the transformer is now larger (d = 70 instead
of 64) and has more parameters. However, unlike in Theorem 5, these encodings do not mitigate
the low-rank bottleneck in practice, even for 3-layer transformer. Thus, the low-rank construction of
Theorem 5 is primarily of theoretical interest.

Role of N In Figure 7, we explore how the number of input points N affects the difficulty of
learning the target function. We fix d = 64, H = d2 /r, and the number of layer L = 2. The results
show that, as predicted by Fact 1, the full-rank heads learn the target accurately across a range of N .
However, the low-rank heads suffer declining accuracy as N grows. This accords with Conjecture 6,
which predicts that low-rank transformers of a fixed size fail to accurately represent the target for
sufficiently large N .


C    P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 4

In this section, we prove the upper bound Fact 1, the lower bound Theorem 2 and some important
properties relating to the approximation of the target by random heads.
We begin with the proof of Fact 1 in Appendix C.1. In Appendix C.2, we review the basics of
spherical harmonics and describe the corresponding family of ultraspherical orthogonal polynomi-
als on the interval. In Appendix C.3, we construct a basis for functions of pairs of points on the
sphere that we will use to analyze the target and the attention mechanism. In Appendix C.4, we
show how to expand the target function in this basis, proving the critical properties of slow spectral
decay and rotational invariance between basis elements of the same degree. In Appendix C.5, we
expand a single attention head in this basis, showing that the number of basis elements with which
it is correlated is limited by the rank of the attention head. In Appendix C.6, we use these results to
obtain a lower bound on the error of approximation that depends only on certain universal constants
related to the spherical harmonics, particularly the number of spherical harmonics of a given degree
and the coefficients of the ultraspherical expansion of the sign function. In Appendix C.7, we ana-
lyze this expression to derive a bound on the necessary number of heads that depends only on the


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dimension d, the rank r, and the error level Пө. Finally, in Appendix C.8, we analyze a construction
that approximates the target function using random rank-1 heads.

C.1    P ROOF OF FACT 1

Let Пө > 0. We set V = I, KQвҠӨ = ОұI for Оұ > 0 to be chosen later. Since xi , y вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ),
for every i вҲҲ {1, . . . , N }, there exists Оҙ > 0 (which depends on Пө) such that for the set:
               AОҙ := {(x1 , . . . , xN , y) вҲҲ (SdвҲ’1 )N +1 : вҲҖi Мё= j, |(xi вҲ’ xj )вҠӨ y| > Оҙ} ,      (13)
                                        / AОҙ ) вүӨ 2Пө . Note that:
we have that Pr((x1 , , . . . , xN , y) вҲҲ
                                                                                       2
                    X sm(ОұX вҠӨ y) вҲ’вҶ’ arg max(xвҠӨ
                                             i y) = arg max вҲҘxi вҲ’ yвҲҘ ,                           (14)
                                        ОұвҶ’вҲһ          xi                   xi

where the convergence is uniform on AОҙ , and the equality follows since all the vectors are from the
unit sphere. In particular, there exists Оұ > 0 such that:
                                                                                   2
                                                                               2           Пө
                          sup           X sm(ОұX вҠӨ y) вҲ’ arg max вҲҘxi вҲ’ yвҲҘ                вүӨ     .   (15)
                   (x1 ,...,xN ,y)вҲҲAОҙ                              xi                      2
Combining both bounds and taking expectation over the vectors finishes the proof.

C.2    S PHERICAL H ARMONICS

We begin by reviewing some basic results from the theory of spherical harmonics. Let П„ (В·) denote
the uniform distribution over SdвҲ’1 and define the inner product вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©П„ over L2 (SdвҲ’1 ) as follows
                                            Z
                                 вҹЁf, gвҹ©П„ :=       f (x)g(x)dП„ (x)                                (16)
                                                    SdвҲ’1
                      d
A polynomial H : R вҶ’ R is called harmonic and degree-в„“ homogeneous if
                                    вҲҮ2 H = 0,             H(ax) = aв„“ H(x)                        (17)
A spherical harmonic of degree в„“ is the restriction of a harmonic homogeneous polynomial to the
sphere SdвҲ’1 . That is, a function Y : SdвҲ’1 вҶ’ R is a spherical harmonic of degree в„“ if and only if the
Rd вҶ’ R function defined by
                                                 в„“       x
                                         x 7вҶ’ вҲҘxвҲҘ Y                                             (18)
                                                        вҲҘxвҲҘ
is a harmonic homogeneous polynomial of degree в„“. The set of spherical harmonics of degree в„“
on SdвҲ’1 form a function space Fв„“ вҠӮ L2 (SdвҲ’1 ). These subspaces have the following dimensions
(Theorem 4.4 of Frye & Efthimiou (2012)):

                                                 2в„“ + d вҲ’ 2 в„“ + d вҲ’ 3
                           N (d, в„“) := dim Fв„“ =                          .                      (19)
                                                      в„“         в„“вҲ’1
The reason spherical harmonics are so useful is that the Fв„“ are linearly independent, and their direct
                                     N (d,в„“)                                           j N (d,в„“)
sum is L2 (SdвҲ’1 ). That is, if {Yв„“j }j=1 is an orthonormal basis of Fв„“ , then вҲӘвҲһв„“=0 {Yв„“ }j=1     is an
                       2 dвҲ’1
orthonormal basis of L (S ) with respect to вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©П„ .
For a unit vector e, let ud denote the distribution of xвҠӨ e when x вҲј П„ . Then for t вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 1],
                                                    AdвҲ’2            dвҲ’3
                                        ud (t) :=        В· (1 вҲ’ t2 ) 2                           (20)
                                                    AdвҲ’1
where AdвҲ’1 is the surface area of SdвҲ’1 (see Lemma 4.17 of Frye & Efthimiou (2012)). Define the
following inner product over functions mapping [вҲ’1, 1] вҶ’ R:
                                             Z 1
                                 вҹЁf, gвҹ©ud :=     f (t)g(t)ud (t)dt                        (21)
                                                      вҲ’1

The ultraspherical polynomials Pв„“ : [вҲ’1, 1] вҶ’ R for в„“ вҲҲ NвүҘ0 are defined by the following proper-
ties:


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. Pв„“ has degree в„“
      2. в„“ Мё= в„“вҖІ вҮҗвҮ’ вҹЁPв„“ , Pв„“вҖІ вҹ©ud = 0
      3. Pв„“ (1) = 1

These polynomials form an orthogonal basis for L2 ([вҲ’1, 1], ud ), which includes all bounded func-
tions on [вҲ’1, 1]. Moreover, they are intimately connected to the spherical harmonics. We exploit
three such connections. First (Equation 4.30 of Frye & Efthimiou (2012))
                                                                   1
                                            вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘ2ud =                                                 (22)
                                                                N (d, в„“)
Second, the addition formula states that each ultraspherical polynomial can be expressed in terms
of the spherical harmonics of the same degree and vice versa (Theorem 4.113 of Frye & Efthimiou
(2012))
                                                   N (d,в„“)
                                             1      X j
                                   вҠӨ
                             Pв„“ (x y) =                    Y (x)Yв„“j (y)                       (23)
                                          N (d, в„“) j=1 в„“
Finally, the Hecke-Funk formula (Theorem 4.24 of Frye & Efthimiou (2012)) gives the relationship
between the ultraspherical expansion of t 7вҶ’ f (t) and the spherical harmonic expansion of y 7вҶ’
f (xвҠӨ y). For any degree-в„“ spherical harmonic Yв„“ ,
                D                     Z
                            E
                  f вҹЁx, В·вҹ© , Yв„“ :=         f (xвҠӨ y)Yв„“ (y)dП„ (y) = Yв„“ (x) вҹЁf, Pв„“ вҹ©ud         (24)
                                   П„      SdвҲ’1


We will make use of the ultraspherical expansion of two particular functions:
Definition 7. Let {Оұв„“ } be the ultraspherical series for arcsin and let {О·в„“ } be the ultraspherical
series for sign. That is,
                                            вҲһ
                                            X           Pв„“ (t)
                              arcsin(t) =         Оұв„“                                                   (25)
                                                       вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud
                                            в„“=0
                                             вҲһ
                                            X           Pв„“ (t)
                                sign(t) =         О·в„“                       вҲҖt вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 1]                (26)
                                                       вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud
                                            в„“=0


C.3    O RTHONORMAL BASIS FOR TARGET AND ATTENTION H EADS

The goal of this section is to define the orthonormal basis that we will use to analyze the (surrogate)
target and attention functions. We define the input space for these functions as follows: X =
SdвҲ’1 Г— SdвҲ’1 . We denote elements of this set by (x, y) or z for short. For any two functions, define
their tensorization by
                                        (f вҠ— g)(z) = f (x)f (y)                                    (27)
We let П„М„ = П„ вҠ— П„ be the uniform measure on X . We also define a feature space в„Ұ = SdвҲ’1 Г— SdвҲ’1
and denote elements of this space by (q, k) or Пү. Of course, в„Ұ = X , but since they are used in
different contexts, we use separate notation for readability.
We define the feature mapping that we will use to analyze the surrogate target and attention func-
tions:
Definition 8. Define the вҖңrank-1 headвҖқ function ПҒ : X Г— в„Ұ вҶ’ {Вұ1} by

                                   ПҒ(z, Пү) := sign xвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y

                                                                                                       (28)

and the feature map linear operator T : L1 (в„Ұ) вҶ’ L2 (X ) by
                                            Z
                                (T u)(z) :=    ПҒ(z, Пү)u(Пү)dП„М„ (Пү)                                      (29)
                                                       в„Ұ
   3
     Note that Frye & Efthimiou (2012) has an extra factor of AdвҲ’1 in the theorem statement. This is because
they use a different normalization for the spherical harmonics.


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The intuition is as follows. For a fixed value of Пү = (k, q), the function ПҒ(В·, Пү) acts like a hardmax
attention head with rank 1. More precisely, if x = x1 вҲ’ x2 and V = I, then ПҒ(z, Пү) is the output
of the head applied to the source y and targets x1 and x2 , projected onto x. Furthermore, T u is a
weighted linear combination of all possible rank-1 hardmax heads.
We will construct a basis using functions of the form T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ ) for spherical harmonics Y and
Y вҖІ . The rationale for choosing this basis is as follows. T defines a positive semidefinite operator
T вҲ— T : L1 (в„Ұ) вҶ’ L2 (в„Ұ), which is described by the following formula:
                                       Z
                        (T вҲ— T u)(Пү) =                       вҖІ       вҖІ       вҖІ
                                            E [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z, Пү )] В· u(Пү )dП„М„ (Пү )                  (30)
                                                в„Ұ zвҲјП„М„

Functions of the form Y вҠ— Y вҖІ will turn out to be eigenfunctions of this operator. To see why, we
must first analyze the kernel EzвҲјП„М„ [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z, Пү вҖІ )], which we do in the following lemma.
Lemma 9.
                                                вҖІ        4
                          E [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z, Пү )] =             arcsin(q вҠӨ q вҖІ ) arcsin(kвҠӨ kвҖІ )          (31)
                         zвҲјП„М„                            ПҖ2

Proof. To begin, we compute a closely related property вҖ“ the probability that the signs are equal:
                  Pr [ПҒ(z, Пү) = ПҒ(z, Пү вҖІ )] = Pr [вҹЁx, kвҹ© вҹЁq, yвҹ© вҹЁx, kвҖІ вҹ© вҹЁq вҖІ , yвҹ© > 0]              (32)
                  zвҲјП„М„                               zвҲјП„М„
                                                                                                     (33)
Let Оё be the angle between q and q вҖІ and let П• be the angle between k and kвҖІ . We have
                                                                  Оё
                                    Pr[вҹЁy, qвҹ© вҹЁy, q вҖІ вҹ© вүҘ 0] = 1 вҲ’                                   (34)
                                     y                           ПҖ
                                                    вҖІ             П•
                                    Pr[вҹЁx, kвҹ© вҹЁx, k вҹ© вүҘ 0] = 1 вҲ’                                     (35)
                                    x
                                                                 ПҖ
                             вҖІ                      вҖІ               Оё      П•
            Pr [вҹЁy, qвҹ© вҹЁy, q вҹ© вүҘ 0 вҲ§ вҹЁx, kвҹ© вҹЁx, k вҹ© вүҘ 0] = 1 вҲ’          1вҲ’                           (36)
            x,y                                                     ПҖ      ПҖ
                                                              ОёП•
            Pr [вҹЁy, qвҹ© вҹЁy, q вҖІ вҹ© вүӨ 0 вҲ§ вҹЁx, kвҹ© вҹЁx, kвҖІ вҹ© вүӨ 0] =                                        (37)
            x,y                                               ПҖПҖ

                                                                    Оё      П•     ОёП•
                   Pr [вҹЁx, kвҹ© вҹЁx, kвҖІ вҹ© вҹЁy, qвҹ© вҹЁy, q вҖІ вҹ© вүҘ 0] = 1 вҲ’      1вҲ’     +                     (38)
                  x,y                                               ПҖ      ПҖ     ПҖПҖ
A bit of algebra now shows

                                                               Оё       П•     ОёП•
                         Pr [ПҒ(z, Пү) = ПҒ(z, Пү вҖІ )] =             1вҲ’ 1вҲ’     +                         (39)
                         zвҲјП„М„                                 ПҖ        ПҖ     ПҖПҖ
                                                           1  2  ПҖ        ПҖ
                                                          = + 2     вҲ’Оё      вҲ’П•                       (40)
                                                           2 ПҖ    2       2
By definition, Оё = arccos(вҹЁq, q вҖІ вҹ©) and П• = arccos(вҹЁk, kвҖІ вҹ©). Using the identity arcsin(z) = ПҖ/2 вҲ’
arccos(z), we obtain
                                                         1   2
                   Pr [ПҒ(z, Пү) = ПҒ(z, Пү вҖІ )] =             +   arcsin(q вҠӨ q вҖІ ) arcsin(kвҠӨ kвҖІ )       (41)
                  zвҲјП„М„                                   2 ПҖ2
Finally,
                                вҖІ                                     вҖІ                          вҖІ
            E [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z, Пү )] = Pr [ПҒ(z, Пү) = ПҒ(z, Пү )] вҲ’ Pr [ПҒ(z, Пү) Мё= ПҒ(z, Пү )]                 (42)
           zвҲјП„М„                          zвҲјП„М„                               zвҲјП„М„
                                    = 2 Pr [ПҒ(z, Пү) = ПҒ(z, Пү вҖІ )] вҲ’ 1                                (43)
                                          zвҲјП„М„
                                         4
                                    =       arcsin(q вҠӨ q вҖІ ) arcsin(kвҠӨ kвҖІ )                          (44)
                                         ПҖ2


The above lemma gives us a handy expression for T вҲ— T that allows to show the following:


                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 10. Let Y, Y вҖІ be spherical harmonics of degrees в„“ and в„“вҖІ , respectively. Then Y вҠ— Y вҖІ is an
eigenfunction of the operator T вҲ— T :
                                               4        Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ
                          T вҲ— T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ ) =     2
                                                   p                    В·Y вҠ—YвҖІ                      (45)
                                               ПҖ     N (d, в„“)N (d, в„“вҖІ )

Proof. It is easily seen that                       Z
                                    (T вҲ— f )(В·) =        ПҒ(z, В·)f (z)dП„М„ (z)                        (46)
                                                    X
and thus, substituting and changing the order of integration
                                       Z
               [T вҲ— T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )](Пү) =                       вҖІ         вҖІ   вҖІ       вҖІ
                                           E [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z, Пү )] В· (Y вҠ— Y )(Пү )dП„М„ (Пү )               (47)
                                          в„Ұ zвҲјП„М„

Applying Lemma 9 and expanding dП„М„ (Пү) and Y вҠ— Y вҖІ ,
                Z
             4
           = 2     arcsin(q вҠӨ q вҖІ ) arcsin(kвҠӨ kвҖІ ) В· (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )(Пү вҖІ )dП„М„ (Пү вҖІ )                     (48)
             ПҖ в„Ұ
                Z                                     Z
             4                 вҠӨ вҖІ        вҖІ       вҖІ
           = 2        arcsin(q q )Y (q )dП„ (q ) В·           arcsin(kвҠӨ kвҖІ )Y вҖІ (kвҖІ )dП„ (kвҖІ )         (49)
             ПҖ SdвҲ’1                                    SdвҲ’1


Applying the Hecke-Funke formula (Equation (24)) to the first integral,
            Z
                   arcsin(q вҠӨ q вҖІ )Y (q вҖІ )dП„ (q вҖІ ) = Y (q) вҹЁarcsin, Pв„“ вҹ©ud                    (50)
              SdвҲ’1

                                                                          Pв„“
                                                     = Y (q) arcsin,              В· вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud     (51)
                                                                       вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud ud
                                                                Оұв„“
                                                     = Y (q) p                                  (52)
                                                               N (d, в„“)
                                                                 p
By the same logic, the second integral equals Y вҖІ (kвҖІ ) В· Оұв„“вҖІ / N (d, в„“). Combining these proves the
lemma.

The previous lemma immediately implies that the functions T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ ) form an orthogonal basis:
Lemma 11. Let B be a set of orthonormal spherical harmonics. Then the elements of {T (Y вҠ—Y вҖІ ) |
Y, Y вҖІ вҲҲ B} are also orthogonal. Furthermore, if Y and Y вҖІ have degrees в„“ and в„“вҖІ , then
                                                        4      Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ
                                вҲҘT (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )вҲҘ2П„М„ =                                                 (53)
                                                        ПҖ 2 N (d, в„“)N (d, в„“вҖІ )
                                                           p


Proof. Let Yi , Yj , YiвҖІ , Yj вҖІ вҲҲ B. Let YiвҖІ have degree в„“ and YjвҖІ have degree в„“вҖІ . Then
            вҹЁT (Yi вҠ— Yj ), T (YiвҖІ вҠ— Yj вҖІ )вҹ© = вҹЁYi вҠ— Yj , T вҲ— T (YiвҖІ вҠ— Yj вҖІ )вҹ©                       (54)
                                                                        4        Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ
                                            = вҹЁYi вҠ— Yj , YiвҖІ вҠ— Yj вҖІ вҹ© В· 2 p                         (55)
                                                                       ПҖ      N (d, в„“)N (d, в„“вҖІ )
But вҹЁYi вҠ— Yj , YiвҖІ вҠ— Yj вҖІ вҹ© is one if Yi = YiвҖІ and Yj = Yj вҖІ , and zero otherwise.

C.4   E XPANSION OF THE TARGET F UNCTION

We define a surrogate target function that will turn out to be the relevant one for our analysis.
Definition 12. The surrogate target function fЛң : X вҶ’ R is
                                           fЛң(z) := sign(xвҠӨ y)                                      (56)

After a change of variables (x, w) = (x1 вҲ’x2 , x1 +x2 ), our original target function reduces simply
to fЛң(z)x + w. We now wish to expand fЛң in the basis {T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )}. We will first need the following
lemma, which describes the correlation of a rank-1 head with the surrogate target function.


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 13. Fix Пү = (q, k) вҲҲ в„Ұ. Then
                             D            E  вҲһ
                                             X
                               fЛң, ПҒ(В·, Пү) =   cв„“ Pв„“ (q вҠӨ k)                                    (57)
                                                        П„М„
                                                              в„“=0

where
                                                             2
                                                  cв„“ =         О·в„“ Оұв„“                            (58)
                                                             ПҖ

Proof. By definition,
                        D           E
                         fЛң, ПҒ(В·, Пү) =                    sign(xвҠӨ y) sign(xвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)

                                                 E                                              (59)
                                       П„М„       x,yвҲјП„

Let П„+ denote the uniform measure on the hemisphere {x вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 | xвҠӨ k вүҘ 0}, and П„вҲ’ the uniform
measure on the opposite hemisphere. Then we can decompose the expectation as follows:
                           вҠӨ          вҠӨ    вҠӨ      1             вҠӨ          вҠӨ
                 E [sign(x y) sign(x kq y)] = xвҲјП„     E [sign(x y) sign(q y)]             (60)
               x,yвҲјП„                              2 yвҲјП„+
                                                                  1            вҠӨ         вҠӨ
                                                              вҲ’       E [sign(x y) sign(q y)]   (61)
                                                                  2 xвҲјП„
                                                                     yвҲјП„
                                                                        вҲ’



Given any fixed unit vectors x, q we have that
                                                                           arccos(xвҠӨ q)
                        Pr[sign(xвҠӨ y) = sign(q вҠӨ y)] = 1 вҲ’                                      (62)
                         y                                                      ПҖ
Therefore,
          вҠӨ         вҠӨ               вҠӨ           вҠӨ               вҠӨ            вҠӨ
  E[sign(x y) sign(q y)] = Pr[sign(x y) = sign(q y)] вҲ’ Pr[sign(x y) Мё= sign(q y)] (63)
  y                            y                                             y
                                                  вҠӨ                    вҠӨ
                             = 2 Pr[sign(x y) = sign(q y)] вҲ’ 1                                  (64)
                                   y

                                    2 arccos(xвҠӨ q)
                             =1вҲ’                                                                (65)
                                            ПҖ
Plugging this into the expression above,
                       2 arccos(xвҠӨ q)                   2 arccos(xвҠӨ q)

        1                                   1
     =       E 1вҲ’                        вҲ’      E 1вҲ’                                            (66)
        2 xвҲјП„+                ПҖ             2 xвҲјП„вҲ’             ПҖ

           2 1                    вҠӨ
                                           1                вҠӨ

     =вҲ’             E arccos(x q) вҲ’            E arccos(x q)                                    (67)
          ПҖ 2 xвҲјП„+                         2 xвҲјП„вҲ’

           2 1                  вҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                                    1               вҠӨ        вҠӨ

     =вҲ’             E sign(x k) arccos(x q) +            E sign(x k) arccos(x q)                (68)
          ПҖ 2 xвҲјП„+                                   2 xвҲјП„вҲ’

           2                вҠӨ             вҠӨ

     =вҲ’         E sign(x k) arccos(x q)                                                         (69)
          ПҖ xвҲјП„
                                                                                                (70)
Using the identity arccos(t) = ПҖ2 вҲ’ arcsin(t) and the fact that Ex [sign(xвҠӨ k)] = 0,
                                     2              вҠӨ              вҠӨ

                                 =      E sign(x k) arcsin(x q)                             (71)
                                     ПҖ xвҲјП„
                                     2D                              E
                                 =       sign(вҹЁВ·, kвҹ©), arcsin(вҹЁВ·, qвҹ©)                       (72)
                                     ПҖ                                 П„
We now expand sign(вҹЁВ·, kвҹ©) and arcsin(вҹЁВ·, qвҹ©) in a basis of spherical harmonics. By Hecke-Funk,
                   D                  E
                     sign(вҹЁВ·, kвҹ©), Yв„“j = Yв„“j (k) вҹЁsign, Pв„“ вҹ©ud = Yв„“j (k)О·в„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud          (73)
                D                     EП„
                  arcsin(вҹЁВ·, qвҹ©), Yв„“j = Yв„“j (q) вҹЁarcsin, Pв„“ вҹ©ud = Yв„“j (q)Оұв„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud         (74)
                                            П„
                                                                                                (75)


                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, writing the inner product in the basis of spherical harmnoics,
                                          вҲһ N (d,в„“)
   2D                             E    2X X   j
      sign(вҹЁВ·, kвҹ©), arcsin(вҹЁВ·, qвҹ©) =                  Yв„“ (k)О·в„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud Yв„“j (q)Оұв„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘud              (76)
   ПҖ                               П„   ПҖ
                                         в„“=0 j=1
                                            пЈ«                                      пЈ¶
                                          вҲһ                   N (d,в„“)
                                       2 XпЈӯ                    X j
                                     =         О·в„“ Оұв„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘ2ud         Yв„“ (k)Yв„“j (q)пЈё                  (77)
                                       ПҖ                       j=1
                                                          в„“=0

Applying the addition formula (Equation (22)),
                                               вҲһ
                                            2X
                                    =          О·в„“ Оұв„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘ2ud N (d, в„“)Pв„“ (kвҠӨ q)                       (78)
                                            ПҖ
                                             в„“=0
                                            вҲһ
                                            X     2
                                    =               О·в„“ Оұв„“ Pв„“ (kвҠӨ q)                                   (79)
                                                  ПҖ
                                            в„“=0
                                                                                                      (80)



We now expand our surrogate target function fЛң in our basis {T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )}. The following lemma
shows that fЛң is orthogonal to any basis element for which Y Мё= Y вҖІ , and that the coefficient of
T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ ) only depends only on the degree of Y . That is, the energy of fЛң is evenly spread across
all elements of {T (Yв„“ вҠ— Yв„“ ) | Yв„“ вҲҲ Fв„“ }.
Lemma 14. Let Y, Y вҖІ be spherical harmonics of odd degree. Let в„“ be the degree of Y . Then
                                 T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )

                                                        О·в„“
                            fЛң,                     =p          ОҙY,Y вҖІ                                (81)
                                вҲҘT (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )вҲҘП„М„ П„М„    N (d, в„“)

where ОҙY,Y вҖІ = 1[Y = Y вҖІ ]. That is, if the basis element is built from two identical spherical
harmonics of degree в„“, then its correlation with the target function depends only on в„“; otherwise it
is zero.

Proof. Expanding, switching the order of the integrals, and applying Lemma 13,
              D                 E     Z Z
                fЛң, T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ ) =           fЛң(z)ПҒ(z, Пү)(Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )(Пү)dП„М„ (Пү)dП„М„ (z)                  (82)
                                 П„М„
                                      ZX D в„Ұ         E
                                    =     fЛң, ПҒ(В·, Пү) (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )(Пү)dП„М„ (Пү)                            (83)
                                                  в„Ұ                      П„М„
                                                  вҲһ
                                                  X            Z
                                             =            c
                                                          в„“вҖІ        Pв„“вҖІ (q вҠӨ k)(Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )(Пү)dП„М„ (Пү)   (84)
                                                  в„“вҖІ =0         в„Ұ

Expanding the integral over в„Ұ and applying Hecke-Funk (Equation (24)),
                        XвҲһ      Z    Z
                     =      cв„“вҖІ            Pв„“вҖІ (q вҠӨ k)Y вҖІ (k)Y (q)dП„ (k)dП„ (q)                        (85)
                          в„“вҖІ =0         SdвҲ’1       SdвҲ’1

                          XвҲһ            Z
                      =           cв„“вҖІ                 Y вҖІ (q) вҹЁPв„“вҖІ , Pв„“вҖІ вҹ©ud Y (q)dП„ (q)              (86)
                          в„“вҖІ =0         SdвҲ’1

                          XвҲһ
                      =           cв„“вҖІ вҲҘPв„“вҖІ вҲҘ2ud вҹЁY, Y вҖІ вҹ©П„                                            (87)
                          в„“вҖІ =0
                             cв„“
                      =                                                                               (88)
                          N (d, в„“)


                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, applying the formula for cв„“ from Lemma 13 and the formula for вҲҘT (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )вҲҘП„ from
Lemma 11,
                                                    2
  Лң    T (Y вҠ— Y )            cв„“           1           О·в„“ Оұв„“         1                О·в„“
  f,                    =         В·               = ПҖ        В·q                 =p
     вҲҘT (Y вҠ— Y )вҲҘП„М„ П„М„    N (d, в„“) вҲҘT (Y вҠ— Y )вҲҘП„М„   N (d, в„“)    4 2
                                                                 2Оұ   /N (d, в„“)     N (d, в„“)
                                                                                  ПҖ    в„“(i)
                                                                                                             (89)


Up to now, we have constructed a basis without showing that its span includes our target function.
Lemma 25 (in Appendix C.8) verifies that, in fact, fЛң lies in this span. This lemma is not needed for
the proof of Theorem 2, but is used in the kernel approximation of Appendix C.8. It also shows that
this step of the proof is tight. We do not lose anything by lower bounding the error only on the part
of fЛң that lies in the span of our basis functions.

C.5   E XPANSION OF THE H EAD F UNCTIONS

In this section, we expand the low-rank attention head function in our basis {T (Y вҠ— Y вҖІ )}. Unlike
the target function, the energy of an attention head is not spread out, but concentrated on a few basis
elements in each harmonic. We first need the following lemma, which we will use to bound the
number of these special basis elements.
Lemma 15. Let Aв„“ be the span of the harmonics of degree в„“ on SdвҲ’1 that are zero after marginal-
izing onto the first r coordinates. Then

                                                                 r+в„“
                                 dim(Fв„“ /Aв„“ ) := M (r, в„“) вүӨ                                        (90)
                                                                  в„“
where Fв„“ /Aв„“ is the orthogonal complement of Aв„“ in Fв„“ . Furthermore, M (1, в„“) = 1.

Proof. Let L : Fв„“ вҶ’ L2 (Br ) be the linear operator which marginalizes a degree в„“ spherical har-
monic function on the first r coordinates. (Here, Br is the unit r-ball.) That is,

                                                              x
                            (Lf )(x) :=      E     f      p                                 (91)
                                         yвҲјSdвҲ’rвҲ’1       y 1 вҲ’ вҲҘxвҲҘ2
By definition, Aв„“ is the null space of L. We will show below that the range of L contains only
polynomials of the first r coordinates of degree  at most в„“. The dimension of the space of polynomials
in dimension r of degree at most в„“ is r+в„“

                                          в„“   . Thus, by the rank-nullity theorem,

                                                               r+в„“
                                  dim(Fв„“ ) вүӨ dim(Aв„“ ) +                                           (92)
                                                                 в„“
and therefore

                                                                       r+в„“
                           dim(Fв„“ /Aв„“ ) = dim(Fв„“ ) вҲ’ dim(Aв„“ ) вүӨ                                   (93)
                                                                          в„“

We will now show that the range of L contains only polynomials in the first r coordinates of degree
at most в„“. Each spherical harmonic is the restriction to SdвҲ’1 of a harmonic homogeneous polynomial
on Rd , so it suffices to show that L maps monomials of degree exactly в„“ in Rd to polynomials of
degree at most в„“ in the first r coordinates. Let
                                                                r
                                                                       !    d
                                                                                   !
                        x         p1       pr pr+1       pd
                                                              Y     pi
                                                                           Y    pi
                  Y           := x1 В· В· В· xr yr+1 В· В· В· yd =       xi          yi              (94)
                        y
                                                                       i=1            i=r+1

be one such monomial. If any of pr+1 , . . . , pd is odd, then L[Y ] = 0. If all are even, then
                           r
                                  !                   d
                                                                              !
                          Y                           Y      p             pi
                               pi
            L[Y ](x) =       xi              E              yi 1 вҲ’ вҲҘxвҲҘ2                                      (95)
                                              yвҲјSdвҲ’rвҲ’1
                            i=1                          i=r+1
                             r
                                          !    d
                                                                           !                  d
                                                                                                         !
                                                                 2 pi /2
                             Y                 Y                                              Y
                                  xpi i                                                           yipi

                        =                             1 вҲ’ вҲҘxвҲҘ                     E                          (96)
                                                                               yвҲјSdвҲ’rвҲ’1
                            i=1               i=r+1                                       i=r+1



                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           Pr          P
                                                                        d
is a polynomial in x whose highest degree term has degree ( i=1 pi )+   i=r+1 pi   , which equals
the degree of the original monomial.
For the special case of r = 1, it suffices to show that L has rank one, or equivalently that its
nullspace has dimension N (d, в„“) вҲ’ 1. Let Y1 = Pв„“ (вҹЁeМӮ1 , В·вҹ©), where eМӮ1 вҲҲ Rd is the first standard
basis vector. By Theorem 4.10 of Frye & Efthimiou (2012), Y1 is a spherical harmonic of degree в„“.
Complete an orthonormal basis {Y1 , . . . YN (d,в„“) } of Fв„“ . Our goal is to show that LYj = 0 for all
j вҲҲ {2, . . . N (d, в„“)} (with equality in the weak sense).
To do this, it suffices to show that вҹЁPв„“ , LYj вҹ© = 0 for all в„“:
                        вҹЁPв„“ , LYj вҹ© = E [Pв„“ (x)(LYj )(x)]                                          (97)
                                     xвҲјud

                                    = E Pв„“ (x) E Yj          p x                                   (98)
                                     xвҲјud       yвҲҲSdвҲ’2      y 1 вҲ’ |x|2
                                   = E [Pв„“ (x)Yj (z)]                                              (99)
                                     zвҲјП„

                 x           dвҲ’1                                    x
where z :=   p           вҲҲ S . But by definition, Pв„“ (x) = Y1     p            for all
           y 1 вҲ’ |x|2                                            y 1 вҲ’ |x|2
     dвҲ’2
y вҲҲ S . Continuing from above,
                                 = E [Y1 (z)Yj (z)] = вҹЁY1 , Yj вҹ©П„ = 0                             (100)
                                    zвҲјП„

for all j Мё= 1.
Lemma 16. Let X be a square matrix. Let D be the uniform distribution over orthogonal matrices.
Then,
                                        вҠӨ
                                 E [Q XQ] = tr(X) В· I                                    (101)
                                       QвҲјD


Proof. Let qki denote the entry in the kth row and ith column of Q. Then the (i, j) entry of the
expectation is                                  XX
                                     вҠӨ
                              E [Q XQ]ij =              xkв„“ E[qki qв„“j ]                   (102)
                               QвҲјD                                Q
                                                       k   в„“
So long as (k, i) Мё= (в„“, j), then conditional distribution of qв„“j given qki is symmetric, since negating
the в„“th row (or jth column) of Q would produce another orthonormal matrix. Thus, if (k, i) Мё= (в„“, j),
then the expectation is zero. The only non-zero terms are
                                                        X
                                           вҠӨ                         2
                                     E [Q XQ]ii =           xkk E[qki  ]                           (103)
                                   QвҲјD                            Q
                                                           k

Since the marginal distribution of each row (or column) is uniform on the unit sphere, the variance
of each entry is 1.
Lemma 17. Define M (r, в„“) as in Lemma 15. Assume the rank r < d and consider the functions
gh (z) = xвҠӨ Vh x В· П•Мғh (KhвҠӨ x, y) for П•Мғh : Rr Г— SdвҲ’1 вҶ’ R and Kh вҲҲ RdГ—r for h вҲҲ [H]. Then there
exists a subspace Aв„“ вҠҶ Fв„“ of dimension at least N (d, в„“) вҲ’ H В· M (r, в„“) such that T (Yв„“ вҠ— Yв„“ ) is
orthogonal to gh for any Yв„“ вҲҲ Aв„“ and any h вҲҲ H.

Proof. The first part of the proof gives a construction for Aв„“ . Fix y, q and h and define
                                               h                                        i
       hK (k) := E [ПҒ(z, Пү)gh (x)] = E sign(xвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)xвҠӨ V x В· П•Мғh (K вҠӨ x, y)                     (104)
                      xвҲјП„                    xвҲјП„

Define K = [K k]. As a first step, we show that this function only depends on a particular projec-
                                                                 span of  K is span({e1 , . . . , erвҖІ },
tion of V , not on V itself. Choose a basis such that the column
                                                                A B                      вҖІ     вҖІ
where 1 вүӨ rвҖІ вүӨ min(r + 1, d). Then we can rewrite V =                     where A вҲҲ Rr Г—r . The
                                                                C D
distribution of x is isotropic and independent of y. Therefore, we can rotate it without affect-
ing the expectation. In fact, we can draw a random orthogonal matrix from any distribution, and


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ex,Q [f (Qx)] will equal Ex [f (x)]. We draw  random
                                                     orthogonal matrices that fix the column span
                                             I В·                           вҖІ      вҖІ
of K, that is, matrices of the form Q =             , where QМғ вҲҲ R(dвҲ’r )Г—(dвҲ’r ) is a uniformly
                                              В· QМғ
distributed orthogonal matrix. Then,
                            h                                                  i
             hK (k) = E sign(xвҠӨ QвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)xвҠӨ QвҠӨ Vh Qx В· П•Мғh (K вҠӨ Qx, y)                     (105)
                       x,Q

                                                   A      B QМғ
                    = E sign(xвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)xвҠӨ                         x В· П•Мғ h (K вҠӨ
                                                                                x, y)       (106)
                       x,QМғ                      QМғвҠӨ C QМғвҠӨ D QМғ
Moving the expectation over QМғ inside, the off-diagonal blocks are both 0. Applying Lemma 16, the
bottom right block becomes tr(D) В· I. Thus, letting AвҖІ = A вҲ’ tr(D) В· I,

                                A        B QМғ
                           E     вҠӨ                = tr(D) В· I + U AвҖІ U вҠӨ                   (107)
                           QМғ QМғ C     QМғвҠӨ D QМғ

             I
where U =        is defined to be the column span of K. In all,
              В·
                         h                                                           i
           hK (k) = E sign(xвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)xвҠӨ tr(D) В· I + U AвҖІ U вҠӨ x В· П•Мғh (K вҠӨ x, y)

                                                                                           (108)
                       x
Now that we have reduced V , we can more clearly see the implications of the rotational invariance
of the distribution of x. Let O be an arbitrary orthonormal matrix. Then
                  h                                                                       i
  hK (k) = E sign(xвҠӨ O вҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)xвҠӨ O вҠӨ tr(D) В· I + U AвҖІ U вҠӨ Ox В· П•Мғh (K вҠӨ Ox, y) (109)

              xвҲјП„
                  h                                                                       i
           = E sign(xвҠӨ O вҠӨ kq вҠӨ y)xвҠӨ tr(D) В· I + O вҠӨ U AвҖІ U вҠӨ O x В· П•Мғh (K вҠӨ Ox, y) (110)

            xвҲјП„
          = hOвҠӨ K (O вҠӨ k)                                                                         (111)
where the last step follows because O вҠӨ U is precisely the column span of O вҠӨ K. Thus by WeylвҖҷs
fundamental theorem of invariant functions, there exists hМғ : Rr вҶ’ R such that
                                       hK (k) = hМғ(K вҠӨ k)                                 (112)

Let П„K denote the marginal distribution of П„ on the column space of K and let П„K вҠҘ denote its
marginal distribution
               p       on the orthogonal complement of the column space of K. Then the random
vector v + v вҠҘ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘvвҲҘ, where v вҲј П„K and v вҠҘ вҲј П„K вҠҘ is distributed uniformly on the sphere.
Let Y be a spherical  harmonic that is  zero after marginalizing the onto the column space of K. (For
example, if K вҠӨ = KМғ вҠӨ 0rГ—dвҲ’r , then marginalizing onto the column space means taking the
average of the function over the final d вҲ’ r coordinates.) Then
                 Z
     вҹЁhK , Y вҹ© =        hK (k)Y (k)dП„ (k)                                                      (113)
                    dвҲ’1
                 ZS Z               p                        p
               =        hK (v + v вҠҘ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘvвҲҘ)Y (v + v вҠҘ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘvвҲҘ)dП„K вҠҘ (v вҠҘ )dП„K (v)             (114)
                 Z           Z
                                              p
               = hМғK (v)         Y (v + v вҠҘ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘvвҲҘ)dП„K вҠҘ (v вҠҘ ) dП„K (v)                       (115)

               =0                                                                                 (116)
Let Ahв„“ вҠӮ Fв„“ be the space of spherical harmonics of degree в„“ that have this marginalization property
with respect to Kh . Let Aв„“ = вҲ©h Ahв„“ . Recall that N (d, в„“) is the dimension of Fв„“ , and M (r, в„“) is the
dimension of the orthogonal complement of Ahв„“ in Fв„“ , denoted Fв„“ /Ahв„“ . Thus,
  dim(Aв„“ ) = dim(Fв„“ )вҲ’dim(Fв„“ /Aв„“ ) = N (d, l)вҲ’dim(вҠ•h (Fв„“ /Ahв„“ )) вүҘ N (d, в„“)вҲ’HВ·M (r, в„“) (117)
It remains to show that for all Y вҲҲ Aв„“ , T (Yв„“ вҠ— Yв„“ ) is orthogonal to gh .
                             Z
       вҹЁT (Y вҠ— Y ), gh вҹ©П„М„ =     E[ПҒ(z, Пү)gh (z)]Y (k)Y (q)dП„ (k)dП„ (q)                 (118)
                                 z
                             Zв„Ұ       Z
                           =       E          E[ПҒ(x, y, Пү)gh (z)]Y (k)dП„ (k) Y (q)П„ (q) (119)
                              SdвҲ’1 y     SdвҲ’1 x



                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


But for any fixed y and q,
                      Z
                               E[ПҒ(x, y, Пү)gh (z)]Y (k)dП„ (k) = вҹЁhKh , Y вҹ© = 0                       (120)
                        SdвҲ’1 x

by the calculation above, where the final step follows because Y вҲҲ Aв„“ вҠӮ Ahв„“ .

C.6   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 (Low-Rank Approximation Lower Bounds, Equivariant Case). There exist universal
constants c, cвҖІ , C and C вҖІ such that if either of the following sets of assumptions hold:
                                               c
      1. High-accuracy regime: r вүӨ d вҲ’ 3, Пө вүӨ d+1 , and

                                           H вүӨ C В· 2dвҲ’(r+1) log2 (2d/r) .                              (5)

                                                              вҖІ
                                               c
      2. High-dimensional regime: d вүҘ 5, Пө вүҘ dвҲ’2e 2 В·r and


                                                                          C вҖІ /Пө
                                             1           1     d
                                          HвүӨ               В·                       .                   (6)
                                             2           2e r + C вҖІ /Пө

Then, for any choice of H rank-r generalized attention heads П•h : RrГ—2 вҶ’ вҲҶ1 , Vh вҲҲ RdГ—d , Kh вҲҲ
RdГ—r the error of approximating the nearest neighbor function is bounded as follows
                                                     H                                     2
                                                     X
                                                              Vh XП•h KhвҠӨ X, y

                           E            f (X; y) вҲ’                                             вүҘПө,     (7)
                   x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )                h=1                                   2
                    yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

where f is defined as in Equation (3).

                                                                                  вҲҡ
Proof. We lower bound the error by projecting it onto the unit vector (x1 вҲ’ x2 )/( 2). For conve-
nience, we define a basis
                                    x1 вҲ’ x2              x1 + x2
                               x= вҲҡ                w= вҲҡ                                     (121)
                                         2                    2
The joint distribution of x and w is the same as that of x1 and x2 . They are each uniformly
distributed on the sphere, and they are always orthogonal. The projection of the target function onto
x yields the surrogate target function of Definition 12:

                    x1 вҲ’ x2                  1                           1
                      вҲҡ      , f (X; y) = вҲҡ sign (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©) =: вҲҡ fЛң(x, y)                  (122)
                        2                     2                           2
Let the attention weights produced by a softmax head be t1 and t2 = 1 вҲ’ t1 . Then the output of the
head before multiplication with V is
                                                           t1 вҲ’ t2 1
                                 tx1 + (1 вҲ’ t)x2 =           вҲҡ x+ вҲҡ w                                (123)
                                                               2    2
                                  вҲҡ
Letting П•Мғ(K вҠӨ x, y) = (t1 вҲ’ t2 )/ 2, the inner product of the head with x is

                                    xвҠӨ V x В· П•Мғ(K вҠӨ x, y) + xвҠӨ V w                                   (124)
Notice that, since the conditional distribution of w given x is symmetric, the correlation of the
second term above with the surrogate target is zero:
                                              h                  i
                                    E           fЛң(x, y) В· xвҠӨ V w = 0                       (125)
                                x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, we have the following lower bound:

                                                        H                                                   2
                                                        X
                                                              Vh XП•h KhвҠӨ (x1 вҲ’ x2 ), y

                E             f (X; y) вҲ’                                                                                         (126)
        x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )                              h=1
         yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )
                                 *                                    H
                                                                                                                       +2
                                                                      X
                                                                             Vh XП•h KhвҠӨ (x1 вҲ’ x2 ), y

        вүҘ           E                   x,         f (X; y) вҲ’                                                                    (127)
            x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )                                        h=1
             yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

                                                              H                                             H
                                                                                                                            !2
                        1                                     X                                             X
        =     E                         fЛң(x, y) вҲ’                  x вҠӨ
                                                                          Vh x В· П•Мғh (KhвҠӨ x, y)) вҲ’                 вҠӨ
                                                                                                                  x Vh w         (128)
                   dвҲ’1 2
          x,wвҲјD2 (S   )                                       h=1                                           h=1
            yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

                                                              H
                                                                                                        !2
                          1                                   X
        вүҘ      E                         fЛң(x, y) вҲ’                 x   вҠӨ
                                                                            Vh x В· П•Мғh (KhвҠӨ x, y))                               (129)
          x,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 ) 2
                                                              h=1
                        H          2
          1 Лң X
        =   fвҲ’  gh                                                                                                               (130)
          2
                     h=1           П„М„


where gh (z) = xвҠӨ Vh x В· П•Мғh (KhвҠӨ x, y). Construct the space Aв„“ вҠҶ Fв„“ according to Lemma 17, and
              Aв„“
let {Yв„“i }dim
          i=1    be an orthonormal basis of Aв„“ . Then each element in the following set is orthogonal
to each gh (z):
                                                         dim(Aв„“ )
                                         T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )

                                                                                                (131)
                                      вҲҘT (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )вҲҘП„М„ i=1

Furthermore, by Lemma 11, this set is orthonormal. Thus
                                             2                                                                         +2
                                                      X dim(A
                                                          X в„“)
                             H
                                                                          *          H
                             X                                                       X           T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )
                     fЛң вҲ’          gh             вүҘ                          fЛң вҲ’          gh ,                                  (132)
                                                                i=1
                                                                                                вҲҘT (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )вҲҘП„М„
                             h=1             П„М„       в„“ odd                          h=1

                                                      X dim(A
                                                          X в„“)                      T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )
                                                                                                         2
                                                  =                          fЛң,                                                 (133)
                                                                i=1
                                                                                   вҲҘT (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )вҲҘП„М„
                                                      в„“ odd
                                                      X                        О·в„“2
                                                  =           dim(Aв„“ )                                                           (134)
                                                                             N (d, в„“)
                                                      в„“ odd

where the final step follows from Lemma 14. By the construction of Aв„“ (Lemma 17),

                                                  dim(Aв„“ ) вүҘ N (d, в„“) вҲ’ H В· M (r, в„“)                                             (135)

and thus
                                                        X                          M (r, в„“)

                                                    вүҘ            1вҲ’H В·                            О·в„“2                            (136)
                                                                                   N (d, в„“)
                                                        в„“ odd

Appealing either to Lemma 22 or to Lemma 23 finishes the proof.

C.7   A SYMPTOTICS

Lemma 18. Let m > в„“ and в„“ odd. Then
                Z 1    в„“
                      d                                   m
                           (1 вҲ’ t2 )m dt = (вҲ’1)1+(в„“вҲ’1)/2 в„“вҲ’1 (в„“ вҲ’ 1)! .                                                          (137)
                 0    dt                                  2



                                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We have
                   Z 1          в„“                                    в„“вҲ’1
                          d                2 m                 d
                                    (1 вҲ’ t ) dt = вҲ’                        (1 вҲ’ t2 )m             (138)
                    0     dt                                   dt                           t=0
                                                               в„“вҲ’1 Xm
                                                               d        m
                                                      =вҲ’                    (вҲ’1)k t2k             (139)
                                                               dt       k             t=0
                                                                   k=0

                                                                       m
                                                      = (вҲ’1)1+(в„“вҲ’1)/2 в„“вҲ’1 (в„“ вҲ’ 1)! .              (140)
                                                                                 2


                                                                           q
                                                                                   d
Lemma 19. Define О·в„“ as in Definition 7. For odd в„“, О·в„“2 вҲј                       в„“3 (в„“+d) .


Proof. From the definition, we have
                                N (d, l)AdвҲ’2 1
                              p             Z
                     О·l,d = 2                  Pl,d (t)(1 вҲ’ t2 )(dвҲ’3)/2 dt .                      (141)
                                   AdвҲ’1      0

From the Rodrigues formula for Pl,d (Frye & Efthimiou, 2012, Proposition 4.19), we have
                   p                                Z 1    l
                     N (d, l)AdвҲ’2        (вҲ’1)l             d
          О·l,d = 2                  l
                                                                (1 вҲ’ t2 )l+(dвҲ’3)/2 dt .           (142)
                       AdвҲ’1       2 (l + (d вҲ’ 3)/2)l 0    dt
Now, using Lemma 18, we obtain
             p
                                       (вҲ’1)l                1+(lвҲ’1)/2 l + (d вҲ’ 3)/2

                N (d, l)AdвҲ’2
    О·l,d = 2                                          (вҲ’1)                 lвҲ’1       (l вҲ’ 1)! ,   (143)
                   AdвҲ’1         2l (l + (d вҲ’ 3)/2)l                          2
                AdвҲ’2
                             вҲҡ
and thus, using A dвҲ’1
                        вҲј C вҖІ d, we have
                            вҲҡ p               вҲ’l (l вҲ’ 1)!((d вҲ’ 3)/2)! l + (d вҲ’ 3)/2

                |О·l,d | вҲј C d N (d, l)2                                       lвҲ’1       .         (144)
                                                   (l + (d вҲ’ 3)/2)!            2
                             вҲҡ                     l+(dвҲ’3)/2
                                dp                     lвҲ’1
                        =C           N (d, l)2вҲ’l l+(dвҲ’3)/2
                                                        2
                                                                                                  (145)
                              l

                                                        l
                             вҲҡ
                                                      l! dвҲ’3

                                dp             вҲ’l          2    !
                        =C           N (d, l)2      lвҲ’1
                                                          d+lвҲ’2   .                               (146)
                              l                      2 !      2   !

Using StirlingвҖҷs approximation, we obtain

                                                                  1/2
                                                                        (l + d)(l+dвҲ’3)

                                          l+d              l+d
                               N (d, l) вҲј                                                         (147)
                                           l                ld           l(lвҲ’1) d(dвҲ’2)
                                           вҲј (l + d)l+dвҲ’3/2 lвҲ’lвҲ’1/2 dвҲ’d+3/2 ,                     (148)
as well as
                                   s
                     l! dвҲ’3

                              !         ld
                  lвҲ’1
                          2
                         d+lвҲ’2   вҲј            l(l+1)/2 d(dвҲ’3)/2 (d + l)(вҲ’dвҲ’l+2)/2 2l ,            (149)
                   2    !   2   !    l(d + l)
                                         вҲј (l + d)(вҲ’dвҲ’l+1)/2 l(l+1)/2 d(dвҲ’2)/2 2l ,               (150)
leading to
             |О·l,d | вҲј (l + d)(вҲ’dвҲ’l+1+l+d)/2вҲ’3/4 lвҲ’1вҲ’l/2вҲ’1/4+l/2+1/2 d1/2вҲ’d/2+3/4+d/2вҲ’1           (151)
                               вҲ’1/4 вҲ’3/4 1/4
                  вҲј (l + d)          l      d     ,                                               (152)
as claimed.


                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                         q
                                                                d
Lemma 19 shows that О·в„“2 decays slowly with в„“. Using в„“3 (в„“+d)         вүҘ 1/в„“2 and including by a fudge
factor c that is slightly smaller than 1, we get a form that is better suited to the proof of our lower
bounds:
Corollary 20. There exists a universal constant cвҖІвҖІ such that О·в„“2 вүҘ cвҖІвҖІ /в„“2 for all sufficiently large d
and в„“ (say, for all d, в„“ > 4).
                                                           p
Lemma 21 (Decay of Оұв„“ ). For в„“ odd, we have Оұв„“ = 41 О·в„“2 / N (d, в„“).

Proof. We start from arcsin = ПҖ/2 вҲ’ arccos and the kernel representation (Bach, 2017a, Section
3.1)
                     1
                       (ПҖ вҲ’ arccos(x В· y)) = EОёвҲҲSdвҲ’1 [1[x В· Оё > 0]1[y В· Оё > 0]] .                    (153)
                    2ПҖ
Now, from the Hecke-Funk formula, we have, up to zeroth-harmonic terms, the following corre-
spondence between the Gegenbauer expansion of arcsin and that of of sign, given precisely by О·в„“ .
Fix any x вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 . Then
                                   Z
             Pв„“ (1)вҹЁarcsin, Pв„“ вҹ© = arcsin(x В· y)Pв„“ (x В· y)П„ (dy)
                                      Z Z
                                    1
                                 =         sign(x В· Оё) sign(y В· Оё)Pв„“ (x В· y)П„ (dy)П„ (dОё)
                                    4
                                                Z
                                    1
                                 = вҹЁsign, Pв„“ вҹ© sign(x В· Оё)Pв„“ (x В· Оё)П„ (dОё)
                                    4
                                    1
                                 = Pв„“ (1)вҹЁsign, Pв„“ вҹ©2 .                                              (154)
                                    4
                                                                                          p
Since вҹЁarcsin, Pв„“ вҹ© = Оұв„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘ and вҹЁsign, Pв„“ вҹ© = О·в„“ вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘ, so Оұв„“ = 41 О·в„“2 вҲҘPв„“ вҲҘ = 41 О·в„“2 / N (d, в„“).


Lemma 22. There are universal constants c and C such that the following hold: Assume r вүӨ d вҲ’ 3,
     c
Пө вүӨ d+1 , and H вүӨ C В· 2dвҲ’(r+1) log2 (2d/r) . Then
                                X                 M (r, в„“)

                                        1вҲ’H В·                О·в„“2 вүҘ Пө                     (155)
                                                  N (d, в„“)
                                    в„“ odd


Proof.
                                                2в„“ + d вҲ’ 2 в„“ + d вҲ’ 3
                                   N (d, в„“) =                                                       (156)
                                                    в„“        в„“вҲ’1
Applying StirlingвҖҷs approximation,
                                        в„“ + d вҲ’ 3 (в„“ + d вҲ’ 3)в„“+dвҲ’2.5
                           N (d, в„“) вүі                                                               (157)
                                            в„“      (в„“ вҲ’ 1)в„“вҲ’0.5 (d вҲ’ 2)dвҲ’1.5
                                        (в„“ + d вҲ’ 3)в„“+dвҲ’1.5
                                       вүҘ в„“+0.5                                                      (158)
                                         в„“     (d вҲ’ 2)dвҲ’1.5
Meanwhile, Lemma 15 and StirlingвҖҷs approximation give
                                                  (r + в„“)r+в„“+0.5

                                        r+в„“
                          M (r, в„“) вүӨ           вүІ r+0.5 в„“+0.5                                        (159)
                                          в„“        r     в„“
By assumption, r вүӨ d вҲ’ 3, so
                                                  r+в„“+0.5
                                                                 (d вҲ’ 2)dвҲ’1.5

                     M (r, в„“)           r+в„“
                              вүІ                                                                     (160)
                     N (d, в„“)          в„“+dвҲ’3                rr+0.5 (в„“ + d вҲ’ 3)dвҲ’rвҲ’2
                                        (d вҲ’ 2)dвҲ’1.5
                               вүӨ                                                                    (161)
                                   rr+0.5 (в„“ + d вҲ’ 3)dвҲ’rвҲ’2


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The above expression is decreasing in в„“. Thus for all в„“ вүҘ Вөd + 1,
                           M (r, в„“)           (d вҲ’ 2)dвҲ’1.5
                                    вүІ r+0.5                                                   (162)
                           N (d, в„“)   r     ((1 + Вө)(d вҲ’ 2))dвҲ’rвҲ’2
                                         r+0.5
                                        d              1
                                    вүӨ                                                         (163)
                                        r        (1 + Вө)dвҲ’rвҲ’2
                                      = (1 + Вө)вҲ’d+r+2+(r+0.5) log1+Вө (d/r)                    (164)
By assumption, c/Пө вүҘ d + 1, so the above holds with Вө = 1 for all в„“ вүҘ c/Пө:
                                    M (r, в„“)
                                             вүІ 2вҲ’d+(r+1) log2 (2d/r)                          (165)
                                    N (d, в„“)

Also by assumption, H вүӨ C В· 2dвҲ’(r+1) log2 (2d/r) . Setting C appropriately, 1 вҲ’ H В· M (r,в„“)
                                                                                    N (d,в„“)   вүҘ 21
for all в„“ вүҘ c/Пө Finally, applying Corollary 20,
                              X             M (r, в„“)
                                                             X 1 cвҖІвҖІ
                                   1вҲ’H В·               О·в„“2 вүҘ    В·                             (166)
                                            N (d, в„“)           2 в„“2
                            в„“ odd                                           в„“вүҘc/Пө
                                                                             в„“ odd
                                                                              вҖІвҖІ X
                                                                            c            1
                                                                     вүҘ                        (167)
                                                                             4           в„“2
                                                                                 в„“вүҘc/Пө

                                                                            cвҖІвҖІ Пө
                                                                     вүҘ         В·              (168)
                                                                             4 c
Setting c = cвҖІвҖІ /4 completes the proof.
Lemma 23. There is a universal constant c such that the following holds. If d вүҘ 5,
                                                2c   d
                                                   < 2 вҲ’r,                                    (169)
                                                 Пө  2e
and                                                                       cПө
                                          1              1    d
                                       HвүӨ                  В·                     ,            (170)
                                          2              2e r + cПө
then
                                    X                     M (r, в„“)

                                            1вҲ’H В·                           О·в„“2 вүҘ Пө           (171)
                                                          N (d, в„“)
                                    в„“ odd
                                                                                              (172)

Proof. Recall the formula for N (d, в„“) from Equation (19). Lower bounding, for в„“ вүҘ 1 and d вүҘ 5,

                                2в„“ + d вҲ’ 2 в„“ + d вҲ’ 3
                     N (d, в„“) =                                                            (173)
                                      в„“        в„“вҲ’1
                                                       в„“вҲ’1                в„“
                                в„“+dвҲ’3 в„“+dвҲ’3                     в„“+dвҲ’3
                              вүҘ                             вүҘ                              (174)
                                     в„“        в„“вҲ’1                   в„“
                                         в„“
                                  d+в„“
                              вүҘ                                                            (175)
                                   2в„“
                                                                                           (176)

Meanwhile, Lemma 15 gives
                                                                      в„“
                                                     r+в„“    e(r + в„“)
                               M (r, в„“) вүӨ                вүӨ                                    (177)
                                                      в„“         в„“
Thus                                                            в„“                         в„“
                            M (r, в„“)                 r+в„“                         r+в„“
                                     вүӨ          2e В·                вүӨ       2e В·              (178)
                            N (d, в„“)                 d+в„“                          d

                                                          35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      d                   2c   d
                             c 2c   of в„“ for all в„“ < 2e2 вҲ’ r. Assume that Пө < 2e2 вҲ’ r. Then the
The above is a decreasing function
following holds for all в„“ вҲҲ Пө , Пө :
                                                                                  cПө
                                                                       r + cПө

                                               M (r, в„“)
                                                        вүӨ         2e В·                            (179)
                                               N (d, в„“)                  d
                                    cПө
Assume H вүӨ 12        1     d
                                                                c 2c
                     2e В· r+ cПө          . Then for all в„“ вҲҲ     Пө, Пө :

                                                              M (r, в„“)   1
                                                  1вҲ’H В·                вүҘ                          (180)
                                                              N (d, в„“)   2
Finally, applying Corollary 20,
                                                                                       2c/Пө
                 X              M (r, в„“)

                                                             1    X cвҖІвҖІ        cвҖІвҖІ X 1    cвҖІвҖІ Пө
                          1вҲ’H В·                        О·в„“2 вүҘ                 вүҘ          вүҘ    В·    (181)
                                N (d, в„“)                      2           в„“2    4    в„“2    4 2c
                 в„“ odd                                            в„“ odd                в„“=c/Пө

Setting c = cвҖІвҖІ /8 completes the proof.

C.8   K ERNEL R IDGE R EGRESSION AND R ANDOM F EATURE A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we analyze a simple approximation of the nearest neighbor function by standard rank-
1 attention heads. We show that O(ПөвҲ’4 d2/Пө ) heads suffice to achieve a squared approximation error
of Пө, nearly matching the lower bound of Theorem 2. First, we reduce this problem to approximating
the surrogate target function fЛң by rank-1 hardmax heads. Then we approximate fЛң in the RKHS
generated by rank-1 hardmax attention heads (that is, generated by the feature map T ). Finally, we
appeal to standard arguments to conclude that we can approximate fЛң by a finite linear combination
of random rank-1 hardmax heads.
                                                                           вҠӨ          вҠӨ     вҠӨ
                                                                   P
Recall that a standard rank-1 attention layer has the form           h oh vh Xsm X kh qh y for
                    Rd . For simplicity, in this
qh , kh , vh , oh вҲҲ P                           section we use rank-1 heads without a value/output
transform, that is h Оұh Xsm X вҠӨ kh qhвҠӨ y for Оұ вҲҲ R. Any such head can be constructed out of
d standard rank-1 heads by setting vh = ei , vo = Оұei for i вҲҲ [d], so this simplification does not
meaningfully change our result.
Lemma 24. For any u вҲҲ L1 (в„Ұ), there exists a rank-1 attention layer that approximates the nearest
neighbor function f up to expected squared error 12 вҲҘfЛңвҲ’ T uвҲҘ2П„М„ , where T is defined as in Definition 8
and fЛң is the surrogate target function of Definition 12.

Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 2, define
                                                x1 вҲ’ x2                     x1 + x2
                                          x=      вҲҡ     ,            w=       вҲҡ     .             (182)
                                                    2                           2
We can rewrite the target function in terms of the surrogate target function as follows:
                                                             x            w
                                           f (x1 , x2 ; y) = вҲҡ fЛң(x, y) + вҲҡ .                     (183)
                                                              2            2
Likewise, we can write a rank-1 hardmax attention head as
                                                x            w
                         X hm X вҠӨ kq вҠӨ y = вҲҡ ПҒ(x, y; q, k) + вҲҡ ,

                                                  2           2
where ПҒ(x, y; q, k) := sgn(xвҠӨ kq вҠӨ y) is defined as in Equation (28). An вҖңaveraging headвҖқ is an
attention head that always returns the average of the target points, regardless of the source point. It
can be implemented by a rank-1 softmax head by setting q = k = 0:
                                                       x1 + x2  w
                                          X sm X вҠӨ 0y =        =вҲҡ .
                                                          2      2

                                                              36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We construct our approximation to f by taking a linear combination    R of hardmax heads with coeffi-
cients given by u plus a single averaging head with coefficient 1 вҲ’ в„Ұ u(q, k)dП„М„ (q, k):
                 Z                                                Z
                                       вҠӨ   вҠӨ
                                                                                           x1 + x2
    (X, y) 7вҶ’         u(q, k) X hm X kq y dП„М„ (q, k) + 1 вҲ’             u(q, k)dП„М„ (q, k)             .
                  в„Ұ                                                в„Ұ                          2
                                                                                                  (184)
To analyze its error, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Due to the averaging head, the projection of
the error onto w is zero. What remains is the projection of the error onto x:
                                   Z                                                   Z                           2
                                                       вҠӨ    вҠӨ
                                                                                                             w
           E           f (X; y) вҲ’     u(q, k) X hm  X    kq   y   dП„М„ (q, k) +    1 вҲ’     u(q, k)dП„М„ (q, k)  вҲҡ
   x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )               в„Ұ                                                   в„Ұ                      2
   yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )
                                                                                      (185)
                                    Z                                        2
                  1                                                               1 Лң       2
                     xМғвҠӨ f (X; y) вҲ’    u(q, k) xвҠӨ X hm X вҠӨ kq вҠӨ y dП„М„ (q, k) =:

=      E                                                                            f вҲ’Tu
  x,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 ) 2                  в„Ұ                                            2         П„М„
                                                                                      (186)
                                Z                                 2
                  1 Лң                                                 1 Лң      2
=      E             f (x, y) вҲ’    ПҒ(x, y; q, k)u(q, k)dП„М„ (q, k) =:    f вҲ’Tu .       (187)
  x,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 ) 2              в„Ұ                                    2        П„М„


By the above lemma, our task is to find a finitely supported signed measure u for which fЛң вүҲ T u.
We next show that it is possible to exactly represent fЛң using a measure that is not finitely supported.
Lemma 25. The surrogate target function fЛң lies in the span of {T (Yв„“i вҠ—Yв„“i )}. Furthermore, fЛң = T u
where u : в„Ұ вҶ’ R is defined as follows:
                                        ПҖ X О·в„“
                               u(Пү) =              N (d, в„“) В· Pв„“ (q вҠӨ k) .                        (188)
                                        2       Оұв„“
                                                 в„“ odd

                                     N (d,в„“)
Proof. For each odd в„“, let {Yв„“i }i=1 be an orthonormal basis for Fв„“ . Applying Lemma 14, the
norm of the projection of fЛң onto the span of {T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )} is
                     N (d,в„“)                            2 NX  (d,в„“)
                       X
                               Лң    T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )                    О·в„“2
                               f,        i вҠ— Y i )вҲҘ
                                                           =                 = О·в„“2 .  (189)
                       i=1
                                  вҲҘT (Y в„“     в„“     П„М„  П„М„   i=1
                                                                    N (d, в„“)
Summing across all (odd) degrees, the energy equals that of fЛң itself.
                              вҲһ
                              X
                                    2
                                  О·2в„“+1  = вҲҘ sign вҲҘ2П„М„ = 1 = вҲҘfЛңвҲҘ2П„М„ .                              (190)
                                    в„“=0

Thus, the projection of fЛң onto this basis equals fЛң. In addition, this implies that fЛң is in the range of
T:
                           X NX   (d,в„“)
                                              T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )

                                                                    T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )
                     Лң
                     f=                   Лң
                                          f,                                                         (191)
                                 i=1
                                             вҲҘT (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )вҲҘП„М„ П„М„ вҲҘT (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )вҲҘП„М„
                            в„“ odd

                            X NX
                               (d,в„“)
                                      О·                1
                        =          p в„“        В· 2 p             T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )                      (192)
                         в„“ odd i=1
                                    N  (d, в„“)   ПҖ Оұв„“   N (d, в„“)
                            пЈ«                            пЈ¶
                                      N (d,в„“)
                               ПҖ X О·в„“   X
                        =T пЈӯ                 (Y i вҠ— Yв„“i )пЈё                                          (193)
                               2   Оұв„“ i=1 в„“
                                     в„“ odd

                       = T (u) ,                                                                    (194)
where, by the addition formula,
                                               ПҖ X О·в„“
                                    u(Пү) =            N (d, в„“) В· Pв„“ (q вҠӨ k) .                       (195)
                                               2   Оұв„“
                                                 в„“ odd


                                                         37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Approximation to u(В·) of Equation (188) for several dimensions, using degree-50 ultras-
pherical expansion. Heads with вҲ (q, k) = Оё are equivalent to those with angles Оё Вұ ПҖ up to a sign
flip. For large dimension, the distribution over вҲ (q, k) induced by u approaches a Gaussian with
mean 0.


Thus, it is possible to exactly represent the surrogate target with an infinite number of rank-1 heads,
each weighted according to u(В·)dП„М„ (В·). See Figure 8 for an illustration of this function. We can think
of u(В·)dП„М„ (В·) as a signed measure over rank-1 heads that depends only on вҲ (q, k). Notice that the
hardmax head function ПҒ is odd in each of its arguments q and k. Since u(В·) is also an odd function,
we get the same results by restricting this measure to [вҲ’ ПҖ2 , ПҖ2 ]. Figure 8 shows that for large d, the
(restricted) measure u(В·) approaches a Gaussian distribution centered at angle 0.
We have now shown how to represent fЛң using T . This representation gives us a great deal of insight
into the structure of fЛң for the following reason. Implicit in the discussion above is the reproducing
kernel Hilbert structure induced by the map T , as the following lemma shows:
Lemma 26. Let H вҠҶ L2 (X ) be the image of T . Then H is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space with
norm:
                                вҲҘf вҲҘH = inf{вҲҘuвҲҘП„М„ : u вҲҲ G, f = T u}                                (196)

and kernel:
                                   (z, z вҖІ ) 7вҶ’ E [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z вҖІ , Пү)] .                            (197)
                                              ПүвҲјП„М„


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof is given in Bach (2017a), Appendix A. Also note that kernel of this RKHS directly corre-
sponds to the operator T T вҲ— by the following formula:
                                       Z
                            вҲ—                           вҖІ          вҖІ       вҖІ
                       (T T f ) (z) =      E [ПҒ(z, Пү)ПҒ(z , Пү)] f (z )dП„М„ (z ) .             (198)
                                               X ПүвҲјП„М„


If our target function fЛң were an element of this Hilbert space, we would immediately be able to
approximate it using random features. Unfortunately, fЛң МёвҲҲ H because
                                                        X   О·в„“  2
                             вҲҘfЛңвҲҘH = вҲҘuвҲҘП„М„ =                                N (d, в„“) = вҲһ .                            (199)
                                                                   Оұв„“
                                                       в„“ odd

However, we can approximate f by an element of H obtained from solving a ridge regression prob-
lem. For any О» > 0, let fЛңО» be the solution to the following optimization problem:

                                         min вҲҘfЛң вҲ’ fЛҶвҲҘ2П„М„ + О»вҲҘfЛҶвҲҘ2H .                                                 (200)
                                         fЛҶвҲҲH


By tuning О», we can find an function that accurately approximates fЛң and that is smooth enough to be
approximated using random features. The following lemma constructs this fЛңО» . Though we obtained
this construction by solving Equation (200), for brevity we do not prove that it is the solution since
it is not necessary for our construction.
Lemma 27. For any regularization parameter О» > 0, there exists a function fЛңО» вҲҲ H for which
                                                                                            2
                                                 X                      О»N (d, в„“)
                           вҲҘfЛң вҲ’ fЛңО» вҲҘ2П„М„ вүӨ            О·в„“2                                       .                    (201)
                                               в„“ odd
                                                                 ( ПҖ2 Оұв„“ )2 + О»N (d, в„“)


Proof. Define

                                    fЛңО» := T gО»                                                                       (202)
                                                 X NX
                                                    (d,в„“)
                                    gО» :=                         Оів„“ В· (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )                                   (203)
                                          в„“ odd i=1
                                                   2
                                                  ПҖ Оұв„“ О·в„“
                                     Оів„“ := 2      2
                                                               .                                                      (204)
                                          ( ПҖ Оұв„“ ) + О»N (d, в„“)

Then by Lemma 26
                                         X
                 вҲҘfЛңО» вҲҘ2H вүӨ вҲҘgО» вҲҘ2П„М„ =           N (d, в„“)Оів„“2                                                          (205)
                                         в„“ odd
                                         в„“О»                                                      2          2
                                                                                                 ПҖ Оұв„“
                                         X                              X
                                    вүӨ            N (d, в„“)Оів„“2 +              N (d, в„“)О·в„“2                               (206)
                                                                                               О»N (d, в„“)
                                         в„“=1                         в„“>в„“О»
                                         в„“О»
                                         X                            1
                                    вүӨ            N (d, в„“)Оів„“2 +                                                        (207)
                                                                      О»2
                                         в„“=1
                                    <вҲһ.                                                                               (208)

Thus fЛң вҲҲ H. Furthermore, by the representation fЛң = T u of Lemma 25
                                                                                                             2
                                                   X NX
                                                      (d,в„“)
                                                              ПҖ О·в„“

        вҲҘfЛң вҲ’ fЛңО» вҲҘ2П„М„ = вҲҘT (u вҲ’ gО» ) вҲҘ2П„М„ =                                   вҲ’ Оів„“       В· T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i )        .   (209)
                                                                        2 Оұв„“
                                                   в„“ odd i=1
                                                                                                             П„М„



                                                             39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By Lemma 11, this is equal to
                                      X NX
                                         (d,в„“)
                                                 ПҖ О·в„“
                                                                           2
                                                                                                     2
                                  =                                В· T (Yв„“i вҠ— Yв„“i ) П„М„
                                                                 вҲ’ Оів„“                                                               (210)
                                                     2  Оұ в„“
                                    в„“ odd i=1
                                                                   2
                                                                             Оұв„“2

                                    X                  ПҖ О·в„“            4
                                  =       N (d, в„“)           вҲ’ Оів„“                                                                   (211)
                                                        2 Оұв„“          ПҖ 2 N (d, в„“)
                                    в„“ odd
                                    X                        2
                                                    2
                                  =          О·в„“ вҲ’ Оұв„“ Оів„“                                                                             (212)
                                                    ПҖ
                                    в„“ odd
                                                                        2
                                    X                  О»N (d, в„“)
                                  =       О·в„“2                              .                                                        (213)
                                    в„“ odd
                                                ( ПҖ2 Оұв„“ )2 + О»N (d, в„“)



We now derive an informal expression for the kernel ridge regression approximation using a
tuned regularization and describe its implications for random feature approximation in the high-
dimensional regime. From Lemma 19 and Lemma 21, we have О·в„“2 вүІ в„“вҲ’3/2 and Оұв„“2 вҲј О·в„“4 /N (d, в„“).
By Lemma 27, for the kernel ridge regression approximation fЛңО» to attain squared error Пө, we should
set О» so that О»N (d, в„“вҲ— ) вүғ Оұв„“2вҲ— , where в„“вҲ— вҲј 1/Пө2 . This roughly ensures that only degrees в„“ вүі в„“вҲ— are
kept, while в„“ вүІ в„“вҲ— are shrunk, and hence
                                            X          1 X вҲ’3/2
                              вҲҘfЛң вҲ’ fЛңО» вҲҘ вүІ      О·в„“2 вүІ         в„“     вҲјПө.                        (214)
                                               вҲ—
                                                       2    вҲ’2
                                                       в„“вүів„“                 в„“вүіПө
                                                       в„“ odd

We thus obtain О» вҲј Оұв„“2вҲ— /N (d, в„“вҲ— ) вҲј Пө6 N (d, ПөвҲ’2 )вҲ’2 .
Now that we have a sufficiently accurate kernel ridge regression approximation fЛңО» вҲҲ H,
we can approximate it using random features. The key quantity controlling the number of
random features needed is the degrees of freedom of the kernel integral operator, defined as
D(О») := tr T T вҲ— (T T вҲ— + О»I)вҲ’1 . The eigenvalues       вҲ—                           вҲ—

                                                 of T T are the same as those of T T . By
                              4 вҲҡ Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ
Lemma 10, these are           ПҖ2                  | в„“, в„“вҖІ вүҘ 0                 , with the (в„“, в„“вҖІ )-th eigenvalue having multi-
                                 N (d,в„“)N (d,в„“вҖІ )
plicity N (d, в„“)N (d, в„“вҖІ ). Hence
                                                    Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ                                                         Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ
                                             вҲҡ                                                              вҲҡ
           X                                     N (d,в„“)N (d,в„“вҖІ )             X                                 N (d,в„“)N (d,в„“вҖІ )
 D(О») =           N (d, в„“)N (d, в„“вҖІ )В·            Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ                   вүӨ           N (d, в„“)N (d, в„“вҖІ )В·                          . (215)
                                         вҲҡ                       +О»                                                  О»
           в„“,в„“вҖІ                              N (d,в„“)N (d,в„“вҖІ )                  в„“,в„“вҖІ

                         Оұв„“ Оұв„“вҖІ                    О·2 О·2
By Lemma 21, вҲҡ                                   в„“ в„“вҖІ
                                         вҲј N (d,в„“)N (d,в„“вҖІ ) , so
                      N (d,в„“)N (d,в„“вҖІ )
                                                                 !2
                   1X 2 2   1                       1X   N (d, ПөвҲ’2 )2      1            2
            D(О») вҲј    О· О·вҖІ=                            вҲј   О·в„“2        =вүІ 6 В· (edПө2 )2/Пө       (216)
                   О» вҖІ в„“ в„“  О»                       О»          Пө6          Пө
                      в„“,в„“               в„“
                                                                                          2

In the high-dimensional regime (where Пө is fixed and d goes to infinity), D(О») = Оҳ d2/Пө .

By standard arguments about random feature expansions (Bach,           2017b), if the number of random
                                                                 2/Пө2
features H is of the order H вүі D(О») log(D(О»)) = Оҳ d         e           , then with high probability the
random features achieve the same approximation accuracy Пө as the associated kernel ridge regression
solution fЛңО» . It is likely that a better rate can be obtained by drawing the random features from a
problem-specific distribution instead of uniformly at random. Observe that the condition required
by our lower bound in the rank-1 case has  the same form, though a somewhat weaker dependence
                                              1
on d. It is H вүӨ 21 N (d, 4Пө1
                             ) or H = O d 4Пө for sufficiently large d.4
    4
      To see this from Equation (136), recall that M (1, в„“) = 1, follow the final steps of Lemma 22, and use the
fact that we can replace cвҖІвҖІ by 1 for large d.


                                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 5
D.1    P ROOF I NTUITION

Part (i) of Theorem 3 is easy to prove. We approximate each summand of the target (Equation (8))
by a single attention head with a large enough temperature. We note that this construction doesnвҖҷt
depend on the input distribution, and can be readily generalized to any other continuous distribution.
The error parameter Пө affects the necessary temperature (i.e., the magnitude of the weights), but not
the number of heads.
The proof of part (ii) of Theorem 3 is more intricate. The crux of the proof is to construct a linear
combination of threshold functions that behaves like a periodic function with high frequency. Our
proof is inspired and extends the proof method of Yehudai & Shamir (2019) for separation between
kernel methods and 2-layer neural networks. Note that each summand t of the target in Equation (8)
can be written as
    arg max вҹЁxi , yвҹ© + bt,i = 1(вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© + bвҲ—t > 0)x1 + 1(вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© + bвҲ—t < 0)x2 ,         (217)
         xi

where bвҲ—t = bt,1 вҲ’ bt,2 . Let a := 2d2 + 1, and recall that bt,i = t for i = 1 and 0 for i Мё= 1.
Rewriting the target function using the above substitution, we can show that it is periodic in the
interval [вҲ’a, a], considered as a function of вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©. Denote this function by ПҲa . We extend a
result from Shamir (2018) to show that:

                 E        [|ПҲa (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©) В· g(Kx1 , Kx2 , y)|] вүӨ вҲҘgвҲҘ В· exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(d вҲ’ r)) .        (218)
              x1 ,x2 ,y
for any function g with bounded outputs if K has rank r. Finally, a rank-r transformer with H heads
can be written as a linear combination of such functions with bounded outputs, where the weights
of the linear combination are Vh .
We draw y from a Gaussian instead of uniformly from the unit sphere in order to use the result
from Shamir (2018). There, the bound on the correlation is expressed in the Fourier domain. Since
the Fourier transform of a Gaussian function is also a Gaussian function, the calculations become
significantly easier.

D.2    F ROM P OLYNOMIAL TO E XPONENTIAL S EPARATION

As can be seen from Theorem 3, to get an exponential separation between low- and high-rank trans-
formers, we used a more complex function than the nearest neighbor as used in Theorem 2. It is
natural to ask whether this more complex function is necessary to achieve this strong separation.
We claim that it is not possible to achieve exponential separation using a target that is just one nearest
neighbor function, even with a bias term. Fix some r < d, and consider some target function f that
is hard to approximate using rank-r attention heads. There are now three important parameters that
play a role in the separation result: (1) The desired approximation error Пө; (2) The number of heads
H required to achieve this desired error; and (3) The Lipschitz constant L of the function f .
In Hsu et al. (2021) it is proven that it is both necessary and sufficient to approximate any target
function by polynomially many random ReLU neurons if both Пө = O(1) and L = O(1), that is, if
                                                            1
they are both independent of d. However, if either Пө = poly(d)  or L = poly(d), then exponentially
many random ReLU neurons are required. Our results resemble approximation by random neurons
(with ReLU or other activations), where the вҖңeffectiveвҖқ dimension is d вҲ’ r. Using this analogy,
Theorem 2 covers two cases: (1) Пө = O(1) and L = O(1), and thus the separation is polynomial;
and (2) Пө = O(1/d) and L = O(1) where the separation is exponential.
Thus, to achieve exponential separation for Пө = O(1) we need to construct a hard to approximate
target function with Lipschitz constant L = poly(d). One method is to вҖңcheatвҖқ by multiplying an
L = O(1) target function by a large number that depends on d. However, this will not result in
a small relative error; effectively, by multiplying the target by some constant, we also multiplied
Пө by the same constant. In Theorem 3, we construct a target function f вҲ— with вҲҘf вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ O(1)5 ,
   5
     This can be seen by equation 224 and Lemma 28, where the target for N = 2 can be written as a sum of
two periodic functions, both bounded in [вҲ’1, 1].


                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


meaning that our hardness result applies to the relative error too. However, this target function is
highly oscillatory, resulting in a Lipschitz constant of L = poly(d), and thus we get exponential
separation even for a relative error of Пө = O(1). We believe that the result from Hsu et al. (2021)
can be extended beyond random ReLU neurons. If so, then achieving an exponential separation with
a вҖңsimpleвҖқ function (i.e. Lipschitz constant independent of d) would be impossible.
We also note that a similar impossibility result is known for separation between 2- and 3-layer neural
networks. Safran et al. (2019) shows that such an exponential separation cannot be achieved if both
Пө = O(1) and L = O(1).

D.3    P ROOF OF ITEM ( I ) IN T HEOREM 3

The proof is similar to the proof of Fact 1, where it is applied to each head separately. Namely, let
Пө > 0, and for each t = 1, . . . , 2d2 + 1, set Vt = I, KQвҠӨ = ОұI for Оұ > 0 to be chosen later. There
exists Оҙ > 0 (which depends on Пө) such that for the set:
                        AОҙ,t = {(x1 , . . . , xN , y) : вҲҖi Мё= j, |(xi вҲ’ xj )вҠӨ y > Оҙ}                (219)
                                       / AОҙ,t ) < 4d2Пө+2 . Again, note that in AОҙ,t , softmax converges to
we have that Pr(((x1 , . . . , xN , y) вҲҲ
hardmax uniformly as Оұ вҶ’ вҲһ. In particular, there exists Оұ > 0 such that:
                                                                                    2        Пө
                                                                           2
           sup         X sm Оұ X вҠӨ y + bt вҲ’ arg max вҲҘxi вҲ’ yвҲҘ + bt,i                     вүӨ 2        . (220)
  (x1 ,...,xN ,y)вҲҲAОҙ,t                                        i                           4d + 2

We define an additional head with V = вҲ’ N2 I, KQвҠӨ = 0. Since the attention matrix is zero, for
any target vectorPy this head will attend to uniformly to the source vectors. Hence, the output of this
                     n
head will be вҲ’ 12 i=1 xi . Summing over all the above heads approximates the target in expectation
up to an error of Пө , which finishes the proof.

D.4    P ROOF OF ITEM ( II ) IN T HEOREM 3
                                                                        вҲҡ
For algebraic simplicity, we first rescale the problem by a factor of       d (see Lemma 31). Define the
rescaled target function:
                                    2
                                 2d +1                                    N
      вҲ—вҲ—                       1 X
                                                            2
                                                                      1 X
    f (x1 , . . . , xN , y) = вҲҡ       (вҲ’1)t arg max вҲҘxi вҲ’ yвҲҘ + bt,i вҲ’ вҲҡ      xi ,                   (221)
                                d t=1      iвҲҲ{1,...,N }              2 d i=1
We also draw x1 , x2 and y from scaled versions of the uniform and Gaussian distributions, so that
we now wish to lower bound the following:
                                          h                                        i
                                                                                 2
                              EвҲҡ           вҲҘT (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ f вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ           (222)
                     x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 ( dSdвҲ’1 )
                            yвҲјN (0,I)
In the following proof, when taking norms or inner products of functions, we always consider them
to be in expectation over N (0, I), i.e., in expectation over y. Whenever we consider the expectation
over x1 and x2 , we explicitly write the expectation symbol. To normalize the expectation over y,
                                          d
we introduce the constant cd := вҲҡ12ПҖ .

We will first construct a periodic function on the real line using a linear combination of thresholds.
Let a вҲҲ N>2 and denote Hz (x) = 1(x + z вүҘ 0). We define the following functions:
                  2a                                          2a
                  X                     1                     X                        1
      ПҲa+ (x) =       HaвҲ’n (x) В· (вҲ’1)n вҲ’ ,        ПҲaвҲ’ (x) =       HвҲ’(aвҲ’n) (x) В· (вҲ’1)n вҲ’ .           (223)
                  n=1
                                        2                     n=1
                                                                                       2
Note that since N = 2 and вҲҘx1 вҲҘ = вҲҘx2 вҲҘ, we can write the target f вҲ—вҲ— in the following sense:
                                   1                         1
             f вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y) = вҲҡ ПҲa+ (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©)x1 + вҲҡ ПҲaвҲ’ (вҹЁx2 вҲ’ x1 , yвҹ©)x2 .         (224)
                                    d                         d
For ease of notation, we will denote ПҲa := ПҲa+ , and we will prove the following for ПҲa . However,
note that similar proofs can be shown for ПҲaвҲ’ in the exact same manner, thus we omit them for
brevity. First, ПҲa has the following properties:


                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 28. The function ПҲa (x) defined in Equation (223) satisfies that:
        1. It is a periodic function in the interval [вҲ’a, a], and odd if a is an odd number.
                                                                                                    2      1
        2. For every w with вҲҘwвҲҘ вүҘ d, if a > вҲҘwвҲҘ then ПҲa (вҹЁw, В·вҹ©)2                                       вүҘ 40

Proof. Let x0 вҲҲ [вҲ’a, aвҲ’2]. There is n0 вҲҲ {1, . . . , 2a} such that вҢҲx0 вҢү, вҢҲx0 +2вҢү вҲҲ [aвҲ’n0 , aвҲ’n0 +2].
For every n < n0 or n > n0 + 2 we have that HaвҲ’n (x0 ) = HaвҲ’n (x0 + 2), since the bump in the
threshold is either left of x0 or right of x0 + 2. We also have that HaвҲ’n0 (x0 ) + HaвҲ’n0 +1 (x0 ) =
HaвҲ’n0 (x0 + 2) + HaвҲ’n0 +1 (x0 + 2) = 1. Hence ПҲa (x0 ) = ПҲa (x0 + 2), which means it is a periodic
function with a period of 2.
If a is an odd number, then for every x0 вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 0] we have ПҲa (x0 ) = вҲ’ 21 and for every x0 вҲҲ [0, 1]
we have ПҲa (x0 ) = 21 . Since it is periodic with a period of 2, it is odd in the interval [вҲ’a, a].
For the second item, since x has a spherically symmetric distribution, we can assume w.l.o.g that
w = вҲҘwвҲҘ e1 . We now have that:
                           Z
                                                      вҲҘxвҲҘ2
                  2
    вҲҘПҲa (вҹЁw, В·вҹ©)вҲҘ = cd            |ПҲa (вҹЁw, xвҹ©)|2 eвҲ’ 2 dx                                        (225)
                            xвҲҲRd
                           Z вҲһ                                 Z вҲһ                Z вҲһ   x2
                                                     x2
                                                      1               x2
                                                                       2                 d
                    = cd        |ПҲa (вҲҘwвҲҘ x1 )|2 eвҲ’ 2 dx1 В·         eвҲ’ 2 dx2 В· В· В·     eвҲ’ 2 dxd  (226)
                            вҲ’вҲһ                                  вҲ’вҲһ                 вҲ’вҲһ
                                   Z вҲһ                     2
                             1                       вҲ’ z
                    =         вҲҡ          |ПҲa (z)|2 e 2вҲҘwвҲҘ2 dz                                   (227)
                        вҲҘwвҲҘ 2ПҖ вҲ’вҲһ
                                    Z вҲҡ2вҲҘwвҲҘ
                             1
                    вүҘ          вҲҡ               |ПҲa (z)|2 dz                                     (228)
                        вҲҘwвҲҘ e 2ПҖ вҲ’вҲҡ2вҲҘwвҲҘ
                               вҲҡ                    z2
                                                вҲ’ 2вҲҘwвҲҘ
where
  вҲҡ    we  used
             вҲҡ  that if
                         z  вүӨ    2 вҲҘwвҲҘ  then  e         2
                                                           вүӨ eвҲ’1 . Since a > вҲҘwвҲҘ, then in the interval
 вҲ’ 2 вҲҘwвҲҘ , 2 вҲҘwвҲҘ there are at least вҢҠвҲҘwвҲҘвҢӢ intervals of the form [n, n+2] for n вҲҲ {вҲ’a, ..., aвҲ’2}
       R n+2
where n |ПҲa (z)|2 вүҘ 14 . In total, we can bound the norm by:
                                                   2         1       1
                                    вҲҘПҲa (вҹЁw, В·вҹ©)вҲҘ вүҘ вҲҡ             вүҘ                             (229)
                                                          4e 2ПҖ     40


Next, we now show that the correlation of this function with any other function that depends only
on w1 , . . . , wr is small:
Theorem 29. Let g(w1 , . . . , wr , y) be some function that depends on the first r coordinates of w
with supx |g(x)| вүӨ 1, and take a = 2d2 + 1. Then, we have that:

                 E
                 вҲҡ           E   [|ПҲ a (вҹЁw, yвҹ©) В· g(w1 , . . . , w r , y)|]  вүӨ exp(вҲ’c(d вҲ’ r))  (230)
            wвҲјU ( dSdвҲ’1 ) yвҲјN (0,I)

for some universal constant c > 0.

Proof. For a vector v denote by vМ„ its last d вҲ’ r coordinates. Using the law of total expectation, we
can rewrite the expectation in the following way:


         E
         вҲҡ           E      [|ПҲa (вҹЁw, yвҹ©) В· g(w1 , . . . , wr , y)|]
    wвҲјU ( dSdвҲ’1 ) yвҲјN (0,I)
                     "                   " "          r
                                                                                !                                            #                     ##
                                                      X
    =       E            E     E          E    ПҲa            wi yi + вҹЁwМ„, yМ„вҹ©       В· g(w1 , . . . , wr , y) |y1 , . . . , yr | w1 , . . . , wr
        w1 ,...,wr       wМ„ y1 ,...,yr    yМ„
                                                       i=1
                                   "           r
                                                                        !                                                                  #
                                               X
=       E            E        EE         ПҲa          wi yi + вҹЁwМ„, yМ„вҹ©       В· g(w1 , . . . , wr , y) | y1 , . . . , yr , w1 , . . . , wr       .
    w1 ,...,wr y1 ,...,yr wМ„ yМ„
                                               i=1
                                                                                                                                      (231)


                                                                        43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Namely, we consider the expectation conditioned on drawing the first r coordinates of both w and
y. Note that we could change the order of expectations since all the expectations are bounded and
finite.
Let ПҲМғ be a continuation
                    Pr of ПҲa from [вҲ’a, a] to R such that it is periodic. Fix w1 , . . . , wr , y1 , . . . , yr
and denote by s := i=1 wi yi and вҲҘwМ„вҲҘ = 2ПҒ. Using Claim 30 we have that:
                                                                          вҲһ
                                                                                              !
                  hD                      Ei                             X
                                                                                           2
         E           g(В·), ПҲМғ(s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)   вүӨ c1 В· exp(вҲ’c2 (d вҲ’ r)) +       exp(вҲ’nПҒ ) . (232)
 wМ„вҲјU (2ПҒSdвҲ’rвҲ’1 )
                                                                                   n=1

Note that in the above equation, g is independent of wМ„ (although it does depend on w1 , . . . , wr ), and
also that вҲҘgвҲҘ вүӨ 1 since supx |g(x)| вүӨ 1 (recall that the norm is w.r.t a Gaussian measure).
We now have that:
       E        [|вҹЁg(В·), ПҲa (s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)вҹ©|]
    wМ„вҲјU (2ПҒSdвҲ’rвҲ’1 )
                       hD                     Ei                        hD                                        Ei
вүӨ           E            g(В·), ПҲМғ(s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)   +            E           g(В·), ПҲa (s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©) вҲ’ ПҲМғ(s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)
    wМ„вҲјU (2ПҒSdвҲ’rвҲ’1 )                                 wМ„вҲјU (2ПҒSdвҲ’rвҲ’1 )
                                                                                                      (233)
                                                                                         PвҲһ               2
The first term in Equation (233) can be bounded by c1 В· exp(вҲ’c2 (d вҲ’ r)) +                n=1 exp(вҲ’nПҒ ) by
Equation (232). For the second term, by Cauchy-Schwartz we have that:
                                hD                                        Ei
                             E    g(В·), ПҲa (s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©) вҲ’ ПҲМғ(s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)                                 (234)
                             wМ„
                                    h                                      i
                          вүӨ вҲҘgвҲҘ В· E ПҲa (s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©) вҲ’ ПҲМғ(s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)                                     (235)
                                       wМ„
                              вүӨ E[Pr(|s + вҹЁwМ„, yМ„вҹ© | > a)]                                                 (236)
                                 wМ„

where we used that вҲҘgвҲҘ вүӨ 1 and it is independent of wМ„, and that ПҲa (z) = ПҲМғ(z) for
                                                                                  вҲҡ every |z| вүӨ a.
We have that s + вҹЁwМ„, yМ„вҹ© = вҹЁw, yвҹ©, and вҹЁw, yвҹ© вҲј N (0, d) for every w of norm d. In particular,
for a вүҘ 2d2 there is some constant c3 such that Pr(|s + вҹЁwМ„, yМ„вҹ© | > a) вүӨ exp(вҲ’c3 d). Combining the
above we have that:

                                                                                вҲһ
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                X
                                                                                              2
        E          [|вҹЁg(В·), ПҲa (s + вҹЁwМ„, В·вҹ©)вҹ©|] вүӨ c1 В·   exp(вҲ’c2 (d вҲ’ r)) +          exp(вҲ’nПҒ )        + exp(вҲ’c3 d) .
wМ„вҲјU (2ПҒSdвҲ’rвҲ’1 )
                                                                               n=1
                                                                                                       (237)
We now go back to Equation (231) and consider the conditional probability over y1 , . . . , yr and
w1 , . . . , wr . Note that when taking expectation over y1 , . . . , yr we either have that | вҹЁw, yвҹ© | вүӨ a
which happens w.p > 1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c3 d) or | вҹЁw, yвҹ© | вүҘ a in which case, since , |g(z)|, |ПҲa (z)| вүӨ 1 for
every z вҲҲ R also their product is bounded by 1.
Finally, we consider the expectation over w1 , . . . , wr . We need to show that with high prob-
ability, ПҒ = 21 В· вҲҘwМ„вҲҘ is large. Instead, we will consider the probability over wr+1 , . . . , wd
                             вҲҡ                                                           pPr
(note that since вҲҘwвҲҘ = d, if we lower                   вҲҘwМ„вҲҘ it will also upper bound               2
                                            вҲҡ bound                                           i=1 wi ).
                                                  dвҲ’1
Since w is sampled uniformly     вҲҡ from   U( dS ), we can instead consider sampling zi from
                                      zi
N (0, 1) and setting (w)i = d В· вҲҘzвҲҘ       . By standard concentration bound on the norm of Gaus-
sian random variables (see Section 3.1 in Vershynin (2018)) there is some constant c4 such that
          2                                                             Pd
Pr(вҲҘwМ„вҲҘ вҲҲ   / [0.9(d вҲ’ r), 1.1(d вҲ’ r)]) вүӨ exp(вҲ’c4 (d вҲ’ r)). Also, i=r+1 zi2 has a ПҮ2 distribu-
tion
    Pwith d вҲ’ r degrees of freedom.
                                         From Lemma 1 in Laurent & Massart (2000) we have that
        d       2    1
Pr            w
        i=r+1 i   вүҘ  2 В· (d вҲ’ r)  вүӨ  exp(вҲ’c  5 (d вҲ’ r)) for some constant c5 . Together, there is some
                                  2
constant c6 such that Pr(вҲҘwМ„вҲҘ вүҘ 16 (d вҲ’ r)) вүӨ exp(вҲ’c6 (d вҲ’ r)).
                   вҲҡ          PвҲһ
Note that if ПҒ > cвҖІ d вҲ’ r then i=1 exp(вҲ’nПҒ2 ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’cвҖІ (d вҲ’ r)). Combining all the above and
changing the constant terms appropriately, there is some universal constant c > 0 such that:

              E
              вҲҡ           E    [|ПҲ a (вҹЁw, yвҹ©) В· g(w 1 , . . . , w r , y)|]  вүӨ exp(вҲ’c(d вҲ’ r)) (238)
         wвҲјU ( dSdвҲ’1 ) yвҲјN (0,I)


                                                         44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Claim 30. For any f вҲҲ L2 (N (0, Id )), odd periodic function ПҲ : R вҶ’ R and s вҲҲ R, if d > cвҖІ we
have that:
                                                                   вҲһ
                                                                                !
                                                                   X
                                                                              2
           E    [|вҹЁf (В·), ПҲ(s + вҹЁw, В·вҹ©вҹ©|] вүӨ c1 вҲҘf вҲҘ В· exp(вҲ’c2 d) +   exp(вҲ’nОұ ) ,         (239)
     wвҲјU (2ОұSdвҲ’1 )
                                                                            n=1

here cвҖІ , c1 , c2 > 0 are some universal constants.


Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Claim 1 from Yehudai & Shamir (2019) (which is directly
derived from Lemma 5 in Shamir (2018)), except for two changes:


      1. Here we have an absolute value over the inner product, instead of a square as in Claim 1.

      2. We consider a translation of ПҲ, namely our periodic function is ПҲ(s + В·) for a fixed s.


For the first item, this is a direct application of JensenвҖҷs lemma:
                     q                           s                     h                         i
                                             2                                                 2
          E           |вҹЁf (В·), ПҲ(s + вҹЁw, В·вҹ©вҹ©| вүӨ             E           |вҹЁf (В·), ПҲ(s + вҹЁw, В·вҹ©вҹ©| ,    (240)
    wвҲјU (2ОұSdвҲ’1 )                                      wвҲјU (2ОұSdвҲ’1 )


where now we can apply Claim 1 from Yehudai & Shamir (2019). For the second item, note that
ПҲ(s + В·) is also a periodic function, and Lemma 5 from Shamir (2018) applies to it in the same way
as it does on ПҲ(В·).


We are now ready to prove the main theorem:


Proof of Theorem 3 part (ii). Let T be some transformer with H heads, and output matrix Vh for
                                                                       PH
each head h вҲҲ [H]. Then T can be written as T (x1 , x2 , y) = h=1 Vh XП•h (Kh X, y), where
П•h : RrГ—2 вҶ’ вҲҶ1 is some generalized attention function on the simplex, and Kh вҲҲ RdГ—r . We have
that:
                h                                        i
                                                       2
          E      вҲҘf вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ T (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ                                      (241)
      x1 ,x2 ,y

                                        x1                       x2                    2
    = E           ПҲa+ (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©)      + ПҲaвҲ’ (вҹЁx2 вҲ’ x1 , yвҹ©)     вҲ’ T (x1 , x2 , y)       (242)
      x1 ,x2 ,y                          d                        d

                                        x1 2                          x2 2
    вүҘ E            ПҲa+ (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©)          + ПҲaвҲ’ (вҹЁx2 вҲ’ x1 , yвҹ©)                        (243)
      x1 ,x2 ,y                          d                            d
          D                        x1                 E    D                    x2         E
               +                                             вҲ’
      вҲ’ ПҲa (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©) , T (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ ПҲa (вҹЁx2 вҲ’ x1 , yвҹ©) , T (x1 , x2 , y)
                                    d                                           d
                                                                                             (244)

We will split the expectation in Equation (244), using the linearity of expectation and bound each
                                                         2
term separately. By Lemma 28 item (ii), and since вҲҘxi вҲҘ = d2 for i = 1, 2 we have that:

                  +                 x1 2                  вҲ’                 x2 2      1
         E       ПҲa (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©)        ,     E       ПҲa (вҹЁx2 вҲ’ x1 , yвҹ©)        вүҘ    .    (245)
     x1 ,x2 ,y                      d        x1 ,x2 ,y                      d        40

                                                      45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the two last terms in Equation (244) we have:
                            hD                   x1                Ei
                      E       ПҲa+ (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©) , T (x1 , x2 , y)                                               (246)
                  x1 ,x2 ,y                      d
                            "*                        H
                                                                        +#
                                +                x1 X
               = E             ПҲa (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©) ,     Vh XП•h (Kh X, y)                                          (247)
                  x1 ,x2 ,y                       d
                                                                           h=1
                  H
                  X                   hD                                x1                   Ei
              вүӨ               E            ПҲa+ (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ©)             , Vh XП•h (Kh X, y)                     (248)
                        x1 ,x2 ,y                                       d
                  h=1
                  H                   h Dx                  E                                             i
                                               1
                  X
              вүӨ               E                    , Vh X        В· ПҲa+ (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© В· П•h (Kh X, y)          ,   (249)
                        x1 ,x2 ,y           d
                  h=1

                                                                                                                      2
recall that the output of П•h is in R2 (since N = 2). We can bound xd1 , Vh X вүӨ d В· maxh вҲҘVh вҲҘ
independent of y since вҲҘx1 вҲҘ = вҲҘx2 вҲҘ = d. By Theorem 29 we can bound:
                            +
                    E       ПҲa (вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© В· П•h (Kh X, y) вүӨ exp(вҲ’c(d вҲ’ r)) ,          (250)
                  x1 ,x2 ,y

for some universal constant c > 0. In a similar way we can bound the correlation w.r.t ПҲaвҲ’ . Combin-
ing all the above, and plugging back to Equation (244) we get that there is some universal constant
cвҖІ > 0 such that:
             h
                                                    2
                                                      i  2                2
       E      вҲҘf вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ T (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ вүҘ     вҲ’ 2dH max вҲҘVh вҲҘ exp(вҲ’cвҖІ (d вҲ’ r)) . (251)
   x1 ,x2 ,y                                            40        h

                                           2
In particular, if 2dH maxh вҲҘVh вҲҘ exp(вҲ’cвҖІ (d вҲ’ r)) вүӨ 40
                                                    1
                                                       , then:
                                        h
                                                                               2
                                                                                 i  1
                                  E      вҲҘf вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ T (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ вүҘ     .                           (252)
                              x1 ,x2 ,y                                            40
                                                                                                                  2
Rearranging the terms, we get that the above inequality happens if dH max
 1        вҖІ                                   вҖІ
                                                                                        вҲҡh вҲҘVh вҲҘ вүӨ
80 exp(вҲ’c   (d вҲ’ r)). Changing the constant c   and rescaling everything by a factor of  d (according
to Lemma 31) finishes the proof.


The
вҲҡ following lemma justifies our rescaling the target function and input distributions by a factor of
 d.
Lemma 31. Define f вҲ— as in Equation (8) and f вҲ—вҲ— as in Equation (221). For each attention layer T ,
there is an attention layer T вҖІ for which
                                          h                                       i
                                                                                2
                                  EвҲҡ       вҲҘT (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ f вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ             (253)
                           x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 ( dSdвҲ’1 )
                                yвҲјN (0,I)
                                                       h                                              i
                                                                                                  2
                         =             E                   вҲҘT вҖІ (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ f вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ               (254)
                              x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )
                                          1
                                 yвҲјN (0, d  I)



Proof. Let
                                                                H
                                                                X
                                                                      Vh XП•h KhвҠӨ X, y

                                       T (X, y) :=                                                                (255)
                                                                h=1

Then construct the following attention layer:
                                                           H
                                                           X         вҲҡ
                                  T вҖІ (X, y) :=                 (Vh / d)XП•вҖІh KhвҠӨ X, y

                                                                                                                  (256)
                                                           h=1


                                                                      46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                      вҲҡ     вҲҡ
where П•вҖІh (A, Y ) := П•h (A/ d, y/ d). ForвҲҡinstance,                                    вҠӨ
                                                                вҲҡ if П•hвҖІ(A, y) = sm(A Qh y), then
  вҖІ                      вҠӨ
П•h (A, y) = sm(A (Qh /d)y). Clearly,      вҲҡ        T (X/вҲҡ d, y/
                                                              вҲҡ d) = T (X, y). Likewise, by construc-
tion, f вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , . . . xN , y) = f вҲ— (x1 / d, . . . xN / d, y/ d). Thus,
                                h                                             i
                                                                          2
                   E                вҲҘT (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ f вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ
           x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 (SdвҲ’1 )
                       1
              yвҲјN (0, d  I)
                                               вҲҡ       вҲҡ     вҲҡ            вҲҡ       вҲҡ     вҲҡ   2

       =            EвҲҡ                   T x1 / d, x2 / d, y/ d вҲ’ f вҲ— x1 / d, x2 / d, y/ d
           x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 ( dSdвҲ’1 )
                yвҲјN (0,I)
                                         h                                          i
                                                                                  2
           =            EвҲҡ                вҲҘT вҖІ (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ f вҲ—вҲ— (x1 , x2 , y)вҲҘ
               x1 ,x2 вҲјD2 ( dSdвҲ’1 )
                    yвҲјN (0,I)


E     P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 6 AND AN A DDITIONAL C ONSTRUCTION

In Section 6, we present a construction (Theorem 5) that uses concatenated positional encodings
to facilitate the majority voting strategy. This construction has the strange property that it breaks
the permutation invariance of standard attention layers in order to approximate a function that is
permutation invariant. It also increases the dimension of the transformer. This begs the question of
whether these properties are necessary to allow low-rank attention to represent the target. Below,
we presenting an alternative construction that does not have these properties. Instead, it modifies the
attention mechanism by concatenating the outputs of the heads together rather than summing them.
It then passes the concatenated outputs to an MLP layer that computes the mode.
Theorem 32 (Majority Voting Approximation Upper Bound). There exist universal constants
                                                                               3
c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 > 0 such that for all d > c1 , Пө вҲҲ 0, 21 , and H вүҘ c2 В· dПө2 , there exist vectors


q1 , . . . , qH and a 4-layer feedforward network g : RdH вҶ’ Rd of width c3 d2 H such that
                                                                       пЈ№пЈ¶ 2
                                                    X sm(X вҠӨ q1 q1вҠӨ y)
                                                      пЈ«пЈ®

                             f (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g пЈӯпЈ°       ..
                                                                       пЈ»пЈё вүӨ Пө + exp(вҲ’c4 d) .      (257)
                                                 пЈ¬пЈҜ                    пЈәпЈ·
               E                                           .
    x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )                                            вҠӨ       вҠӨ
                                                          X sm(X         qH qH y)       2


This construction shows that using a constant-depth MLP to combine the heads can overcome the
weakness of low rank attention. The full proof can be found in Appendix E.3. The idea behind
the construction of the MLP g(В·) is to perform an inner product between the outputs of the heads,
allowing us to compare which one of the outputs x1 or x2 received more votes. The inner products
can be approximated by a ReLU network, as long as the input vectors are not too close to each other,
which happens with exponentially large probability. This is the cause of the extra exponentially
small term in the loss.


E.1    T WO - LAYER TRANSFORMERS WITH MASKED SELF ATTENTION

In Theorem 5, we use the following definition of a multi-layer transformer with self-attention for
our majority voting construction. Self-attention simply means that the source and target points are
the same, in contrast to the cross-attention used in the rest of this paper. We modify the attention
mechanism by adding a self-excluding mask so that each input point cannot attend to itself (see
below, where we form XМғi by deleting the ith column of X). Following standard practice, we also
use a skip connection. We do not need a MLP or normalization layer, though our construction can
easily be extended to include them.


                                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 33. A rank-r self-masked transformer layer with H heads is a function T : RdГ—N вҶ’
RdГ—N parameterized by rank-k attention heads {(Mh , Vh )}Hh=1 and defined as follows:
                                    "                                        #
                             XМғi := x1      В·В·В·     xiвҲ’1   xi+1   В·В·В·   xN                    (258)

                                            H
                                            X                вҠӨ
                         Ti (X) := xi +           Vh XМғi sm XМғi Mh xi                         (259)
                                            h=1
                                                                                              (260)

Here, Ti denotes the ith output (or ith column of the output) [T1 (X) В· В· В·      TN (X)].
A 2-layer, rank-r transformer with concatenated positional encodings is a function T : RdГ—N вҶ’
RdГ—N parameterized by a positional encoding matrix E = Rde Г—N and two (d + de )-dimensional
self-masked transformer layers, T (1) and T (2) , and an output-layer matrix A вҲҲ RdГ—(d+de ) and
defined as follows:

                                              (2)          X
                             T (X) = A В· TN T (1)                  .                      (261)
                                                           E

Note that in the above definition, we consider the N th output point of the transformer to be the
output of the model as a whole.

E.2   L EMMAS

To prove Theorems 5 and 32 we will need several lemmas.
The first shows that for a fixed set of inputs, drawing a rank-1 head randomly will have the same
output as the target f with probability slightly larger than 21 . This lemma justifies our majority
voting strategy.
Lemma 34. Fix x1 , x2 , y вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 with | вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүҘ a for some a > 0. Then for d > c1 we
have that:
                                                                       1       a
              Pr         arg max вҹЁxi , qвҹ© В· вҹЁy, qвҹ© = arg max вҹЁxi , yвҹ© вүҘ + c2 В· вҲҡ         (262)
           qвҲјU (SdвҲ’1 )        i                           i            2         d
for some universal constants c1 , c2 > 0.


Proof. In the proof, all probabilities are for q вҲј U(SdвҲ’1 ), thus we omit this notation. Denote
w := x1 вҲ’ x2 , and assume w.l.o.g that вҹЁw, yвҹ© > 0, the other direction is similar. We can write:

                          Pr arg max вҹЁxi , qвҹ© В· вҹЁy, qвҹ© = arg max вҹЁxi , yвҹ©
                                     i                            i
                        =Pr (sgn(вҹЁw, yвҹ©) = sgn(вҹЁw, qвҹ© В· вҹЁy, qвҹ©))
                        =Pr (вҹЁw, qвҹ© В· вҹЁy, qвҹ© > 0) .

Since the above probability
                            is rotation invariant w.r.t q, we can assume w.l.o.g that w = e1 . Hence
                   aМғ
we can write y =      , where yМ„ вҲҲ RdвҲ’1 and aМғ = вҹЁw, yвҹ©. Thus, the above probability is equal to:
                   yМ„

             Pr (q1 (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ©) > 0)                                                    (263)
             1                                      1
            = Pr (q1 (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ©) > 0|q1 > 0) + Pr (q1 (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ©) > 0|q1 < 0)     (264)
             2                                      2
             1                                   1
            = Pr (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© > 0|q1 > 0) + Pr (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© < 0|q1 < 0)               (265)
             2                                   2
            =Pr (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© > 0|q1 > 0)                                                  (266)


                                                    48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last equality is by the symmetry of the distribution of q. Note that if вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© > 0 which
happens w.p 12 , then the term inside the above probability is positive. Hence, we can write:

               Pr (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© > 0|q1 > 0)
               1 1
              = + В· Pr (aМғq1 + вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© > 0|q1 > 0, вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© < 0)
               2 2
               1 1                    2aМғ                         aМғ
              вүҘ + В· Pr aМғq1 вүҘ вҲҡ |q1 > 0 В· Pr | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© | вүӨ вҲҡ | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© < 0                      (267)
               2 2                      d                           d
We will now lower bound each probability separately. First, note that if we sample u вҲј N 0, d1 I ,

      u1
then вҲҘuвҲҘ has the same distribution as q1 . By the concentration of the norm of Gaussian random vari-
ables (see Vershynin (2018) Section 3.1), there is a constant c1 > 0 such that  w.p > 1 вҲ’
                                                                                          exp(вҲ’c1 d)
                                                              1                       3

we have вҲҘuвҲҘ вҲҲ [0.9, 1.1]. There is also a constant c2 вҲҲ 0, 2 such that Pr u1 > d > c2 . This
                                                                                     вҲҡ

bounds the first probability term in Equation (267). For the second term, note that вҲҘyМ„вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘyвҲҘ = 1.
By the same reasoning as above we can write:

                          aМғ                                    a
      Pr | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© | вүӨ вҲҡ | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© < 0 вүҘ Pr | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© | вүӨ вҲҡ | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© < 0                    (268)
                            d                                    d

                          u2        a                                                  a В· 0.9
    =PruвҲјN (0, 1 I )           вүӨвҲҡ         вүҘ (1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c1 d)) В· Pru2 вҲјN (0, 1 ) |u2 | вүӨ вҲҡ         (269)
                 d       вҲҘuвҲҘ         d                                     d
                                                                                           d

The above probability is bounded by erf aВ·0.9   вҲҡ
                                                  d
                                                      вүҘ aВ·0.9
                                                         вҲҡ , where this inequality is since erf(z) > z
                                                           d
          1
for z вҲҲ 0, 2 . In total, we can bound this probability by

                                       a                                       a В· 0.9
                   Pr | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© | вүӨ вҲҡ | вҹЁqМ„, yМ„вҹ© < 0 вүҘ (1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c1 d)) В· вҲҡ .                   (270)
                                        d                                          d
We take d > cМғ so that exp(вҲ’c1 d) вүӨ 21 , Combining the two bounds, and changing the universal
constant finishes the proof.

The following lemma shows that a random draw of inputs will satisfy a certain condition which
allows the use of the previous lemma.
Lemma 35. Let Пө > 0, then:
                                                                                     вҲҡ
              Prx1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 ) (| вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүӨ Пө) вүӨ (1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c1 d)) В· 2Пө d ,         (271)
where c1 > 0 is some universal constant.

Proof. By the symmetry      of the distribution, we can assume w.l.o.g that y = e1 . Also, note that for
                                                                            u1       v1
u, v вҲј N 0, d1 I , we can view the distribution of (x1 )1 and (x2 )1 as вҲҘuвҲҘ

                                                                                and вҲҘvвҲҘ . Combining the
above, we get that:

                                                                           u1     v1
    Prx1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 ) (| вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүӨ Пө) = Pru,vвҲјN (0, 1 I )        вҲ’        вүӨПө .      (272)
                                                                  d       вҲҘuвҲҘ вҲҘvвҲҘ
By the concentration of the norm of normal random vectors (see Vershynin (2018) section 3.1) we
have w.p > 1вҲ’exp(вҲ’c   1 d) that вҲҘuвҲҘ , вҲҘvвҲҘ вүӨ 1.1 for some universal constant c1 > 0. Also z := u1 вҲ’
v1 вҲј N 0, d2 . Hence, the above probability can be upper bounded by PrzвҲјN (0, 2 ) (|z| < 1.1Пө) вүӨ

     вҲҡ                                                                           d

erf Пө d . Note that erf(x) вүӨ 2x for every x > 0, hence the above probability can be bounded by
                     вҲҡ
(1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c1 d)) В· 2Пө d

The following lemma shows a construction of the majority function over H input vectors. This
construction uses an approximation of the inner product of two inputs using a ReLU network.


                                                  49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 36. Let v1 , . . . vH вҲҲ {x+ , xвҲ’ } вҠӮ Rd , where вҹЁxвҲ’ , x+ вҹ© вүӨ 0.1. Let v вҲ— be the mode of
v1 , . . . vH . Then there exists a 4-layer feedforward network g : Rd(H+2) вҶ’ Rd with width c В· d2 H
for some universal constant c > 0 and weights bounded by 2 such that
                                           v1             v1
                                       пЈ«пЈ® пЈ№пЈ¶          пЈ«пЈ® пЈ№пЈ¶
                                       пЈ¬пЈҜ .. пЈәпЈ·       пЈ¬пЈҜ .. пЈәпЈ·
                                       пЈ¬пЈҜ . пЈәпЈ·        пЈ¬пЈҜ . пЈәпЈ·        вҲ—
                                     gпЈ¬пЈ¬пЈҜvH пЈәпЈ· = g пЈ¬пЈҜvH пЈәпЈ· = v
                                         пЈҜ пЈәпЈ·         пЈ¬пЈҜ пЈәпЈ·                                    (273)
                                       пЈӯпЈ°x пЈ»пЈё         пЈӯпЈ°x пЈ»пЈё
                                             +             вҲ’
                                          xвҲ’              x+

                                                                                вҠӨ
Proof. Let x be the finally d coordinate of v := [v1 В· В· В· vH xвҲ’ x+ ] вҲҲ Rd(H+2) , and let
xМӮ be the second to last block of d coordinates of v. Note that either x = x+ and xМӮ = xвҲ’ or the
other way around. We construct a network that calculates the inner product between x and each vi
                    1
up to accuracy of 10H  . By Lemma 37 there is such a 2-layer network M1 : Rd(H+2) вҶ’ R2d+1 with
         2
width cd H for some universal constant c > 0 and weights bounded by 2. We add 2d more neurons
which act as two identity matrices to keep the last 2d coordinates of v. We add an additional output
layer to M1 which sums all the outputs of the inner products.
We now construct another network M2 : R2d+1 вҶ’ Rd which either output x if the sums of the inner
product is larger than 0.2 В· H or xМӮ otherwise. Note that by our assumption that вҹЁx1 , x2 вҹ© вүӨ 0.1, M2
                                                                                                   1
will output the mode of the vi вҖҷs. This is because M1 calculates inner products up to an error of 10H ,
                                                                                                    1
summing over H such inner products returns the exact sum plus an error which is bounded by 10 .
Composing M1 and M2 provides an MLP which will output either x+ or xвҲ’ depending on who is
the mode.
                                                                                                1
The total width of the network is c3 d2 H, since we calculate inner products up to an error of 10H ,
and the depth of the network is 4.

We next show that shallow neural networks can approximately compute the inner product of two
vectors.
                                                                  2                    2
Lemma 37. Let Пө > 0. There exists a 2-layer network N : SdвҲ’1 вҶ’ R with width cdПө and
weights bounded by 2 that calculates вҹЁx, xвҖІ вҹ© up to accuracy Пө. Here c > 0 is some universal
constant.

Proof. By Lemma 6 in Daniely (2017) there exists a depth 2 network Nsquare : R вҶ’ R that calculates
x2                             Пө                   32d
 2 in [вҲ’2, 2] with an error of d , width of at most Пө and weights bounded by 2. For each coordinate
i вҲҲ [d] we compose the linear function (x)i + (xвҖІ )i with Nsquare to get a depth 2 network that
                   вҖІ   2
calculates ((x)i +(x
                  2
                     )i )
                          up to an error of dПө . Summing over these networks for every index i and
                                                                                             2
subtracting 1 results in a network that calculates вҹЁx, xвҖІ вҹ© with an error of Пө and width 32d
                                                                                           Пө

Finally, the following lemma shows that if we draw random rank-1 attention heads, taking their
вҖңmajority voteвҖқ will approximate the target function f . The rate of approximation depends on the
number of sampled heads and on the input dimension.
                              H
Lemma 38. Let M : Rd             вҶ’ Rd be the majority function over H vectors in Rd . Namely, given
a set of H vectors, M outputs the vector which appears the most times in the set, and breaks ties
randomly. For a vector qh define gh (x1 , x2 ; y) = arg maxxi вҹЁxi , qh вҹ©В·вҹЁy, qh вҹ©. There exist universal
                                            3
constants c1 , c2 > 0 such that if H > c1Пөd2 , then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ exp(c2 d) over samples
q1 , . . . , qH вҲј Unif(SdвҲ’1 ), we have that:
                                    h                                            2i
                         E            f (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ M {g(x1 , x2 ; y}H h=1      вүӨПө,            (274)
               x1 ,x2 ;yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

Here, f is defined as in Equation (3).

Proof. Fix x1 , x2 , y with | вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүҘ Пө. Denote by Ah the event over sampling q вҲј
Unif(SdвҲ’1 ) which output 1 if arg maxi вҹЁxi , qh вҹ© В· вҹЁy, qh вҹ© = arg maxi вҹЁxi , yвҹ© and 0 otherwise.


                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By Lemma 34 we have that Pr(Ah = 1) вүҘ 12 + c2 В· вҲҡПөd if d > c1 for some universal constants
c1 , c2 > 0. Note that the events {Ah }H
                                       h=1 are independent when x1 , x2 , y are fixed. Hence, we can
use HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality:
                                  H                            !
                              1 X           1          Пө
               Prq1 ,...,qH          Ah вҲ’      + c2 В· вҲҡ     вүҘ t вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’2Ht2 ) .              (275)
                              H             2           d
                                 h=1
                                       2
By setting t = c2Пө
               вҲҡ and H вүҘ d2 we get that:
                 d       Пө
                                                    H
                                                                    !
                                                1 X      1
                                      Pr            Ah <                вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’2c2 d) .                                     (276)
                                                H        2
                                                   h=1

                                                                                  1
                                                                                    PH         1
From now on, we condition on the event that q1 , . . . , qH are sampled such that H  h=1 Ah вүҘ 2 ,
which happens w.p > 1 вҲ’ 2 exp(вҲ’2c2 d). Note that if this event happens, then the majority of the
functions gh (x1 , x2 , y) will output the same vector as f (x1 , x2 , y).
                                                                              вҲҡ
By Lemma 35 we have that Pr (| вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүӨ Пө) вүӨ (1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c3 d)) В· 2Пө d for some universal
constant c3 > 0. Hence, we get that:
                        h                                           2i
           E              f (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ M {g(x1 , x2 , y}H
                                                             h=1                            (277)
  x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )
                                           h                                                        2                             i
= Pr (| вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүӨ Пө) В· E               f (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ M {g(x1 , x2 , y}H
                                                                                  h=1                        | вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүӨ Пө +
                                                                                                                               (278)
                                       h                                                           2                              i
+Pr (| вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүҘ Пө) В· E                f (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ M {g(x1 , x2 , y}H
                                                                                  h=1                       | вҹЁx1 вҲ’ x2 , yвҹ© | вүҘ Пө
                                                                                                                              (279)
                                вҲҡ                                               вҲҡ
вүӨ(1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c3 d)) В· 2Пө d В· 1 + 1 В· exp(вҲ’2c2 d) вүӨ c В· Пө d                                                                      (280)
where we choose d large enough such that 1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’c3 d) вүҘ 21 and exp(вҲ’2c2 d) вүӨ 12 and changed
the constant c > 0 accordingly. Replacing Пө with ПөМғ = cвҲҡПө d finishes the proof.



E.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 32
                                                                                                             3
Proof. By Lemma 38 there exist q1 , . . . , qHвҲ’2 вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 such that if H вүҘ c2Пөd2 :
                                h                                            2i
                     E              f (x1 , x2 , y) вҲ’ M {g(x1 , x2 , y}H
                                                                       h=1       вүӨПө                                           (281)
                  x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

where gh (x1 , x2 , y) = arg maxxi вҹЁxi , qh вҹ© В· вҹЁx, qh вҹ© and M is the majority function. We can take
H вҲ’ 2 instead of H by increasing the constant by a factor of at most 2.
We define Mi = Оұqi qiвҠӨ for i = 1, . . . , H вҲ’ 2 for some Оұ > 0 which will be defined later.
We also pick some q0 вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 and define MHвҲ’1 = Оұq0 q0вҠӨ and MH = вҲ’Оұq0 q0вҠӨ . Note that if
q0 вҲҲ
   / {x1 , x2 , y} and arg maxxi xi MHвҲ’1 y = x1 then arg maxxi xi MH y = x2 and vice versa.
Let g : RdH вҶ’ Rd be the 4-layer network  with width cпЈ№1 d2 H as defined in
                                                                        пЈ® Lemma 36 which    simu-
                                     X sm(X вҠӨ M1 y)                        arg maxxi (xвҠӨ
                                   пЈ®                                                            пЈ№
                                                                                       i M 1 y)
lates the majority. Denote by v := пЈ°       ..                                       ..
                                                     пЈ» and by vmax = пЈ°                          пЈ».
                                   пЈҜ                 пЈә                  пЈҜ                       пЈә
                                            .                                        .
                                                  X sm(X вҠӨ MH y)                                        arg maxxi (xвҠӨ
                                                                                                                    i MH y)
We have that:
                            h                                   i
                                                            2
             E                  вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (v)вҲҘ
    x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )
                            h                                           i                               h                             i
                                                                    2                                                             2
вүӨ            E                  вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (vmax )вҲҘ               +            E                  вҲҘg (vmax ) вҲ’ g (v)вҲҘ           .
    x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )                                                       x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )
                                                                                                                              (282)


                                                                51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We will bound each term separately. For the first term in Equation (282) we can write:
                               h                                 i
                                                               2
                     E           вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (vmax )вҲҘ                                                  (283)
                x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )
                 h                                                i
                                               2
              = E вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (vmax )вҲҘ | вҹЁx1 , x2 вҹ© вүӨ 0.1 В· Pr(вҹЁx1 , x2 вҹ© вүӨ 0.1)+                      (284)
                 h                                                i
                                               2
              + E вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (vmax )вҲҘ | вҹЁx1 , x2 вҹ© > 0.1 В· Pr(вҹЁx1 , x2 вҹ© > 0.1) .                     (285)
By Lemma 38 the first term is bounded by Пө.                        For the second term, note that
                                2
вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (vmax )вҲҘ вүӨ 2 since the output of each function is a unit vector. Also, by stan-
dard concentration of random vectors on the unit sphere (see Section 3 in Vershynin (2018)), there
is ha universal constant c3 > 0 such   i that Pr(вҹЁx1 , x2 вҹ© > 0.1) вүӨ exp(вҲ’c3 d). Hence, we can bound
                                     2
E    вҲҘf (x 1 , x 2 ; y) вҲ’ g (vmax )вҲҘ    вүӨ Пө + 2 exp(вҲ’c3 d).

We will bound the second term in Equation (282) uniformly for any x1 , x2 , y. Note that g is a
ReLU neural network with 4 layers, width c1 d2 H and weights bounded by 2. Hence, we can bound
its Lipschitz constant by the
                             multiplication of the Frobenius norm of its weights matrices, which is
bounded by 4(c1 d2 H))4 . Hence:
                       2                               2
   вҲҘg (vmax ) вҲ’ g (v)вҲҘ вүӨ 4(c1 d2 H))4 В· вҲҘvmax вҲ’ vвҲҘ

                                                                                             (286)
                                                                                       2
                              вүӨ 4(c1 d2 H))4 H В· max X sm(X вҠӨ Mh y) вҲ’ arg max(xвҠӨ

                                                                               i Mh y)   .
                                                           h                                xi
                                                                                                                (287)
There is Оҙ > 0 which depends on Пө such that for the set:
                         AОҙ := {x1 , x2 , y вҲҲ SdвҲ’1 : вҲҖqh , (x1 вҲ’ x2 )вҠӨ qh qhвҠӨ y > Оҙ} ,                          (288)
                                                                                                    вҠӨ
we have that Pr((x1 , x2 , y) вҲҲ
                              / AОҙ ) вүӨ                      Пө
                                                   (4(c1 d2 H))4 )2H .   Note that X sm(ОұX              qh qhвҠӨ y) вҲ’вҶ’
                                                                                                                  ОұвҶ’вҲһ
arg maxxi (xвҠӨ     вҠӨ
            i qh qh y) uniformly on AОҙ for every qh .               Hence, we can find Оұ > 0 large enough
such that:
                                                                             2
                                                                                             Пө
          sup          max X sm(X вҠӨ Mh y) вҲ’ arg max(xвҠӨ
                                                     i Mh y)                     вүӨ                         .    (289)
      x1 ,x2 ,yвҲҲSdвҲ’1     h                                     xi                    (4(c1 d2 H))4 ) H
                                  h                     i
                                                      2
This bounds Ex1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 ) вҲҘg (vmax ) вҲ’ g (v)вҲҘ вүӨ Пө.

Combining both bounds from Equation (282) we have:
                                h                           i
                                                          2
                       E         вҲҘf (x1 , x2 ; y) вҲ’ g (v)вҲҘ вүӨ Пө + exp(вҲ’c3 d)                                     (290)
                       x1 ,x2 ,yвҲјUnif(SdвҲ’1 )

where we changed the constant c3 accordingly.

E.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

Proof. We first define the construction. Let q1 , . . . , qH be such that the conclusions
                                                                                          of Lemma
                                                                                                    38
                                                                                   1 вҲ’1 0
are satisfied (e.g. by drawing them uniformly from the unit sphere). Let E =                  . We call
                                                                                   0 0 0
the second dimension of the positional encodings the вҖңscratch spaceвҖқ. We construct the heads of the
first layer as follows: For each h, let
                                  qh                                0
                                " #                                " #
                        (1)             вҠӨ                    (1)
                                                           Vh = 0 0вҠӨ 1 0

                     Mh = Оұ 0 qh 0 0                                                             (291)
                                   0                                1
The number of heads in the first layer is H. The weights of the second layer of the transformer are
defined as:

                                    0                                     ei
                                   " #                                   " #
                          (2)                                     (2)
                                    1 0вҠӨ                                  0 eвҠӨ

                         Mi =                  0   1            Vi = ОІ         i        0   0                   (292)
                                    0                                     0

                                                           52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for the standard basis vectors ei , and ОІ > 0 will be defined later. The number of heads in the second
layer is d. Finally, we set the output layer as A = a1 [Id 0 0].
We will now prove the correctness of the construction. For the following argument, assume that
each head uses hardmax instead of softmax. Note that by a similar argument used in the proof of
Theorem 32, this incurs an extra loss of Пө for any Пө > 0 at the cost of increasing Оұ.
When the first layer is applied to the input y, the scratch space of the output of each head is 1 if
xвҠӨ      вҠӨ       вҠӨ     вҠӨ
  1 qh qh y > x2 qh qh y and вҲ’1 otherwise. Let sy , sx1 , sx1 be the sum of the scratch spaces of all
the H heads (we will in fact only use sy ). Note that sy > 0 if the majority of the heads outputted
x1 and sy < 0 if the majority outputted for x2 . All other dimensions of the output are 0. Thus, after
the skip connection, the output of the first layer is
                                    x1 x2 y              x1 x2 y
                                  "               #! "                 #
                            (1)
                          T         1 вҲ’1 0            = 1     вҲ’1 0 .                            (293)
                                    0      0 0           sx1 sx2 sy
For the second layer of attention, note that each head attends to x1 if sy > 0 and to x2 otherwise.
By summing d such heads, where each head corresponds to some standard basis vector, the output
of the second layer is
                                       x1 x2 y                y          x1
                                     "              #!! " #            " #
                         (2)    (1)
                       T      T         1 вҲ’1 0            = 0 +ОІ 1                            (294)
                                        0     0 0             sy         sx1
if sy > 0, and the same with x2 if sy > 0. Finally, the after the output layer, the output of the entire
transformer is ОІ1 y + x1 if sy > 0, or ОІ1 y + x2 otherwise.

By taking first take ОІ > 1Пө , we get that the output of the transformer is the same as the output of the
majority of the rank-1 attention heads of the first layer of the transformer, up to an extra error of Пө.
By Lemma 38 and taking the number of heads H to be large enough, we get that the majority of the
heads in the first layer approximates the target up to an error of Пө. Scaling Пө appropriately finishes
the proof.


                                                  53
