Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS C ANNOT R ELIABLY
P ROTECT A RTISTS F ROM G ENERATIVE AI
 Robert Hönig            Javier Rando             Nicholas Carlini              Florian Tramèr
 ETH Zurich               ETH Zurich               Google DeepMind               ETH Zurich



                                              A BSTRACT

         Artists are increasingly concerned about advancements in image generation models
         that can closely replicate their unique artistic styles. In response, several protection
         tools against style mimicry have been developed that incorporate small adversarial
         perturbations into artworks published online. In this work, we evaluate the effec-
         tiveness of popular protections—with millions of downloads—and show they only
         provide a false sense of security. We find that low-effort and “off-the-shelf” tech-
         niques, such as image upscaling, are sufficient to create robust mimicry methods
         that significantly degrade existing protections. Through a user study, we demon-
         strate that all existing protections can be easily bypassed, leaving artists vulnerable
         to style mimicry. We caution that tools based on adversarial perturbations cannot
         reliably protect artists from the misuse of generative AI, and urge the development
         of alternative protective solutions.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Style mimicry is a popular application of text-to-image generative models. Given a few images from
an artist, a model can be finetuned to generate new images in that style (e.g., a spaceship in the style
of Van Gogh). But style mimicry has the potential to cause significant harm if misused. In particular,
many contemporary artists worry that others could now produce images that copy their unique art
style, and potentially steal away customers (Heikkilä, 2022). As a response, several protections have
been developed to protect artists from style mimicry (Shan et al., 2023a; Van Le et al., 2023; Liang
et al., 2023). These protections add adversarial perturbations to images that artists publish online, in
order to inhibit the finetuning process. These protections have received significant attention from the
media—with features in the New York Times (Hill, 2023), CNN (Thorbecke, 2023) and Scientific
American (Leffer, 2023)—and have been downloaded over 1M times (Shan et al., 2023a).
Yet, it is unclear to what extent these tools actually protect artists against style mimicry, especially if
someone actively attempts to circumvent them (Radiya-Dixit et al., 2021). In this work, we show
that state-of-the-art style protection tools—Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a), Mist (Liang et al., 2023) and
Anti-DreamBooth (Van Le et al., 2023)—are ineffective when faced with simple robust mimicry
methods. The robust mimicry methods we consider range from low-effort strategies—such as using
a different finetuning script, or adding Gaussian noise to the images before training—to multi-step
strategies that combine off-the-shelf tools. We validate our results with a user study, which reveals
that robust mimicry methods can produce results indistinguishable in quality from those obtained
from unprotected artworks (see Figure 1 for an illustrative example).
We show that existing protection tools merely provide a false sense of security. Our robust mimicry
methods do not require the development of new tools or fine-tuneing methods, but only carefully
combining standard image processing techniques which already existed at the time that these protec-
tion tools were first introduced!. Therefore, we believe that even low-skilled forgers could have easily
circumvented these tools since their inception.
Although we evaluate specific protection tools that exist today, the limitations of style mimicry
protections are inherent. Artists are necessarily at a disadvantage since they have to act first (i.e.,
once someone downloads protected art, the protection can no longer be changed). To be effective,
    Code and images released at https://github.com/ethz-spylab/robust-style-mimicry.
    Correspondence at {robert.hoenig, javier.rando, florian.tramer}@inf.ethz.ch


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 Generated art mimic

                 Original artwork by @nulevoy


                                                 An astronaut riding a horse


                                                Public art can be used
                                                to mimic artists…


                 … so artists only release       Protections prevent
                 protected art                   naive mimicry

                      Protected artwork


                                                 Protections fail against
                                                 robust mimicry (ours)


Figure 1: Artists are vulnerable to style mimicry from generative models finetuned on their art.
Existing protection tools add small perturbations to published artwork to prevent mimicry (Shan et al.,
2023a; Liang et al., 2023; Van Le et al., 2023). However, these protections fail against robust mimicry
methods, giving a false sense of security and leaving artists vulnerable. Artwork by @nulevoy (Stas
Voloshin), reproduced with permission.


protective tools face the challenging task of creating perturbations that transfer to any finetuning
technique, even ones chosen adaptively in the future.1 To illustrate this point, updated versions of
Mist (Liang et al., 2023) and Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a) were released after the conclusion of our
study, and yet we found these updated versions to be similarly ineffective against our methods. We
thus caution that adversarial machine learning techniques will not be able to reliably protect artists
from generative style mimicry, and urge the development of alternative measures to protect artists.
We disclosed our results to the affected protection tools prior to publication. In response, Glaze
released a new version 2.1 that protects against the specific attacks we describe here.


2   BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-image diffusion models. A latent diffusion model consists of an image autoencoder and a
denoiser. The autoencoder is trained to encode and decode images using a lower-dimensional latent
space. The denoiser predicts the noise added to latent representations of images in a diffusion process
(Ho et al., 2020). Latent diffusion models can generate images from text prompts by conditioning
the denoiser on image captions (Rombach et al., 2022). Popular text-to-image diffusion models
include open models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) and Kandinsky (Razzhigaev
et al., 2023), as well as closed models like Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and DALL-E (Ramesh et al.;
Betker et al., 2023).
Style mimicry. Style mimicry uses generative models to create images matching a target artistic
style. Existing techniques vary in complexity and quality (see Appendix G). An effective method
is to finetune a diffusion model using a few images in the targeted style. Some artists worry
that style mimicry can be misused to reproduce their work without permission and steal away
customers (Heikkilä, 2022).
   1
     A similar conclusion was drawn by Radiya-Dixit et al. (Radiya-Dixit et al., 2021), who argued that
adversarial perturbations cannot protect users from facial recognition systems.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Style mimicry protections. Several tools have been proposed to prevent unauthorized style
mimicry. These tools allow artists to include small perturbations—optimized to disrupt style mimicry
techniques—in their images before publishing. The most popular protections are Glaze (Shan et al.,
2023a) and Mist (Liang et al., 2023). Additionally, Anti-DreamBooth (Van Le et al., 2023) was
introduced to prevent fake personalized images, but we also find it effective for style mimicry. Both
Glaze and Mist target the encoder in latent diffusion models; they perturb images to obtain latent
representations that decode to images in a different style (see Appendix H.1). On the other hand,
Anti-DreamBooth targets the denoiser and maximizes the prediction error on the latent representations
of the perturbed images (see Appendix H.2).
Circumventing style mimicry protections. Although not initially designed for this purpose,
adversarial purification (Yoon et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2020; Samangouei et al., 2018) could be used
to remove the perturbations introduced by style mimicry protections. DiffPure (Nie et al., 2022) is
the strongest purification method and Mist claims robustness against it. Another existing method for
purification is upscaling (Mustafa et al., 2019). Similarly, Mist and Glaze claim robustness against
upscaling. Section 4.1 highlights flaws in previous evaluations and how a careful application of both
methods can effectively remove mimicry protections.
IMPRESS (Cao et al., 2024) was the first purification method designed specifically to circumvent
style mimicry protections. While IMPRESS claims to circumvent Glaze, the authors of Glaze critique
the method’s evaluation (Shan et al., 2023b), namely the reliance on automated metrics instead of a
user study, as well as the method’s poor performance on contemporary artists. Our work addresses
these limitations by considering simpler and stronger purification methods, and evaluating them
rigorously with a user study and across a variety of historical and contemporary artists. Our results
show that the main idea of IMPRESS is sound, and that very similar robust mimicry methods are
effective.
Unlearnable examples . Style mimicry protections build upon a line of work that aims to make data
“unlearnable” by machine learning models (Shan et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021; Cherepanova et al.,
2021; Salman et al., 2023). These methods typically rely on some form of adversarial optimization,
inspired by adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013). Ultimately, these techniques always fall
short of an adaptive adversary that enjoys a second-mover advantage: once unlearnable examples
have been collected, their protection can no longer be changed, and the adversary can thereafter select
a learning method tailored towards breaking the protections (Radiya-Dixit et al., 2021; Fowl et al.,
2021; Tao et al., 2021).


3    T HREAT M ODEL


The goal of style mimicry is to produce images, of some chosen content, that mimic the style of a
targeted artist. Since artistic style is challenging to formalize or quantify, we refrain from doing so
and define a mimicry attempt as successful if it generates new images that a human observer would
qualify as possessing the artist’s style.
We assume two parties, the artist who places art online (e.g., in their portfolio), and a forger who
performs style mimicry using these images. The challenge for the forger is that the artist first protects
their original art collection before releasing it online, using a state-of-the-art protection tool such as
Glaze, Mist or Anti-DreamBooth. We make the conservative assumption that all the artist’s images
available online are protected. If a mimicry method succeeds in this setting, we call it robust.
In this work, we consider style forgers who finetune a text-to-image model on an artist’s images—the
most successful style mimicry method to date (Shan et al., 2023a). Specifically, the forger finetunes
a pretrained model f on protected images X from the artist to obtain a finetuned model fˆ. The
forger has full control over the protected images and finetuning process, and can arbitrarily modify to
maximize the mimicry success. Our robust mimicry methods combine a number of “off-the-shelf”
manipulations that allow even low-skilled parties to bypass existing style mimicry protections. In
fact, our most successful methods require only black-box access to a finetuning API for the model f ,
and could thus also be applied to proprietary text-to-image models that expose such an interface.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Original artwork (b) Finetuning used in (Shan et al., 2023a).             (c) Our finetuning

Figure 2: The protections of Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a) do not generalize across fine-tuning setups.
We mimic the style of the contemporary artist @nulevoy from Glaze-protected images by using: (b)
the finetuning script provided by Glaze authors; and (c) an alternative off-the-shelf finetuning script
from HuggingFace. In both cases, we perform “naive” style mimicry with no effort to bypass Glaze’s
protections. Glaze protections are successful using finetuning from the original paper, but significantly
degrade with our script. Our finetuning is also better for unprotected images (see Appendix D).


4     ROBUST S TYLE M IMICRY

We say that a style mimicry method is robust if it can emulate an artist’s style using only protected
artwork. While methods for robust mimicry have already been proposed, we note a number of
limitations in these methods and their evaluation in Section 4.1. We then propose our own methods
(Section 4.3) and evaluation (Section 5) which address these limitations.

4.1   L IMITATIONS OF P RIOR ROBUST M IMICRY M ETHODS AND OF T HEIR E VALUATIONS

(1) Some mimicry protections do not generalize across finetuning setups. Most forgers are
inherently ill-intentioned since they ignore artists’ genuine requests not to use their art for genera-
tive AI (Heikkilä, 2022). A successful protection must thus resist circumvention attempts from a
reasonably resourced forger who may try out a variety of tools. Yet, in preliminary experiments,
we found that Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a) performed significantly worse than claimed in the original
evaluation, even before actively attempting to circumvent it. After discussion with the authors of
Glaze, we found small differences between our off-the-shelf finetuning script, and the one used in
Glaze’s original evaluation (which the authors shared with us).2 These minor differences in finetuning
are sufficient to significantly degrade Glaze’s protections (see Figure 2 for qualitative examples).
Since our off-the-shelf finetuning script was not designed to bypass style mimicry protections, these
results already hint at the superficial and brittle protections that existing tools provide: artists have
no control over the finetuning script or hyperparameters a forger would use, so protections must be
robust across these choices.

(2) Existing robust mimicry attempts are sub-optimal. Prior evaluations of protections fail to
reflect the capabilities of moderately resourceful forgers, who employ state-of-the-art methods (even
off-the-shelf ones). For instance, Mist (Liang et al., 2023) evaluates against DiffPure purifications
using an outdated and low-resolution purification model. Using DiffPure with a more recent model,
we observe significant improvements. Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a) is not evaluated against any version
of DiffPure, but claims protection against Compressed Upscaling, which first compresses an image
with JPEG and then upscales it with a dedicated model. Yet, we will show that by simply swapping
the JPEG compression with Gaussian noising, we create Noisy Upscaling as a variant that is highly
successful at removing mimicry protections (see Figure 26 for a comparison between both methods).

(3) Existing evaluations are non-comprehensive. Comparing the robustness of prior protections
is challenging because the original evaluations use different sets of artists, prompts, and finetuning
setups. Moreover, some evaluations rely on automated metrics (e.g., CLIP similarity) which are
unreliable for measuring style mimicry (Shan et al., 2023a;b). Due to the brittleness of protection
methods and the subjectivity of mimicry assessments, we believe a unified evaluation is needed.
    2
      The two finetuning scripts mainly differ in the choice of library, model, and hyperparameters. We use a
standard HuggingFace script and Stable Diffusion 2.1 (the model evaluated in the Glaze paper).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2   A U NIFIED AND R IGOROUS E VALUATION OF ROBUST M IMICRY M ETHODS

To address the limitations presented in Section 4.1, we introduce a unified evaluation protocol to
reliably assess how existing protections perform against a variety of simple and natural robust mimicry
methods. Our solutions to each of the numbered limitations above are: (1) The attacker uses a popular
“off-the-shelf” finetuning script for the strongest open-source model that all protections claim to be
effective for: Stable Diffusion 2.1. This finetuning script is chosen independently of any of these
protections, and we treat it as a black-box. (2) We design four robust mimicry methods, described
in Section 4.3. We prioritize simplicity and ease of use for low-expertise attackers by combining
a variety of off-the-shelf tools. (3) We design and conduct a user study to evaluate each mimicry
protection against each robust mimicry method on a common set of artists and prompts.

4.3   O UR ROBUST M IMICRY M ETHODS

We now describe four robust mimicry methods that we designed to assess the robustness of protections.
We primarily prioritize simple methods that only require preprocessing protected images. These
methods present a higher risk because they are more accessible, do not require technical expertise,
and can be used in black-box scenarios (e.g. if finetuning is provided as an API service). For
completeness, we further propose one white-box method, inspired by IMPRESS (Cao et al., 2024).
We note that the methods we propose have been considered (at least in part) in prior work that found
them to be ineffective against style mimicry protections (Shan et al., 2023a; Liang et al., 2023; Shan
et al., 2023b). Yet, as we noted in Section 4.1, these evaluations suffered from a number of limitations.
We thus re-evaluate these methods (or slight variants thereof) in a comprehensive manner and show
that they are significantly more successful than previously claimed.

Black-box preprocessing methods.
✦ Gaussian noising. As a simple preprocessing step, we add small amounts of Gaussian noise to
protected images. This approach can be used ahead of any black-box diffusion model.
✦ DiffPure. We use image-to-image models to remove perturbations introduced by the protections,
also called DiffPure (Nie et al., 2022) (see Appendix I.1). This method is black-box, but requires two
different models: the purifier, and the one used for style mimicry. We use Stable Diffusion XL as our
purifier.
✦ Noisy Upscaling. We introduce a simple and effective variant of the two-stage upscaling purification
considered in Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a). Their method first performs JPEG compression (to minimize
perturbations) and then uses the Stable Diffusion Upscaler (Rombach et al., 2022) (to mitigate
degradations in quality). Yet, we find that upscaling actually magnifies JPEG compression artifacts
instead of removing them. To design a better purification method, we observe that the Upscaler is
trained on images augmented with Gaussian noise. Therefore, we purify a protected image by first
applying Gaussian noise and then applying the Upscaler. This Noisy Upscaling method introduces
no perceptible artifacts and significantly reduces protections (see Figure 26 for an example and
Appendix I.2 for details).

White-box methods.
✦ IMPRESS++. For completeness, we design a white-box method to assess whether more complex
methods can further enhance the robustness of style mimicry. Our method builds on IMPRESS (Cao
et al., 2024) but adopts a different loss function and further applies negative prompting (Miyake et al.,
2023) and denoising to improve the robustness of the sampling procedure (see Appendix I.3 and
Figure 27 for details).


5     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Protection tools. We evaluate three protection tools—Mist, Glaze and Anti-DreamBooth—against
four robust mimicry methods—Gaussian noising, DiffPure, Noisy Upscaling and IMPRESS++—and
a baseline mimicry method. We refer to a combination of a protection tool and a mimicry method as


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      b) Naive style mimicry   c) Naive style mimicry   d) Robust style mimicry
              a) Original artwork
                                                      from unprotected art       from protected art        from protected art


                       @greg-f (Gregory Fromenteau)


                                      Edvard Munch



Figure 3: Examples of robust style mimicry for two different artists: @greg-f (contemporary) and
Edvard Munch (historical). Cherry-picked examples with strong protections and successful robust
mimicry. We apply Noisy Upscaling for prompts: “a shoe” and “an astronaut riding a horse”.


a scenario. We thus analyze fifteen possible scenarios. Appendix J describes our experimental setup
for style mimicry and protections in detail.

Artists. We evaluate each style mimicry scenario on images from 10 different artists, which we
selected to maximize style diversity. To address limitations in prior evaluations (Shan et al., 2023b),
we use five historical artists as well as five contemporary artists who are unlikely to be highly
represented in the generative model’s training set (two of these were also used in Glaze’s evaluation).3
All details about artist selection are included in Appendix J.

Implementation. Our mimicry methods finetune Stable Diffusion 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022),
the best open-source model available at the time when the protections we study were introduced.
We use an off-the-shelf finetuning script from HuggingFace (see Appendix J.1 for details). We
first validate that our style mimicry pipeline is successful on unprotected art using a user study,
detailed in Appendix K.1. For protections, we use the original codebases to reproduce Mist and
Anti-Dreambooth. Since Glaze does not have a public codebase (and the authors were unable to share
one), we use the released Windows application binary (version 1.1.1) as a black-box. We set each
scheme’s hyperparameters to maximize protections. See Appendix J.2 for details on the configuration
for each protection.
We perform robust mimicry by finetuning on 18 different images per artist. We then generate images
for 10 different prompts. These prompts are designed to cover diverse motifs that the base model,
Stable Diffusion 2.1, can successfully generate. See Appendix K for details about prompt design.

User study. To measure the success of each style mimicry scenario, we rely only on human
evaluations since previous work found automated metrics (e.g., using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) to
be unreliable (Shan et al., 2023a;b). Moreover, style protections not only prevent style transfer, but
also reduce the overall quality of the generated images (see Figure 3 for examples). We thus design a
user study to evaluate image quality and style transfer as independent attributes of the generations.4
We acknowledge that an ideal study would recruit artists, as was done in (Shan et al., 2023a).
Unfortunately, most artists we reached out to were reluctant to participate in a study that shows
limitations of existing protective tools (a small number of artists did acknowledge the success of our
   3
      Contemporary Artists were selected from Artstation. We keep them anonymous throughout this work—and
refrain from showcasing their art—except for artists who gave us explicit permission to share their identity and
art. We will share all images used in our experiments upon request with researchers.
    4
      The user study was approved by our institution’s IRB.


                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


methods when targeting their art styles, but they did not form a large enough cohort to get statistically
significant results).
Our user study therefore relies on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) annotators, with stringent
measures taken to ensure the quality and reliability of responses (see Appendix K). Our study asks
participants to compare image pairs, where one image is generated by a robust mimicry method, and
the other from a baseline state-of-the-art mimicry method that uses unprotected art of the artist. A
perfectly robust mimicry method would generate images of quality and style indistinguishable from
those generated directly from unprotected art. We perform two separate studies: one assessing image
quality (e.g., which image looks “better”) and another evaluating stylistic transfer (i.e., which image
captures the artist’s original style better, disregarding potential quality artifacts). Our results show
that these two metrics obtain very similar results across all scenarios. Appendix K describes our user
study and interface in detail.
As noted by the authors of Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a), the users of platforms like MTurk might not
have high artistic expertise. However, we believe that the judgment of non-artists is also relevant
as they may ultimately represent potential consumers of digital art. Thus, if lay people consider
mimicry attempts to be successful, mimicked art could hurt an artist’s business. Also, to mitigate
potential issues with the quality of annotations (Kennedy et al., 2020), we put in place several control
mechanisms to filter out low-quality annotations to the best of our abilities (details in Appendix K).
Furthermore, as noted above, a small number of artists did acknowledge that they found our methods
effective.

Evaluation metric. We define the success rate of a robust mimicry method as the percentage of
annotators (5 per comparison) who prefer outputs from the robust mimicry method over those from
a baseline method finetuned on unprotected art (when judging either style match or overall image
quality). Formally, we define the success rate for an artist in a specific scenario as:
                                   10      5
                            1     X       X
    success rate =                               1[robust mimicry preferred over unprotected mimicry]
                          10 · 5 prompt annotator
                                                                                                     (1)
A perfectly robust mimicry method would thus obtain a success rate of 50%, indicating that its
outputs are indistinguishable in quality and style from those from the baseline, unprotected method.
In contrast, a very successful protection would result in success rates of around 0% for robust mimicry
methods, indicating that mimicry on top of protected images always yields worse outputs.

6     R ESULTS

In Figure 4, we report the distribution of success rates per artist (N=10) for each scenario. We
averaged the quality and stylistic transfer success rates to simplify the analysis (detailed results can be
found in Appendix C). Since the forger can try multiple mimicry methods for each prompt, and then
decide which one worked best, we also evaluate a “best-of-4” method that picks the most successful
mimicry method for each generation (according to human evaluators). Best-of-4 also also illustrates
how different methods succeed for different styles and artists, as it outperforms all independent
methods.

6.1   M AIN F INDINGS : A LL P ROTECTIONS ARE E ASILY C IRCUMVENTED

We find that all existing protective tools create a false sense of security and leave artists vulnerable
to style mimicry. Indeed, our best robust mimicry methods produce images that are, on average,
indistinguishable from baseline mimicry attempts using unprotected art. Since many of our simple
mimicry methods only use tools that were available before the protections were released, style forgers
may have already circumvented these protections since their inception.
Noisy upscaling is the most effective method for robust mimicry, with a median success rate above
40% for each protection tool (recall that 50% success indicates that the robust method is indistin-
guishable from a mimicry using unprotected images). This method only requires preprocessing
images and black-box access to the model via a finetuning API. Other simple preprocessing methods


                                                    7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         median artist
                                most protected artist                    most vulnerable artist

                       Anti-DreamBooth                               Glaze                                   Mist
Naive mimicry
     Gaussian
       noising
 IMPRESS++

       DiffPure
       Noisy
    Upscaling
     Best-of-4
                  0%     25%    50%         75%         0%      25%      50%        75%           0%   25%      50%   75%
                         Success rate                            Success rate                          Success rate

 Figure 4: Success rate per artist (N=10) on all mimicry scenarios. Box plots represent success rates
 for most protected, quartiles, median and least protected artists, respectively. Success rates around
 50% indicate that robust mimicry outputs are indistinguishable in style and quality from mimicry
 outputs based on unprotected images. Best-of-4 selects the most successful method for each prompt.


 like Gaussian noising or DiffPure also significantly reduce the effectiveness of protections. The
 more complex white-box method IMPRESS++ does not provide significant advantages. Sample
 generations for each method are in Appendix B.
 A style forger does not have to use a single robust mimicry method, but can test all of them and
 select the most successful. This “best-of-4” approach always beats the baseline mimicry method over
 unprotected images (which attempts a single method and not four) for all protections.
 Appendix A shows images at each step of the robust mimicry process (i.e., protections, preprocessing,
 and sampling). Appendix B shows example generations for each protection and mimicry method.
 Appendix C has detailed success rates broken down per artist, for both image style and quality.

 6.2     A NALYSIS

 We now discuss key insights and lessons learned from these results.

 Glaze protections break down without any circumvention attempt. Results for Glaze without
 robust mimicry (see “Naive mimicry” row in Figure 4) show that the tool’s protections are often
 ineffective. Without any robustness intervention, 30% of the images generated with our off-the-shelf
 finetuning are rated as better than the baseline results using only unprotected images. This contrasts
 with Glaze’s original evaluation, which claimed a success rate of at most 10% for robust mimicry.5
 This difference is likely due to the protection’s brittleness to slight changes in the finetuning setup
 (as we illustrated in Section 4.1). With our best robust mimicry method (noisy upscaling) the
 median success rate across artists rises further to 40%, and our best-of-4 strategy yields results
 indistinguishable from the baseline for a majority of artists.

 Robust mimicry works for contemporary and historical artists alike. Shan et al. (2023b) note
 that one of IMPRESS’ main limitations is that “purification has a limited effect when tested on artists
 that are not well-known historical artists already embedded in original training data”. Yet, we find
 that our best-performing robust mimicry method—Noisy Upscaling—has a similar success rate for
 historical artists (42.2%) and contemporary artists with little representation in the model’s training
 set (43.5%).
     5
       The original evaluation in Glaze directly asks annotators whether a mimicry is successful or not, rather than
 a binary comparison between a robust mimicry and a baseline mimicry as in our setup. Shan et al. (2023a) report
 that mimicry fails in 4% of cases for unprotected images, and succeeds in 6% of cases for protected images.
 This bounds the success rate for robust mimicry—according to our definition in Equation (1)—by at most 10%.


                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     Naive style mimicry   Naive style mimicry   Robust style mimicry
                Original artwork
                                                    from unprotected art   from protected art     from protected art


                                   Alphonse Mucha


                                     Edvard Munch


Figure 5: Randomly selected comparisons where all 5 annotators preferred mimicry from unprotected
art over robust mimicry. Both use Noisy Upscaling for robust mimicry.


Protections are highly non-uniform across artists. As we observe from Figure 4, the effectiveness
of protections varies significantly across artists: the least vulnerable artist (left-most whisker) enjoys
much stronger mimicry protections than the median artist or the most vulnerable artist (right-most
whisker). We find that robust mimicry is the least successful for artists where the baseline mimicry
from unprotected images gives poor results to begin with (cf. results for artist A1 in Appendix C and
Appendix K.1). Yet, since existing tools do not provide artists with a way to check how vulnerable
they are, these tools still provide a false sense of security for all artists. This highlights an inherent
asymmetry between protection tools and mimicry methods: protections should hold for all artists
alike, while a mimicry method might successfully target only specific artists.

Robust mimicry failures still remove protection artifacts. We manually checked the cases
where all annotators ranked mimicry from unprotected art as better than robust mimicry with Noisy
Upscaling. Figure 5 shows two examples. We find that in many instances, the model fails to mimic
the style accurately even from unprotected art. In these cases, robust mimicry is still able to generate
clear images that are similar to unprotected mimicry, but neither matches the original style well.


7    D ISCUSSION AND B ROADER I MPACT

Adversarial perturbations do not protect artists from style mimicry. Our work is not intended as
an exhaustive search for the best robust mimicry method, but as a demonstration of the brittleness of
existing protections. Because these protections have received significant attention, artists may believe
they are effective. But our experiments show they are not. As we have learned from adversarial ML,
whoever acts first (in this case, the artist) is at a fundamental disadvantage (Radiya-Dixit et al., 2021).
We urge the community to acknowledge these limitations and think critically when performing future
evaluations.

Just like adversarial examples defenses, mimicry protections should be evaluated adaptively.
In adversarial settings, where one group wants to prevent another group from achieving some goal, it
is necessary to consider “adaptive attacks” that are specifically designed to evade the defense (Carlini
& Wagner, 2017). Unfortunately, as repeatedly seen in the literature on machine learning robustness,
even after adaptive attacks were introduced, many evaluations remained flawed and defenses were
broken by (stronger) adaptive attacks (Tramer et al., 2020). We show it is the same with mimicry
protections: simple adaptive attacks significantly reduce their effectiveness. Surprisingly, most
protections we study claim robustness against input transformations (Liang et al., 2023; Shan et al.,
2023a), but minor modifications were sufficient to circumvent them.
We hope that the literature on style mimicry prevention will learn from the failings of the adversarial
example literature: performing reliable, future-proof evaluations is much harder than proposing a


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


new defense. Especially when techniques are widely publicized in the popular press, we believe it is
necessary to provide users with exceptionally high degrees of confidence in their efficacy.

Protections are broken from day one, and cannot improve over time. Our most successful
robust style mimicry methods rely solely on techniques that existed before the protections were
introduced. Also, protections applied to online images cannot easily be changed (i.e., even if the
image is perturbed again and re-uploaded, the older version may still be available in an internet
archive) (Radiya-Dixit et al., 2021). It is thus challenging for a broken protection method to be
fixed retroactively. Of course, an artist can apply the new tool to their images going forward, but
pre-existing images with weaker protections (or none at all) will significantly boost an attacker’s
success (Shan et al., 2023a).
Nevertheless, the Glaze and Mist protection tools recently received significant updates (after we
had concluded our user study). Yet, we find that the newest 2.0 versions do not protect against
our robust mimicry attempts either (see Appendix E and F). A subsequent version of Glaze (2.1)
explicitly targets the methods we studied, but this does not change the fact that all previously protected
art remains vulnerable, and that future attacks could again attempt to adaptively evade the newest
protections. The same holds true for attempts to design similar protections for other data modalities,
such as video (Passananti et al., 2024) or audio (Gokul & Dubnov, 2024).

Ethics and broader impact. The goal of our research is to help artists better decide how to protect
their artwork and business. We do not focus on creating the best mimicry method, but rather on
highlighting limitations in popular perturbation tools—especially since using these tools incurs a cost,
as they degrade the quality of published art. We disclose our results to the affected protection tools
prior to publication, so that they can determine the best course of action for their users.
Further, insecure protection tools may mislead artists to believe it is safe to release their work,
enabling forgery and putting them in a worse situation than if they had been more cautious in the
absence of any protection. With this work, we hope to raise awareness among artists about the
fundamental limitations of protection tools.
With respect to our paper, all the art featured in this paper comes either from historical artists, or
from contemporary artists who explicitly permitted us to display their work. We hope our results will
inform improved non-technical protections for artists in the era of generative AI.

Limitations and future work. A larger study with more than 10 artists and more annotators may
help us better understand the difference in vulnerability across artists. The protections we study are
not designed in awareness of our robust mimicry methods. However, we do not believe this limits
the extent to which our general claims hold: artists will always be at a disadvantage if attackers can
design adaptive methods to circumvent the protections.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all the MTurkers that engaged with our tasks, especially those that provided valuable
feedback during our preliminary studies to improve the survey. We thank the contemporary artists
Stas Voloshin (@nulevoy) and Gregory Fromenteau (@greg-f) for allowing us to display their artwork
in this paper. JR is supported by an ETH AI Center doctoral fellowship.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
  Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. Improving image generation with better captions. Computer
  Science. https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf, 2(3):8, 2023.
Bochuan Cao, Changjiang Li, Ting Wang, Jinyuan Jia, Bo Li, and Jinghui Chen. Impress: Evaluating
  the resilience of imperceptible perturbations against unauthorized data usage in diffusion-based
  generative ai. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten
  detection methods. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security,
  pp. 3–14, 2017.
Valeriia Cherepanova, Micah Goldblum, Harrison Foley, Shiyuan Duan, John Dickerson, Gavin
  Taylor, and Tom Goldstein. Lowkey: Leveraging adversarial attacks to protect social media users
  from facial recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07922, 2021.
Samantha Cole. Largest dataset powering ai images removed after discovery of child sex-
  ual abuse material. 404 Media, Dec 2023.      URL https://www.404media.co/
  laion-datasets-removed-stanford-csam-child-abuse/.
Liam Fowl, Micah Goldblum, Ping-yeh Chiang, Jonas Geiping, Wojciech Czaja, and Tom Goldstein.
  Adversarial examples make strong poisons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:30339–30351, 2021.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Vignesh Gokul and Shlomo Dubnov. Poscuda: Position based convolution for unlearnable audio
  datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02135, 2024.
Melissa Heikkilä. This artist is dominating ai-generated art. and he’s not happy about it. MIT
 Technology Review, 125(6):9–10, 2022.
Melissa Heikkilä. This artist is dominating ai-generated art. and he’s not happy about it. Technology
 Review, 2022.
Kashmir Hill. This tool could protect artists from ai-generated art that steals their style. The New
 York Times, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Hanxun Huang, Xingjun Ma, Sarah Monazam Erfani, James Bailey, and Yisen Wang. Unlearnable
  examples: Making personal data unexploitable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04898, 2021.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565–26577,
  2022.
Ryan Kennedy, Scott Clifford, Tyler Burleigh, Philip D. Waggoner, Ryan Jewell, and Nicholas J. G.
  Winter. The shape of and solutions to the mturk quality crisis. Political Science Research and
  Methods, 8(4):614–629, 2020. doi: 10.1017/psrm.2020.6.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Lauren Leffer. Your personal information is probably being used to train generative ai models. 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023.
Chumeng Liang and Xiaoyu Wu. Mist: Towards improved adversarial examples for diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12683, 2023.
Chumeng Liang, Xiaoyu Wu, Yang Hua, Jiaru Zhang, Yiming Xue, Tao Song, Zhengui Xue, Ruhui
  Ma, and Haibing Guan. Adversarial example does good: Preventing painting imitation from
  diffusion models via adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  20763–20786. PMLR, 2023.
Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver++: Fast
  solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models. 2022.
Daiki Miyake, Akihiro Iohara, Yu Saito, and Toshiyuki Tanaka. Negative-prompt inversion: Fast
  image inversion for editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16807,
  2023.
muerrilla. Negative prompt weight: Extension for stable diffusion web ui. https://github.
 com/muerrilla/stable-diffusion-NPW, 2023.
Aamir Mustafa, Salman H Khan, Munawar Hayat, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao. Image super-
  resolution as a defense against adversarial attacks. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 29:
 1711–1724, 2019.
Weili Nie, Brandon Guo, Yujia Huang, Chaowei Xiao, Arash Vahdat, and Animashree Anandkumar.
 Diffusion models for adversarial purification. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 16805–16827. PMLR, 2022.
Josephine Passananti, Stanley Wu, Shawn Shan, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y Zhao. Disrupting style
  mimicry attacks on video imagery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06865, 2024.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Evani Radiya-Dixit, Sanghyun Hong, Nicholas Carlini, and Florian Tramèr. Data poisoning won’t
  save you from facial recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14851, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents.
Anton Razzhigaev, Arseniy Shakhmatov, Anastasia Maltseva, Vladimir Arkhipkin, Igor Pavlov,
  Ilya Ryabov, Angelina Kuts, Alexander Panchenko, Andrey Kuznetsov, and Denis Dimitrov.
  Kandinsky: an improved text-to-image synthesis with image prior and latent diffusion. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.03502, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hadi Salman, Alaa Khaddaj, Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Raising the
  cost of malicious ai-powered image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06588, 2023.
Pouya Samangouei, Maya Kabkab, and Rama Chellappa. Defense-gan: Protecting classifiers against
  adversarial attacks using generative models, 2018.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Shawn Shan, Emily Wenger, Jiayun Zhang, Huiying Li, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y Zhao. Fawkes:
  Protecting privacy against unauthorized deep learning models. In 29th USENIX security symposium
  (USENIX Security 20), pp. 1589–1604, 2020.
Shawn Shan, Jenna Cryan, Emily Wenger, Haitao Zheng, Rana Hanocka, and Ben Y Zhao. Glaze:
  Protecting artists from style mimicry by {Text-to-Image} models. In 32nd USENIX Security
  Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 2187–2204, 2023a.
Shawn Shan, Stanley Wu, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y Zhao. A response to glaze purification via
  impress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07731, 2023b.
Changhao Shi, Chester Holtz, and Gal Mishne. Online adversarial purification based on self-
  supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Stability AI. Stable diffusion 2.1. https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/
  stable-diffusion-2-1, 2022. Accessed: 2024-04-03.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Wei Ren Tan, Chee Seng Chan, Hernan Aguirre, and Kiyoshi Tanaka. Improved artgan for conditional
 synthesis of natural image and artwork. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 28(1):394–409,
 2019. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2018.2866698. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2018.
 2866698.
Lue Tao, Lei Feng, Jinfeng Yi, Sheng-Jun Huang, and Songcan Chen. Better safe than sorry: Pre-
  venting delusive adversaries with adversarial training. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:16209–16225, 2021.
Catherine Thorbecke. It gave us some way to fight back: New tools aim to protect art and images
  from ai’s grasp. 2023.
Florian Tramer, Nicholas Carlini, Wieland Brendel, and Aleksander Madry. On adaptive attacks to
  adversarial example defenses. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1633–1645,
  2020.
Thanh Van Le, Hao Phung, Thuan Hoang Nguyen, Quan Dao, Ngoc N Tran, and Anh Tran. Anti-
  dreambooth: Protecting users from personalized text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2116–2127, 2023.
Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul,
  Mishig Davaadorj, Dhruv Nair, Sayak Paul, Steven Liu, William Berman, Yiyi Xu, and Thomas
  Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models, apr 2024. URL https://github.com/
  huggingface/diffusers. If you use this software, please cite it using the metadata from
  this file.
Stephen J Wright. Numerical optimization, 2006.
Jongmin Yoon, Sung Ju Hwang, and Juho Lee. Adversarial purification with score-based generative
  models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12062–12072. PMLR, 2021.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Boyang Zheng, Chumeng Liang, Xiaoyu Wu, and Yan Liu. Understanding and improving adversarial
  attacks on latent diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04687, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        D ETAILED A RT E XAMPLES
This section illustrates how images look like at every stage of our work. We include (1) original
artwork from a contemporary artist (@nulevoy)6 as a reference in Figure 6, (2) the original artwork
after applying each of the available protections in Figure 7, (3) one image after applying the cross
product of all protections and preprocessing methods in Figure 8, (4) baseline generations from a
model trained on unprotected art in Figure 9, and (5) robust mimicry generations for each scenario in
Figure 10.


                        Figure 6: 4 samples from the original artwork from @nulevoy.


                                                        (a) Glaze


                                                         (b) Mist


                                                  (c) Anti-DreamBooth

                      Figure 7: Artwork in Figure 6 after applying different protections.



    6
        The artist gave explicit permission for the use of their art


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   No preprocessing        Gaussian Noising              DiffPure            Noisy Upscaling


                                            (a) Glaze


                                              (b) Mist


                                      (c) Anti-DreamBooth

Figure 8: Artwork used for finetuning after applying preprocessing methods to protected images
in Figure 7. Each row represents a protection, and each column a preprocessing method. Noisy
Upscaling is the most successful preprocessing technique at removing the perturbations introduced
by protections.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Generations in the style of @nulevoy after finetuning on unprotected images. Each
generation is sampled with a different seed.


  Naive mimicry     Gaussian Noising         DiffPure          IMPRESS++         Noisy Upscaling


                                             (a) Glaze


                                              (b) Mist


                                        (c) Anti-DreamBooth

Figure 10: Generations in the style of @nulevoy using robust mimicry methods for the prompt “an
astronaut riding a horse”. Each row represents which protection was applied to the finetuning data.
Each column represents the robust mimicry method used. The first column indicates naive mimicry
was applied (i.e. we trained directly on the protected images). Figure 9 includes sample generations
from a model trained on artwork without protections.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    ROBUST M IMICRY G ENERATIONS


           Unprotected            Anti-DB           Unprotected        Glaze   Unprotected   Mist


        Albrecht Durer, “a shoe with a plant growing inside”


        Edvard Munch, “a shoe”


        Edvard Munch, “a piano”


        A5 , “a feathered car”


        Anna O.-Lebedeva, “a piano”


        A5 , “a village in a thunderstorm”


        Edward Hopper, “a golden apple”


        Edward Hopper, “a feathered car”


Figure 11: Style mimicry for all protections using naive mimicry—no robust method is used and
we finetune directly on protected images. We randomly chose artists and prompts. Each image pair
shows the protected generation and generation from unprotected art.


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Anti-DB +                               Glaze +                          Mist +
      Unprotected           Gaussian noising   Unprotected        Gaussian noising   Unprotected   Gaussian noising


   Albrecht Durer, “a shoe with a plant growing inside”


   Edvard Munch, “a shoe”


   Edvard Munch, “a piano”


   A5 , “a feathered car”


   Anna O.-Lebedeva, “a piano”


   A5 , “a village in a thunderstorm”


   Edward Hopper, “a golden apple”


   Edward Hopper, “a feathered car”


Figure 12: Style mimicry for all protections using Gaussian Noising. We randomly chose artists and
prompts. Each image pair shows the protected robust generation and generation from unprotected art.


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Anti-DB +                             Glaze +                   Mist +
      Unprotected            DiffPure          Unprotected        DiffPure   Unprotected   DiffPure


   Albrecht Durer, “a shoe with a plant growing inside”


   Edvard Munch, “a shoe”


   Edvard Munch, “a piano”


   A5 , “a feathered car”


   Anna O.-Lebedeva, “a piano”


   A5 , “a village in a thunderstorm”


   Edward Hopper, “a golden apple”


   Edward Hopper, “a feathered car”


Figure 13: Style mimicry for all protections using DiffPure. We randomly chose artists and prompts.
Each image pair shows the protected robust generation and generation from unprotected art.


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Anti-DB +                              Glaze +                   Mist +
      Unprotected           IMPRESS++          Unprotected        IMPRESS++   Unprotected   IMPRESS++


   Albrecht Durer, “a shoe with a plant growing inside”


   Edvard Munch, “a shoe”


   Edvard Munch, “a piano”


   A5 , “a feathered car”


   Anna O.-Lebedeva, “a piano”


   A5 , “a village in a thunderstorm”


   Edward Hopper, “a golden apple”


   Edward Hopper, “a feathered car”


Figure 14: Style mimicry for all protections using IMPRESS++. We randomly chose artists and
prompts. Each image pair shows the protected robust generation and generation from unprotected art.


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Anti-DB +                               Glaze +                         Mist +
      Unprotected           Noisy Upscaling    Unprotected        Noisy Upscaling   Unprotected   Noisy Upscaling


   Albrecht Durer, “a shoe with a plant growing inside”


   Edvard Munch, “a shoe”


   Edvard Munch, “a piano”


   A5 , “a feathered car”


   Anna O.-Lebedeva, “a piano”


   A5 , “a village in a thunderstorm”


   Edward Hopper, “a golden apple”


   Edward Hopper, “a feathered car”


Figure 15: Style mimicry for all protections using Noisy Upscaling. We randomly chose artists and
prompts. Each image pair shows the protected robust generation and generation from unprotected art.


                                                             22
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 C      D ETAILED R ESULTS
 C.1     M IMICRY Q UALITY V ERSUS S TYLE

 This section includes the detailed results from our user study. As mentioned in Section 5, we ask
 users to assess quality and stylistic fit separately in our study. Figure 16 and 17 show the results for
 each of these evaluations separately (the results in the main body represent the average of the two).
 Finally, Table 1 includes numerical results for each scenario.

                                                        median artist
                               most protected artist                        most vulnerable artist

                       Anti-DreamBooth                                  Glaze                                   Mist
Naive mimicry
     Gaussian
       noising
 IMPRESS++

       DiffPure
        Noisy
     Upscaling
     Best-of-4
                  0%     25%    50%         75%        0%       25%         50%        75%           0%   25%      50%   75%
                         Success rate                           Success rate                              Success rate

 Figure 16: Quality evaluation. User preference ratings of all style mimicry scenarios but only for the
 quality question: “Based on noise, artifacts, detail, prompt fit, and your impression, which image has
 higher quality?”.


                       Anti-DreamBooth                                  Glaze                                   Mist
Naive mimicry
     Gaussian
       noising
 IMPRESS++

       DiffPure
        Noisy
     Upscaling
     Best-of-4
                  0%     25%    50%         75%        0%       25%         50%        75%           0%   25%      50%   75%
                         Success rate                           Success rate                              Success rate

 Figure 17: Style evaluation. User preference ratings of all style mimicry scenarios but only for the
 quality question: “Overall, ignoring quality, which image better fits the style of the style samples?”.


                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Success rates averaged across artists for all style mimicry scenarios. Higher percentages
indicate more successful mimicry, and 50% would indicate perfect mimicry.

 Method       Naive mimicry   Gaussian noising     IMPRESS++       DiffPure   Noisy Upscaling   Best-of-4
 Protection
 Anti-DB              11.6%             20.6%              32.2%     26.6%             45.0%      56.6%
 Glaze                22.2%             29.6%              35.4%     32.0%             39.4%      56.6%
 Mist                  9.0%             21.0%              37.4%     35.8%             42.8%      62.0%
                                                 (a) Quality

 Method       Naive mimicry   Gaussian noising     IMPRESS++       DiffPure   Noisy Upscaling   Best-of-4
 Protection
 Anti-DB              21.8%             31.2%              28.6%     31.0%             44.0%      52.4%
 Glaze                30.8%             35.4%              27.8%     37.6%             41.6%      51.2%
 Mist                 19.4%             35.4%              31.6%     37.4%             44.2%      53.4%
                                                  (b) Style



C.2   R ESULTS B ROKEN D OWN PER A RTIST

We present next the results obtained for each artist in each scenario. Table 2 plots the success rate for
each method against each protection for all artists, and Table 3 includes the detailed success rates.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Success rates per artist for style and quality questions, respectively. Each line plot shows,
for a given protection and artist, the success rate with Gaussian noising ( ), naive mimicry ( ),
IMPRESS++ ( ), DiffPure ( ), Noisy Upscaling ( ), and Best-of-4 ( ) on a scale from 0% to
77%, where the bar | demarcates 50%.

  Attack                Anti-DB                   Glaze                     Mist
  Artist
  A1
  A2
  A3
  A4
  A5
  Albrecht Durer
  Alphonse Mucha
  Anna O.-Lebedeva
  Edvard Munch
  Edward Hopper
                                             (a) Quality

  Attack                 Anti-DB                  Glaze                     Mist
  Artist
  A1
  A2
  A3
  A4
  A5
  Albrecht Durer
  Alphonse Mucha
  Anna O.-Lebedeva
  Edvard Munch
  Edward Hopper
                                              (b) Style


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: User preference ratings of all style mimicry scenarios S ∈ M for each artist A ∈ A by
name. Each cell states the percentage of votes that prefer an image generated under the corresponding
scenario S and artist A ∈ A over a matching image generated under clean style mimicry. Higher
percentages indicate weaker attacks or better defenses.

              Method             Naive mimicry   Gaussian noising   IMPRESS++   DiffPure   Noisy Upscaling   Best-of-4
 Protection   Artist
 Anti-DB      A1                           4%                6%           8%       18%               26%         30%
              A2                          14%               48%          54%       32%               50%         62%
              A3                          10%                8%          18%       16%               40%         46%
              A4                          14%               22%          20%       14%               54%         70%
              A5                          16%               16%          22%       24%               54%         60%
              Albrecht Durer               2%               22%          32%       26%               42%         70%
              Alphonse Mucha              16%               22%          44%       42%               60%         66%
              Anna O.-Lebedeva            38%               40%          56%       40%               44%         76%
              Edvard Munch                 2%               14%          40%       40%               46%         56%
              Edward Hopper                0%                8%          28%       14%               34%         30%
 Glaze        A1                           8%               20%          22%       10%               12%         24%
              A2                          12%               42%          40%       28%               44%         60%
              A3                          12%               26%          18%       26%               34%         52%
              A4                          22%               20%          20%       54%               54%         60%
              A5                          18%               34%          34%       24%               40%         52%
              Albrecht Durer               2%               16%          40%       28%               26%         54%
              Alphonse Mucha              40%               44%          58%       42%               56%         66%
              Anna O.-Lebedeva            42%               46%          54%       44%               34%         70%
              Edvard Munch                40%               16%          42%       42%               38%         62%
              Edward Hopper               26%               32%          26%       22%               56%         66%
 Mist         A1                           0%                6%          20%        4%               12%         28%
              A2                          14%               50%          50%       46%               48%         76%
              A3                           0%               10%          22%       24%               60%         60%
              A4                           0%               16%          24%       36%               66%         70%
              A5                          12%               22%          40%       28%               50%         54%
              Albrecht Durer              10%               24%          28%       46%               38%         60%
              Alphonse Mucha              32%               18%          60%       56%               54%         66%
              Anna O.-Lebedeva            20%               38%          54%       50%               34%         74%
              Edvard Munch                 2%               22%          54%       44%               28%         72%
              Edward Hopper                0%                4%          22%       24%               38%         60%
                                                      (a) Quality

              Method             Naive mimicry   Gaussian noising   IMPRESS++   DiffPure   Noisy Upscaling   Best-of-4
 Protection   Artist
 Anti-DB      A1                           0%                4%           4%       10%               34%         36%
              A2                          14%               20%          40%       16%               48%         54%
              A3                          10%               14%          26%       28%               42%         46%
              A4                          36%               58%          42%       56%               54%         56%
              A5                           4%                0%          10%       32%               60%         66%
              Albrecht Durer              20%               32%          36%       28%               44%         50%
              Alphonse Mucha              56%               56%          42%       52%               48%         58%
              Anna O.-Lebedeva            32%               50%          24%       30%               28%         56%
              Edvard Munch                 6%               30%          26%       20%               46%         50%
              Edward Hopper               40%               48%          36%       38%               36%         52%
 Glaze        A1                           8%               14%           8%       14%               30%         34%
              A2                          36%               42%          26%       46%               44%         52%
              A3                          24%               24%          16%       40%               32%         50%
              A4                          56%               58%          32%       44%               58%         66%
              A5                          12%               18%          18%       30%               32%         40%
              Albrecht Durer              22%               28%          26%       26%               38%         38%
              Alphonse Mucha              48%               54%          36%       54%               52%         56%
              Anna O.-Lebedeva            26%               32%          40%       38%               44%         68%
              Edvard Munch                38%               32%          36%       40%               48%         56%
              Edward Hopper               38%               52%          40%       44%               38%         52%
 Mist         A1                           0%                6%           4%        0%               22%         18%
              A2                           6%               38%          44%       42%               64%         72%
              A3                           6%               28%          26%       36%               34%         44%
              A4                          36%               58%          46%       52%               48%         54%
              A5                           4%               14%          18%       26%               58%         56%
              Albrecht Durer              28%               32%          24%       36%               50%         60%
              Alphonse Mucha              34%               50%          34%       50%               48%         64%
              Anna O.-Lebedeva            32%               48%          44%       56%               38%         64%
              Edvard Munch                10%               38%          36%       40%               42%         64%
              Edward Hopper               38%               42%          40%       36%               38%         38%
                                                       (b) Style



                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   I NTER -A NNOTATOR AGREEMENT

                                              Inter-annotator agreement
                       Robust mimicry

                        Naive mimicry

                                     0%    20%         40%   60%   80%       100%
                         3/5 votes agree         4/5 votes agree          5/5 votes agree


Figure 18: Inter-annotator agreement for generations from robust mimicry with Noisy Upscaling and
generations from models finetuned on protected art directly (naive mimicry). We plot the percentage
of comparisons for which the preferred option was selected by 3, 4 or 5 annotators, respectively.
The graph shows a higher consensus for naive mimicry, since the differences are clearer, and more
variance for robust mimicry.


D     D IFFERENCES WITH G LAZE F INETUNING
In Section 4.1 and Figure 2, we discussed the brittleness of Glaze protections against small changes
in the finetuning script. We also found our finetuning setup to be better at baseline style mimicry
from unprotected art (see Figure 19).


(a) Original artwork            (b) Glaze finetuning                          (c) Our finetuning

Figure 19: The finetuning script shared by Glaze authors produce substantially worse mimicry even
from unprotected art. We apply both finetuning scripts directly on unprotected art from @nulevoy.
The main reason behind this difference might be that the script uses Stable Diffusion 1.5, instead of
version 2.1 as reported in their paper.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     F INDINGS ON G LAZE 2.0

After concluding our user study, Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a) released an updated version of their tool
(v2.0). According to the official release, “This new version significantly improved Glaze robustness
against the newest AI models”. Although we could not run the entire user study with the latest
protections, we reproduced some of our experiments to verify if protections were more robust under
robust mimicry. We believe this comparison is fair to Glaze since we are using newer models—such
as Stable Diffusion XL for upscaling. These models, although released before Glaze 1.1.1, may not
have been considered in the tool’s design and are now explicitly accounted for.
The official release specifically mentions “Significantly improved robustness against Stable Diffusion
1, 2, SDXL, especially for smooth surface art (e.g. anime, cartoon)”. Therefore, we decided to
test this new tool with the contemporary artist nulevoy, who draws in a cartoon style and gave us
permission to display their artwork. As with the previous version, we only have access to the publicly
available Windows application that uses unknown parameters. We protect the images using the
“highest” protection option. Our main findings are:

      1. Glaze v2.0 introduces more visible perturbations uniformly over the images. See Figure 20.
      2. Glaze v2.0 does not improve protection under robust mimicry. Noisy Upscaling still achieves
         almost perfect style mimicry. See Figure 21.
      3. Noisy Upscaling is able to to remove visible perturbations during preprocessing as before.
         See Figure 22.


                  (a) Glaze v1.1.1                                    (b) Glaze v2.0

    Figure 20: Comparison of perturbations by Glaze v1.1.1 and v2.0 on artwork from @nulevoy.


      (a) Robust style mimicry on Glaze v1.1.1            (b) Robust style mimicry on Glaze v2.0

Figure 21: Comparison of robust style mimicry (Noisy Upscaling) on artwork from @nulevoy
protected with both versions of Glaze. Images in Figure 6 serve as a reference for the artistic style.


F     F INDINGS ON M IST V 2

After responsibly disclosing our work to defense developers, authors from Mist brought to our
attention the recent release of their latest Mist v2 with improved resilience (Zheng et al., 2023). As
we did with Glaze v2.0 (see Section E), we reproduced some of our experiments with the latest


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) Original artwork                       (b) Protected images after Noisy Upscaling

Figure 22: Original artwork from @nulevoy and the resulting images after applying Noisy Upscaling
to artwork protected with Glaze v2.0. See protected images in Figure 20.


protections to verify the success of robust mimicry. Their original implementation still uses the
outdated version 1.5 of Stable Diffusion. We change to SD 2.1 to match our previous experiments7 .
Our findings, as we saw with Glaze v2.0, highlight that improved protections are still not effective
against low-effort robust mimicry. More specifically, the latest version of Mist:

        1. introduces visible perturbations over the images. See Figure 23
        2. does not improve protections against robust mimicry. See Figure 24
        3. creates protection that are easily removable with Noisy Upscaling. See Figure 25.


                       (a) Mist v1                                           (b) Mist v2

Figure 23: Comparison of perturbations introduced by Mist v1 and v2 on artwork from @nulevoy.


           (a) Robust style mimicry on Mist v1                   (b) Robust style mimicry on Mist v2

Figure 24: Comparison of robust style mimicry (Noisy Upscaling) on artwork from @nulevoy
protected with both versions of Mist. Images in Figure 6 serve as a reference for the artistic style.


   7
       Both models share the same encoder for which protections are optimized.


                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Original artwork                      (b) Protected images after Noisy Upscaling

Figure 25: Original artwork from @nulevoy and the resulting images after applying Noisy Upscaling
to artwork protected with Mist v2. See protected images in Figure 23.


G     M ETHODS FOR S TYLE M IMICRY

This section summarizes the existing methods that a style forger can use to perform style mimicry.
Our work only considers finetuning since it is reported to be the most effective (Shan et al., 2023a).

G.1    P ROMPTING

Well-known artistic styles contained in the training data (e.g. Van Gogh) can be mimicked by
prompting a text-to-image model with a description of the style or the name of the artist. For
example, a prompt can be augmented with “ painted in a cubistic style” “ painted by van Gogh” to
mimic those styles, respectively. Prompting is easy to apply and does not require changes to the
model. However, it fails to mimic styles that are not sufficiently represented in the training data of
model—often from the most vulnerable artists.

G.2    I MG 2I MG

Img2Img creates an updated version of an image with guidance from a prompt. For this, Img2Img
processes image x with t timesteps of a diffusion process to obtain the diffused image xt . Then,
Img2Img uses the model with guidance from prompt P to reverse the diffusion process into the
output image variation xP . Analogous to prompting, a prompt suffices to transfer a well-known style,
but Img2Img also fails for unknown styles.

G.3    T EXTUAL I NVERSION

Textual inversion (Gal et al., 2022) optimizes the embedding of some n new tokens t = [t1 , . . . , tn ]
that are appended to image prompts P so that generations closely mimic the style of a given set
of images. The tokens are optimized via gradient descent on the model training loss so that P + t
generates images that mimic the target style. Textual inversion requires white-box access to the target
model, but enables the mimicry of unknown styles.

G.4    F INETUNING

Finetuning updates the weights of a pretrained text-to-image model to introduce a new functionality.
In this case, finetuning allows a forger to “teach” the generative model an unknown style using
a set of images in the target style and their captions (e.g. an astronaut riding a horse). First, all
captions are augmented with some special word, like the name of the artist, to create prompts
Px = Cx + “by w∗ ”. Then, the model weights are updated to minimize the reconstruction loss of the
given images following the augmented prompts. At inference time, the forger can append “by w∗ ” to
any prompt to obtain art in the target style
The authors of Glaze identify this finetuning setup as the strongest style mimicry method (Shan et al.,
2023a). We validate the success of our style mimicry with a user study detailed in Appendix K.1


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H        E XISTING S TYLE M IMICRY P ROTECTIONS

Naming convention. Depending on the context, style mimicry protections may be viewed either as
attacks or as the targets of attacks. In an artistic setting, artists see style mimicry as an attack and
utilize methods like Glaze as a defense. Conversely, in the context of adversarial robustness, Glaze can
be seen as an attack against style mimicry methods through adversarial perturbations. The research
community has not reached a consensus on terminology: Glaze’s authors consider style mimicry an
attack and label Glaze as a defense, while the authors of Mist and Anti-DreamBooth describe their
approaches as attacks. In our work, we distance ourselves from the attack/defense terminology and
instead refer to these mechanisms as protections, and to the party performing mimicry as the “style
forger”.
Existing protections can either target the encoder or the decoder of text-to-image models. We classify
them accordingly.

H.1       E NCODER P ROTECTIONS

Encoder protections include adversarial perturbations in the images X so that the encoder Eϕ of the
model maps images to latent representations that, when reconstructed, recover images in a different
style. Concretely, an encoder protection first defines a target latent representation tx ∈ Latent for
each image x ∈ X that is different to its own style. For instance, the target latent representation for
Edvard Munch could be Vincent Van Gogh. Then, protection P optimizes the objective
                                             min dLat (Eϕ (x + δx ) , tx )
                                              δx
                                                                                                         (2)
                                        subject to dImg (x + δx , x) ≤ p.

Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a) is an instance of an encoder protection. Glaze first selects an adversarial
target style Sadv that style mimicry should learn instead of the style S to be protected. Then, Glaze
uses Img2Img style transfer to create a variation xSadv in style Sadv of each image x ∈ X. The latent
representation of variation xSadv is used as the target latent representation tx for each image x ∈ X.
Glaze selects the target style Sadv from a pre-defined set of 50 styles Sadv . First, Glaze computes the
distance between the mean CLIP embedding of the images X and the prompt PS ′ corresponding to
each style S ′ ∈ Sadv . Then, Glaze randomly samples target style Sadv from the 50 to the 75 percentile
of target styles Sadv sorted by distance.
Glaze implements Objective (2) with the penalty method (Wright, 2006) as
                                                   2
                        min ∥Eϕ (x + δx ) , tx ∥2 + α · max(LPIPS(x + δx , x) − p, 0)                    (3)
                         δx


where LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) is a choice for metric dImg that aims to measure user-perceived
image distortion. Glaze then optimizes Objective (3) with the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer.
Mistϕ (Liang et al., 2023) is a different encoder protection from the Mist project8 . Mistϕ opti-
mizes perturbations with PGD to minimize the squared L2 -induced distance between the latent
representation of the artists’ images and some unrelated target image.
In their original work, Mist is only evaluated against DreamBooth, Style Transfer, and Textual
Inversion, but not against finetuning. Also, the original Mist work refers to Mistϕ as Mist operating
in textural mode.

H.2       D ENOISER P ROTECTIONS

Denoiser protections use the prediction error of the denoiser ϵθ as a proxy of the quality of style
mimicry, making it a feasible target for adversarial optimization. Current Denoiser protections,
such as Mist (Liang et al., 2023) and Anti-DreamBooth (Van Le et al., 2023) assume that poorly
reconstructed images will fail to mimic style
    8
        Mist project also contains a denoiser attack that we fail to reproduce as a robust protection.


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anti-DreamBooth (Van Le et al., 2023) uses the prediction error of the denoiser ϵθadv as a proxy for
the mimicry quality, where denoiser ϵθadv corresponds to the denoiser from a finetuned model trained
on images with the style to be protected. Since perturbations maximizing the error with the pretrained
decoder can be easily circunvented with finetuning, Anti-DreamBooth uses a technique they refer to
as Alternating Surrogate and Perturbation Learning (ASPL). The intuition behind ASPL is trying
to simulate finetuning on the art and maximizing the error during finetuning. For this purpose, they
interleave finetuning steps with perturbation optimization steps.

I     ROBUST M IMICRY M ETHODS
This section details the robust mimicry methods we use in our work. These methods are not aimed
at maximizing performance. Instead, they demonstrate how various ”off-the-shelf” and low-effort
techniques can significantly weaken style mimicry protections.
Formally, given protected images X and a pretrained text-to-image model f , we define a general
robust mimicry pipeline that finetunes a model fˆ and then produces an image Z for a given prompt
as follows (a successful method may not require modifications in all stages):
                               fˆ ← Finetune(f ; PreProcess(X))
                          Z ← PostProcess(Sample(fˆ, “prompt”)).

I.1   D IFF P URE

DiffPure (Nie et al., 2022) uses image generation diffusion models to adversarially purify images
                                    √xadv ∈ Xprot with t timesteps of a diffusion process to obtain the
Xprot . DiffPure processes each image
                        √
diffused image xtadv = αt · xadv + 1 − αt · ϵ, where α is the noise schedule of the diffusion process
and noise ϵ is sampled from N (0, I). Then, DiffPure constructs the purified image DiffPure(xadv )
by applying reverse diffusion to image xtadv for t timesteps with an image generation diffusion model
DM. Nie et al. prove that under certain idealized conditions, DiffPure is likely to weaken adversarial
perturbations in image xadv .
If the text-to-image model M supports unconditional image generation, then we can use model M for
the reverse diffusion process. For example, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) generates images
unconditionally when the prompt P equals the empty string. Under these conditions, Img2Img is
equivalent to DiffPure. Therefore, in the context of defenses for style mimicry, we refer to Img2Img
applied with an empty prompt P as unconditional DiffPure, and to Img2Img applied with a non-empty
prompt P as conditional DiffPure.

I.2   N OISY U PSCALING

Upscaling increases the resolution of an image by predicting new pixels that enhance the level of
detail. Upscaling images can purify adversarially perturbed images (Mustafa et al., 2019). However,
we discover that applying upscaling directly on protected images fails to remove the perturbations.
We define Noisy Upscaling as a way to address the shortcomings of upscaling. Noisy Upscaling
first applies Gaussian noising and then upscales the noisy image. Noisy Upscaling has a more
profound effect than the sum of its parts: Gaussian noising only adds noise to an image xadv , but
does not remove the adversarial perturbation δx . Similarly, we observe upscaling to roughly preserve
perturbation δx . In contrast, NoisyUpscale(xadv ) shows neither visually perceptible noise, nor
adversarial perturbations. Figure 26 illustrates the improvements. We explain these phenomena as
follows.
First, we use the Stable Diffusion Upscaler (UpscaleSD ), which is trained on noise-augmented images
and accepts the corresponding noise level L as a class-conditioning label. We can therefore condition
UpscaleSD on the noise level Lσ2 , corresponding to the variance σ 2 used by GaussianNoising, to
remove the noise that GaussianNoising adds.
Second, we note that upscaling has shown success against adversarial perturbations for classifiers
(Mustafa et al., 2019), but not against adversarial perturbations for generative models (Liang et al.,
2023; Shan et al., 2023a).


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Original artwork (b) Protected artwork      (c) Upscaling      (d) Compr. Upscaling (e) Noisy Upscaling

Figure 26: Illustration of Noisy Upscaling on a random image from @nulevoy. Unlike naive upscaling
and Compressed Upscaling, Noisy Upscaling removes protections while preserving the details in the
original artwork.


I.3   IMPRESS++

We enhance the IMPRESS algorithm (Cao et al., 2024). We change the loss of the reverse encoding
optimization from patch similarity to l∞ and include two additional steps: negative prompting and
post-processing. All in all, IMPRESS++ first preprocesses protected images with Gaussian noise and
reverse encoder optimization, then samples using negative prompting and finally post-processes the
generated images with DiffPure to remove noise.

Reverse encoder optimization. Reverse encoder optimization is a preprocessing defense against en-
coder protections. It adds additional perturbations ∆∆′ to images Xprot so that the latent representation
              ′                              ′
tx′adv = Eϕ (xadv ) of each protected image xadv = xadv + δxadv satisfies

                                           Dϕ′ tx′adv ≈ x′adv                                          (4)

                              ∆′ satisfies
and each perturbation δxadv ∈ ∆
                                      dImg (xadv + δxadv , xadv ) ≤ p.                                  (5)
                                                                                 ′
If Equation (4) holds, then style mimicry finetuning learns the style of images Xprot . In addition, the
combination of Equation (5) with the image similarity constraint dImg (x + δx , x) ≤ p in Objective (2)
                                   ′
ensures that the defended images Xprot look similar to the original images X. Therefore, style mimicry
                        ′
finetuning on images Xprot should learn a style similar to style S.
Reverse encoder optimization aims to achieve Equation (4) and Equation (5) by optimizing the
objective
                            min dLat (Eϕ (xadv + δxadv ) , Eϕ (xadv ))
                            δxadv
                                                                                          (6)
                           subject to dImg (xadv + δxadv , xadv ) ≤ p
with PGD.

Negative prompting. Negative prompting (Miyake et al., 2023) is a technique to guide image
generation of a diffusion-based text-to-image model M away from a prompt Pneg . To this end,
negative prompting manipulates the classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022), which computes
the denoiser output of model M as
                        ϵ̃θ (z, t, P ) = (1 + w) · ϵθ (z, t, P ) − w · ϵθ (z, t, “”)                    (7)
where parameter w controls the guidance strength. Negative prompting simply substitutes the empty
string “” with Pneg to obtain
                       ϵ̃θ (z, t, P ) = (1 + w) · ϵθ (z, t, P ) − w · ϵθ (z, t, Pneg ) .                (8)

We design a routine for DInF that leverages negative prompting to guide model M away from
adversarial generations. To this end, we first apply Textual Inversion with adversarial images Xprot to
encode the style of adversarial generations Sadv into a special word w∗ . We then set prompt Pneg =
“art by w∗”.


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Naive negative prompting offers no strength control. Too little strength may fail to guide model M
away from the adversarial style Sadv . Too much strength may guide towards the style opposite to style
Sadv in the latent space of model M, which is not necessarily the desired style S. We use negative
prompt weights (muerrilla, 2023) to control the strength of negative prompting. The negative prompt
weights technique introduces the strength control parameter c to interpolate between Equation (7)
and Equation (8) as
            ϵ̃θ (z, t, P ) = (1 + w) · ϵθ (z, t, P ) − w · ((1 + c) · ϵθ (z, t, Pneg ) − c · ϵθ (z, t, “”)) .   (9)

Figure 27 illustrates the improvements introduced by each additional step.


              (a) Original                          (b) IMPRESS +                   (c) IMPRESS++. IMPRESS +
               IMPRESS                            negative prompting               negative prompting + denoising

Figure 27: Improvements of each additional step in IMPRESS++ over the original IMPRESS (Cao
et al., 2024). Negative prompting improves image consistency and denoising reduces artifacts in
generated images.


J         E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
This section describes our general experimental setup and specifies the settings and hyperparameters
of the methods we use. When possible, we use default values from the machine learning literature.
For implementation details see our official repository: https://github.com/ethz-spylab/
robust-style-mimicry

J.1        S TYLE M IMICRY E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

As described in Section 3, our threat model considers style mimicry with a latent diffusion text-to-
image model M that is finetuned on a set of images X in a style S. This section specifies our choices
for model M, images X, style S, the hyperparameters for finetuning M, and the hyperparameters for
generating images with the finetuned model. Where possible, we try to replicate the style mimicry
setup used by Shan et al. to evaluate Glaze, and highlight any differences.

Model We use Stable Diffusion version 2.1 (Stability AI, 2022), the same model used to optimize
the protections we evaluate (Shan et al., 2023a; Liang et al., 2023; Van Le et al., 2023).

Dataset. We collate 10 image sets X A : A ∈ A from 10 different artists A. Each image set X A
contains 18 images that we choose manually to follow a consistent style SA . We select the artists
A from contemporary and historical artists: We select 5 contemporary artists from ArtStation9 and
5 historical artists from the WikiArt dataset (Tan et al., 2019). We found 2 of the 4 artists used by
Glaze and included them in our evaluation. We manually select the remaining 8 artists to cover a
broad variety of styles. Glaze additionally verified that the images of the contemporary artists in their
evaluation are not included in the training dataset of the model M. Unfortunately, the LAION-5B
dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022) used to train SD 2.1 was taken offline (Cole, 2023), so we are unable
to perform this verification. Instead, we verify for each contemporary artist A ∈ A that SD 2.1 is
      9
          www.artstation.com


                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


unable to mimic the style SA by manually inspecting SD 2.1 generations for prompts of the form “An
{object} by {artist}”. We center-crop each image x to 512 × 512 pixels and generate a caption Cx
for x with the BLIP-2 model (Li et al., 2023).

Finetuning hyperparameters. Glaze does not specify which finetuning script they use, but they
claim to “follow the same training parameters as (Rombach et al., 2022). We use 5 · 10−6 learning
rate and batch size of 32.” This batch size misfits their small finetuning image sets that contain no
more than 34 images. Moreover, the finetuning code that Shan et al. kindly sent us upon request uses
DreamBooth finetuning with Stable Diffusion 1.5, instead of version 2.1 as described in their work.
In light of these discrepancies, and assuming that mimicry protections should be agnostic to the
finetuning setup used, we use an “off-the-shelf” HuggingFace finetuning script for Stable Diffusion
(von Platen et al., 2024) and manually tune hyperparameters for optimal style mimicry before
protections are applied. Concretely, we use 2,000 training steps, batch size 4, learning rate 5 · 10−6 ,
and set the remaining hyperparameters to their default values. We pair each image x with the prompt
Px = Cx +“ by w∗ ”, where w∗ = “nulevoy”10 .

Generation hyperparameters We use the DPM-Solver++(2M) Karras (Lu et al., 2022; Karras
et al., 2022) scheduler for 50 steps to generate images of size 768 × 768. This scheduler generates
images with slightly higher quality than the PNDM (Liu et al., 2021) scheduler used by Glaze.

J.2     P ROTECTIONS E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

We evaluate three different protections: Mist (Liang et al., 2023), Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a), and
Anti-DreamBooth (Van Le et al., 2023). For a fair comparison, we fix the perturbation budget p for
each adversarial perturbation δx created by Mist and Anti-DreamBooth to p = 8/255, which is the
same budget that Liang et al. use to evaluate Mist. It is not possible to evaluate Glaze with exactly
this perturbation budget, for three reasons: First, Glaze uses LPIPS for the image similarity measure
dImg , which does not bound the L∞ norm. Second, Glaze implements the metric dImg as a soft bound
in Objective (3), which offers no hard bound guarantees. Third, Glaze is closed-source software
whose perturbation budget control only offers the settings Default, Medium, and High. Upon
request, the Glaze authors refused to share a codebase where we could control the hyperparameters.
Therefore, we evaluate Glaze through their official public tool with the setting High to evaluate
our protections under the highest protections. In our evaluation, we perceive images processed with
Glaze to be equally or less perturbed than images processed with Mist and Anti-DreamBooth.
Next, we describe specific hyperparameters we use to reproduce each of the protections.

J.2.1    A NTI -D REAM B OOTH
Van Le et al. implement Anti-DreamBooth against DreamBooth finetuning. We adapt their imple-
mentation to our vanilla finetuning for style mimicry, using the same hyperparameters where possible:
We set the number of iterations to N = 50, the PGD perturbation budget to p = 8/255, the PGD step
size to α = 5 · 10−3 , and the number of PGD steps per ASPL iteration to NPGD = 6. We minimize
the loss LFinetune with the vanilla finetuning setup in Appendix J.1 for 300 training steps.

J.2.2    M ISTϕ
We replicate the evaluation that Liang & Wu use to evaluate Mistϕ against Stable Diffusion. We set
the PGD perturbation budget to p = 8/255, the number of PGD iterations to NPGD = 100, the PGD
step size to α = 1/255, and the target image to T = Target Mist shown in Figure 28.

J.2.3    G LAZE
The Glaze authors were unable to share a codebase upon request. We thus use their publicly released
Windows application binary. We use the latest available version of Glaze, v1.1.1. We set Intensity
   10
     @nulevoy is the first ArtStation artist that we experimented with. In our experiments, we found “nulevoy”
a suitable choice for the special word w∗ and use it for all artists. We check that all of nulevoy’s images are
published after the release date of LAION-5B to ensure that SD 2.1 has no prior knowledge about nulevoy’s
style.


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 28: The Mist target image Target Mist. Target Mist is the default target image in the reference
Mist implementation and one of the successful target images evaluated by Liang & Wu.


to High and Render Quality to Slowest, to obtain the strongest protections. Appendix E
includes qualitative results on an updated version released after we concluded our user study.

J.3     ROBUST M IMICRY M ETHODS E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

J.3.1    G AUSSIAN NOISING
We manually tune the Gaussian noising strength to σ2 = 0.05.

J.3.2    D IFF P URE
We use conditional DiffPure with the best-performing publicly available image generation diffusion
model, Stable Diffusion XL 1.0 (SDXL) (Podell et al., 2023). We implement conditional DiffPure
using the HuggingFace AutoPipelineForImage2Image pipeline. We use classifier-free guid-
ance scale guidance scale = 7.5 with prompt P = Cx for image x. We manually tune the
number of diffusion timesteps t via the strength pipeline argument to strength = 0.2.

J.3.3    IMPRESS++
Reverse Optimization Like Mistϕ , we set the PGD perturbation budget to p = 8/255 and the PGD
step size to α = 1/255. We manually tune the number of PGD iterations to NPGD = 400.

Noisy Upscaling We manually tune the Gaussian noising strength to σ = 0.1. We then use the
Stable Diffusion Upscaler 11 with the maximum denoising strength L.12 .
                                                                                           √
√ note that the Stable Diffusion Upscaler is trained on diffused images of the form xα = α · x +
We
√1 − α · N (0, I). In contrast, noisy
                                  √ upscaling noises images additively,
                                                                √        that is, without the factor
  α. However, we note that for 1 − α = σ = 0.1, we have α = 0.995 ≈ 1. In practice, we
observe no qualitative difference in the generated images.

Negative Prompting We manually tune the negative prompting strength to c = 0.5. We use the
Stable Diffusion web UI 13 to apply Textual Inversion on the adversarial images Xprot . We follow the
Textual Inversion setup used by Liang et al. to evaluate Mist and set the length of the token vector t
to n = 8, the embedding initialization text to “style *”, the learning rate to γ = 0.005, the batch size
to 1, and the number of training steps to 500.

DiffPurepost To make IMPRESS++ work under a single-model availability, we apply DiffPurepost
with the same model that we use for image generation, SD 2.1. We implement DiffPurepost using the
HuggingFace AutoPipelineForImage2Image pipeline. We use the classifier-free guidance
  11
     www.huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-x4-upscaler
  12
     We inadvertently set the denoising strength to L = 320 instead of the actual maximum denoising strength
L = 350. We observe no qualitative difference in the generated images.
  13
     https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui


                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scale guidance scale = 7.5 with prompt P = Cx + “, artistic” for image x. We manually tune
the number of diffusion timesteps t via the strength pipeline argument to the value strength =
0.2.

K    U SER S TUDY
This user study was approved by our institution’s IRB.

Design. Our user study asks annotators to compare outputs from one robust mimicry method
against a baseline where images are generated from a model trained on the original art without
protections—for a fixed set of prompts P.
We present participants with both generations and a gallery with original art in the target style. We
ask participants to decide which image is better in terms of style and quality, separately. For this, we
ask them two different questions:

      1. Based on noise, artifacts, detail, prompt fit, and your impression, which image has higher
         quality?
      2. Overall, ignoring quality, which image better fits the style of the style samples?

For each comparison, we collect data from 5 users. We randomize several aspects of our study
to minimize user bias. We randomly select the order of robust mimicry and baseline generations.
Second, we randomly shuffle the order of all image comparisons to prevent all images from the same
mimicry method to appear consecutively. Finally, we also randomly sample the seeds that models use
to generate images to prevent repeating the same baseline image across different comparisons.

Differences with Glaze’s user study. Our study does not exactly replicate the design of Glaze’s
user study for two reasons. First, the Glaze study provided annotators with four AI-generated
images and four original images, asking if the generated images successfully mimicked the original
artwork. This evaluation fails to account for the commonly encountered scenario where current
models are incapable of reliably mimicking an artist’s style even from unprotected art. Second, we
believe the relative assessment recorded in our study (“Which of these two mimicry attempts is more
successful?”) is easier for humans than the absolute assessment used in the Glaze study (“Is this
mimicry attempt successful”).

Prompts. We curate a small dataset of 10 prompts P. We design the prompts to satisfy two criteria:

      1. The prompts should cover diverse motifs with varying complexity. This ensures that we
         can detect if a scenario compromised the prompt-following capabilities of a style mimicry
         model.
      2. The prompts should only include prompts for which our finetuning base model M, SD 2.1,
         can successfully generate a matching image. This reduces the impact of potential human
         bias against common defects of SD 2.1.

To satisfy criterion 1 and increase variety, we instruct ChatGPT to generate prompt suggestions for
four different categories:

      1. Simple prompts with template “a {subject}”.
      2. Two-entity prompts with template “a {subject} {ditransitive verb} a {object}”.
      3. Entity-attribute prompts with template “a {adjective} {subject}”.
      4. Entity-scene prompts with template “a {subject} in a {scene}”.

The chat we used to generate our prompts can be accessed at https://chatgpt.com/share/
ea3d1290-f137-4131-baca-2fa1c92b3859. To satisfy criterion 2, we generate images
with SD 2.1 on prompts suggested by ChatGPT and manually filter out prompts with defect gener-
ations (e.g. a horse with 6 legs). We populate the final set of prompts P with 4 simple prompts, 2
two-entity prompts, 2 entity-attribute prompts, and 2 entity-scene prompts (see Figure 29).


                                                  37
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1  prompts = [
2      # simple prompts
 3     "a mountain",
 4     "a piano",
 5     "a shoe",
 6     "a candle",
 7     # two-entity prompts
 8     "a astronaut riding a horse",
 9     "a shoe with a plant growing inside",
10     # entity-attribute prompts
11     "a feathered car",
12     "a golden apple",
13     # entity-scene prompts
14     "a castle in the jungle",
15     "a village in a thunderstorm",
16 ]



    Figure 29: Our set of prompts. We manually wrote the prompts “a astronaut riding a horse” and “a
    village in a thunderstorm”. ChatGPT wrote the remaining prompts.


    Quality control. We first run a pilot study where we directly ask users to answer the previous
    questions about style and quality. This study resulted in very low-quality responses that are barely
    better than random choice. We enhanced the study to introduce several quality control measures to
    improve response quality and filter out low-quality annotations:

          1. We limit our study to desktop users so that images are sufficiently large to perceive artifacts
             introduced by protections.
          2. We precede the questions we use for our study with four dummy questions about the noise,
             artifacts, detail, and prompt matching of the images. The dummy questions force annotators
             to pay attention and gather information useful to answer the target questions.
          3. We precede our study with a training session that shows for question 1, 2, and each of the
             four dummy questions an image pair with a clear, objective answer. The training session
             helps users to understand the study questions. We introduced this stage after gathering
             valuable feedback for annotators.
          4. We add control comparisons to detect annotators who did not understand the tasks or were
             answering randomly. We generated several images from the baseline model trained on the
             original art. For each of these images, we created two ablations. For question 1 (quality),
             we include Gaussian noise to degrade its quality but preserve the same information. For
             question 2 (style), we apply Img2Img to remove the artist style and map the image back to
             photorealism using the prompt “high quality photo, award winning”. We randomly include
             control comparisons between the original generations and these ablations, and we only
             accept labels from users who answered correctly at least 80% of the control questions.

    Execution. We execute our study on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). We design and evaluate
    an MTurk Human Intelligence Task (HIT) for each artist A ∈ A, shown in Figure 30. Each HIT
    includes image pair comparisons for a single artist A under all scenarios S ∈ M, as well 10 quality
    control image pairs, 10 style control image pairs, and 6 training image pairs. We generate an image
    pair for each of the 10 prompts and each of 15 scenarios, for a total of 10 · 15 + 10 + 10 + 6 = 176
    image pairs per HIT. We estimate study participants to spend 5 minutes on the training image pairs
    and 30 seconds per remaining image pair, so 90 minutes in total. We compensate study participants
    at a rate of $16/hour, so $24 per HIT.

    K.1   S TYLE M IMICRY S ETUP VALIDATION

    We execute an additional user study to validate that our style mimicry setup in Appendix G success-
    fully mimics style from unprotected images.


                                                      38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Figure 30: The interface of our user study.


              Clean style mimicry success rate
                                                              not successful at all    successful
                                                              not very successful      very successful
  0%        20%        40%        60%    80%     100%         somewhat successful


Figure 31: User ratings of clean style mimicry success. Each bar indicates the percentage of votes for
the corresponding success level for clean style mimicry generations. Figure 32 breaks the ratings
down by artist.


For each prompt P ∈ P and artist A ∈ A, our validation study uses the baseline model trained on
uprotected art to generate one image. Inspired by the evaluation by Glaze (Shan et al., 2023a), we ask
participants to evaluate the style mimicry success by answering the question:

          How successfully does the style of the image mimic the style of the style samples? Ignore
          the content and only focus on the style.

To answer this question, we show a participant the image xO                    A
                                                          A and the images X that serve as style
samples. The participant can answer the question on a 5-point Likert scale with options

       1. Not successful at all
       2. Not very successful
       3. Somewhat successful
       4. Successful
       5. Very successful

We also execute the style mimicry validation study on MTurk. We design and evaluate a single HIT
for all questions, shown in Figure 33. We estimate study participants to spend 15 seconds on each
question, and to spend 1 minute to familiarize themselves with a new style, so 35 minutes in total.
We compensate study participants at a rate of $18/hour, so $10.50 per HIT.
We find that style mimicry is successful in over 70% of the comparisons. Results are detailed in
Figure 31.


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Clean style mimicry success rate

                                A1


                                A2


                                A3


                                A4


                                A5


                      Albrecht Durer


                    Alphonse Mucha


                   Anna O.-Lebedeva


                      Edvard Munch


                     Edward Hopper

                                   0%          20%                 40%               60%           80%                100%
                                        not successful at all            somewhat successful        very successful
                                        not very successful              successful


Figure 32: User ratings of clean style mimicry success. Each bar indicates the percentage of votes for
the corresponding success level over all clean style mimicry generations for the corresponding artist.


                 Figure 33: The interface of our style mimicry setup validation study.


K.2    D OES PRE - PROCESSING ALONE DEGRADE IMAGE QUALITY ?

While purification methods can nullify the effects of adversarial purifications, they could, in principle,
also degrade image quality. To evaluate the extent of this phenomenon, we include comparisons
between artists’ original art, and their original art pre-processed with Noisy Upscaling. We include
these comparisons for six artists14 in our study and add comparisons for two held-out original artworks
for each artist. On average, participants preferred the quality of pre-processed originals exactly 50
% of the time, and their style 48.3 % of the time. This suggests that Noisy Upscaling does not
meaningfully degrade the quality of original artwork.


  14
     We only include six out of the ten artists, because this experiment was added while the study was already
ongoing.


                                                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L      C OMPUTE R ESOURCES
Table 4 reports the compute resources for our experiments.

Table 4: Compute resources for our experiments. Execution time per image / (artist) reports the
execution time of the method to compute a single image, or the combined execution time for all
samples of an artist, if the method operates on all samples of an artist at once. † Google Cloud ‡
IMPRESS++ requires an additional 2 seconds per image generation.

                                                                         Execution time per
    Method             GPU         CPU                Memory   Storage                        Overall execution time
                                                                         image / (artist)
    Finetuning         RTX A6000   EPYC 7742            5 GB     5 GB         (40 minutes)               100 hours
    Image generation   RTX A6000   EPYC 7742            5 GB     5 GB           15 seconds                13 hours
    Anti-DB            RTX A6000   EPYC 7742            5 GB    10 GB           29 minutes                88 hours
    Glaze              T4          16 vCPUs on GCP†     5 GB     5 GB            4 minutes                12 hours
    Mist               RTX A6000   EPYC 7742            5 GB     5 GB           18 seconds              54 minutes
    Gaussian noising   None        EPYC 7742            0 GB     0 GB     143 milliseconds              26 seconds
    IMPRESS++          RTX A6000   EPYC 7742            5 GB     5 GB       (27 minutes)‡             370 minutes‡
    DiffPure           RTX A6000   EPYC 7742            7 GB     7 GB           48 seconds             144 minutes
    Noisy Upscaling    RTX A6000   EPYC 7742          3.5 GB   3.5 GB          217 seconds             651 minutes


                                                       41
