Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PABBO: P REFERENTIAL A MORTIZED B LACK -B OX
O PTIMIZATION
    Xinyu Zhang∗ , Daolang Huang∗ , Samuel Kaski               Julien Martinelli
    Department of Computer Science                             Inserm Bordeaux Population Health
    Aalto University                                           Vaccine Research Institute
    xinyu.zhang@aalto.fi                                       Université de Bordeaux
                                                               Inria Bordeaux Sud-ouest



                                              A BSTRACT

           Preferential Bayesian Optimization (PBO) is a sample-efficient method to learn
           latent user utilities from preferential feedback over a pair of designs. It relies on a
           statistical surrogate model for the latent function, usually a Gaussian process, and
           an acquisition strategy to select the next candidate pair to get user feedback on.
           Due to the non-conjugacy of the associated likelihood, every PBO step requires a
           significant amount of computations with various approximate inference techniques.
           This computational overhead is incompatible with the way humans interact with
           computers, hindering the use of PBO in real-world cases. Building on the recent
           advances of amortized BO, we propose to circumvent this issue by fully amortizing
           PBO, meta-learning both the surrogate and the acquisition function. Our method
           comprises a novel transformer neural process architecture, trained using reinforce-
           ment learning and tailored auxiliary losses. On a benchmark composed of synthetic
           and real-world datasets, our method is several orders of magnitude faster than the
           usual Gaussian process-based strategies and often outperforms them in accuracy.


1     I NTRODUCTION

Learning the latent utility function of a given user from its feedback is a task that is becoming
increasingly important in the era of personalization, with applications ranging from the optimization
of visual designs (Koyama et al., 2020), thermal comfort (Abdelrahman & Miller, 2022), proportional
integral controller (Coutinho et al., 2024), or robotic gait (Li et al., 2021). As humans are typically
better at comparing two options rather than assessing their absolute value (Kahneman & Tversky,
2013), current solutions often leverage data based on preferential feedback, the outcome of a pairwise
comparison also referred to as a duel (Chu & Ghahramani, 2005).
Preferential Bayesian Optimization (PBO, González et al. (2017)) is the gold standard method
for optimizing black-box functions from sequential duel feedback. To learn the latent utility of a
human subject, PBO operates in a Bayesian framework and classically relies on a Gaussian Process
(GP) prior (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) and a probit or logit likelihood (Brochu et al., 2010).
Due to the non-conjugacy of the preferential likelihood, approximation techniques are required for
posterior inference (Takeno et al., 2023). The obtained posterior is then plugged into an acquisition
function, which selects the next pair of candidate designs to display to the user, in a way that balances
exploration and exploitation (Garnett, 2023). Approximating the posterior and maximizing the
acquisition function results in a significant computational overhead, which may hinder the use of PBO
in real-world cases, as the user would have to wait an extended period of time before each iteration.
To circumvent this issue, amortization, or pre-computing solutions and learning an ML model to
approximate them, has emerged as a promising solution, effectively enabling rapid and still accurate
on-line computation with sophisticated models, trading off the speed to off-line computations.
Amortization has been successfully applied to simulation-based inference (Cranmer et al., 2020;
Gloeckler et al., 2024), sequential Bayesian experimental design (Foster et al., 2021), and more
relevantly, vanilla Bayesian optimization (Chen et al., 2017; Maraval et al., 2023; Song et al., 2024).
*
    Equal contribution.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Pre-training stage                                       Fast and reliable
                                                                                                      candidate pairs generation
      Pre-training Datasets                   PABBO                                                          Random       qEI       MPES
                                                                                                 PABBO
                                     Prediction   Acquisition                                                qEUBO        qTS       qNEI

                                       Head         Head
                                                                                                103


                                                                             Simple regret
                                                                                                102
                                              Transformer
                                                                                                101

                                          Data Embedder                                         100


                                                                                                150


                                                                           Inference time (s)
                                   generate            update history
                                                                                                100


                                                                                                 50
               or              query

                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                      0        10          20         30
       Candidate pairs                            Preference                                               Interaction steps



                      Preference                    End-to-End
 Method                              Amortization                                                                               Reference
                      Feedback                       training
 BO                       ✗               ✗              ✗                                                               (Garnett, 2023)
 qEUBO, qEI, qNEI                                                          (Astudillo et al., 2023; Siivola et al., 2021)
                          ✓               ✗              ✗
 qTS, MPES                                                       (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2020)
 PFN                      ✗               ✓             ✗                                          (Müller et al., 2023)
 NAP                      ✗               ✓             ✓                                        (Maraval et al., 2023)
 PABBO                    ✓               ✓             ✓                                                                       This work

Figure 1: Leveraging synthetic and existing BO datasets, PABBO learns an acquisition policy in an
end-to-end manner, thus directly amortizing the design proposal step. Contrary to existing methods,
at inference time, PABBO only relies on preference data. Our method outperforms GP-based strategies
and dramatically speeds up the optimization.


Beyond speed gains, an interesting characteristic of amortization with regards to BO and PBO is that
it can jointly model the probabilistic surrogate and the acquisition function, two modules that are
usually treated independently in BO. This provides two powerful advantages: rather than guessing
which combination of GP kernel and acquisition function works best for a given task through various
heuristics, these are now learned from data. In the end, the model will directly predict the acquisition
function values. However, current end-to-end black-box optimization methods predict acquisition
function values for single designs. Translating this task in the preferential framework requires
predicting acquisition values for pairs of designs, suggesting novel network architectures and training
procedures. To the best of our knowledge, amortization has not yet been employed in a PBO setting.

Contributions.
  • We introduce PABBO, the first end-to-end framework for Preferential Amortized Black-Box
    Optimization (Figure 1). PABBO directly outputs acquisition function values for candidate pairs,
    conditioned on observed data, and handles preferential feedback through a novel transformer-
    based architecture.
  • We present a reinforcement learning-based pre-training scheme to directly learn acquisition
    function values for pairs. Due to the sparsity of the rewards, in a similar spirit as Maraval et al.
    (2023), we add an auxiliary loss, but based on binary classification instead of regression, due to
    the preferential nature of the data. Figure 1 displays the PABBO workflow.
  • On a set of synthetic and real-world examples, PABBO provides speedups of several orders of
    magnitude against GP-based methods, often outperforming them, even on unseen examples
    during pre-training, thus demonstrating its impressive in-context optimization capability. We
    conclude by illustrating the robustness of PABBO through a series of ablation studies.


                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   P REFERENTIAL B LACK -B OX O PTIMIZATION

The goal of preferential black-box optimization (PBBO) is to determine the optimal solution x∗ =
arg maxx∈X f (x) using the duel feedback x ≻ x′ , signifying a preference of x over x′ . The
preference structure is governed by the latent function f : X → R defined over the subset X ⊂ Rd :
                                x ≻ x′ ⇐⇒ f (x) + ε > f (x′ ) + ε′ ,                                    (1)
where ε and ε′ are i.i.d. realizations of the normal distribution N (0, σnoise
                                                                         2
                                                                               ).
By definition of PBBO, we only have access to a dataset D made of the human observations of m
                                    ′ m                    ′
duel feedbacks {li }m
                    i=1 = {xi ≻ xi }i=1 , with xi and xi being the winner and the loser of the duel,
respectively, and li a binary variable recording the location of preferred instance in a query. No
information about the latent function is provided, e.g., its analytic form, convexity, or regularity.

2.2   A MORTIZATION

Amortization is a data-driven approach that involves training a model, often a neural network, on
a large set of pre-collected tasks. The goal is to enable the model to capture and leverage shared
information across these tasks, thus learning how to make predictions efficiently on similar tasks in the
future. This process allows the model to perform approximate inference rapidly during the inference
stage, since knowledge from related tasks encountered during training has already been internalized.
Recently, amortization has been introduced to BO, either amortizing the surrogate model (Müller
et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024), the acquisition function (Swersky et al., 2020; Volpp et al., 2020), or
directly end-to-end training system (Chen et al., 2017; 2022; Yang et al., 2024; Maraval et al., 2023).
Our work aims to employ a fully end-to-end trained system that learns how to optimize functions
directly from preference data.
Designing a task-specific architecture is crucial to efficiently utilize data in amortized learning.
Conditional neural processes (CNPs; Garnelo et al. 2018), as a meta-learning framework built on
Deep Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017), are particularly well-suited for tasks like BO (Maraval et al., 2023;
Müller et al., 2023), where historical queries are permutation-invariant. Transformer-based neural
processes (Nguyen & Grover, 2022; Müller et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2024) extend this idea by
leveraging the attention mechanism to more effectively capture interactions between points.

2.3   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has recently found success in the Black-Box Optimization realm (Volpp
et al., 2020; Hsieh et al., 2021; Maraval et al., 2023), due to its ability to yield non-myopic acquisition
strategies. This leads to better performances since these strategies consider the influence of future
evaluations up to a given horizon determined by the available budget T . An RL problem is defined
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) M = (S, A, P, R, γ), S and A stand for the state and action
spaces, respectively, P : S ×A×S → [0, 1] is the state transition model, and R is the reward function
which encompasses a given optimization goal. The goal is to learn a probability distribution over
state-action pairs π(at |st ), referred to as a policy, such that π maximizes the discounted expected
returns with discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1], which defines the degree of myopia of the policy.


3     P REFERENTIAL A MORTIZED B LACK - BOX O PTIMIZATION (PABBO)

To solve the problem introduced in Section 2.1 in an amortized manner, PABBO proceeds as illustrated
in Figure 2. In brief, PABBO directly outputs acquisition values for candidate pairs through the
policy πθ , which is parameterized by a transformer backbone and an acquisition head. To stabilize
the training, we additionally employ a prediction head for an auxiliary preference prediction task.
Section 3.1 describes the MDP we employ for learning the policy πθ , Section 3.2 details the conception
of the pre-training dataset accordingly to the neural process framework, and Section 3.3 focuses on
the transformer architecture and the loss functions involved in its actual training.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                          (!*'&'())
                                                   ℋ!/0 = ℋ! ∪                      𝒙!,0 , 𝒙!,2 , 𝑙!                                 𝒩 𝑦0             | 𝜇0 , 𝜎01                         𝜋𝜽 ⋅ | 𝒒

                                                                                                                                                 𝜇0 , 𝜎0                                       𝒒

                                                                              Policy 𝜋𝜽
                                                                                                                                     Prediction head 𝑓&                             Acquisition head 𝑓*


                                                     Transformer Block 𝑓%-.
                            Data Embedder 𝑓(.7
                 State                                                          Acquisition Head             Action                              𝝀0 !*'&'()                                    𝝀(/)       𝑡/𝑇
                  ℋ!                                                                  𝑓+ ⋅                   𝒙!,0 , 𝒙!,2
                                                                                                                                                         Transformer Block 𝑓!"#
                                                                                                                    ∇4 ℒ (5)

      Prediction Set                                                             Prediction Head                                                 𝑬0 !*'&'()                  𝑬(,)              𝑬(/)
                                                                                                             Reward
  𝒟($%&"'()) ∪ 𝒟(%+'"'())                                                              𝑓" ⋅                   𝛾 !30 𝑟!                                     Data Embedder 𝑓(#.
                                                                                                                                                      !*'&'()
                                                                                                                                                 𝒙0
       Shuffle
                                                                                            ∇4 ℒ (6)
                                                                                                                               𝒟 $!%&'() ∪ 𝒟 !*'&'()                    𝒟(,)              𝒟(/)
                                                        Auxiliary BCE Loss                                                        Prediction Set                     Context Set        Query Set
                                                                 %+'"'()
                                                 ℒ (6) = BCE 𝑙!̅         , 𝑙!%+'"'()
                                                                                                                               Auxiliary Prediction Task                    Policy learning

Figure 2: Flowchart of PABBO (left), together with a zoom on our proposed transformer block (right).
We use reinforcement learning to guide the acquisition head in proposing valuable query pairs, and
apply an auxiliary BCE loss to the prediction head to stabilize the training of the transformer.


3.1     P OLICY LEARNING

Unlike current PBO methods, we leverage RL to learn a non-myopic policy πθ . For a single task, our
RL problem is formulated as follows:
   • States: st = [Ht , t, T ], where Ht = {(xi,1 , xi,2 , li )}t−1
                                                                i=1 contains the optimization history
     made of (t − 1)-step queries and preferences.
   • Actions: at = (xt,1 , xt,2 ), the next query pair.
   • Rewards: rt = max1≤i≤t max{yi,1 , yi,2 }, the best objective function values observed so far
     with yi,1 and yi,2 being associated to inputs xi,1 and xi,2 , respectively.
State transitions consist in updating the optimization history with the selected next query and
preference feedback, Ht+1 = Ht ∪ {(xt,1 , xt,2 , lt )}. We seek a policy maximizing the rewards
along the entire optimization trajectory while performing well on average across tasks sampled from
ptasks . Rewards rt denote the maximal objective function values observed at step t. Such values
are always available in synthetic pre-training datasets, like GP draws. If the latent function values
are unavailable during pre-training, ranking data can be used to obtain a score for each point as the
reward. We show in Section 5.4 that this substitution does not greatly alter performance.

3.2     P RE - TRAINING DATA ARCHITECTURE

The PABBO workflow involves a pre-training phase, where a policy is learned on all meta-tasks, and
an inference phase, where the trained model is applied to predict acquisition values on a new task
directly. Our approach effectively amortizes the optimization process over multiple tasks, allowing
rapid inference by leveraging the shared structure learned during pre-training. The pre-training
dataset for each meta-task features three parts:
                                                                                  (c)         (c)      (c)
   • A context set D(c) = {(xi,1 , xi,2 , li )}t−1
                                               i=1 containing all past queries and preferences.
                                                                                  (q)
   • A query set D(q) = {(xi )}Si=1 consisting of S locations that the model considers for the
                                                                                      (q)  (q)
     next step, which will be further combined into a candidate query pair set Q = {(xi , xj ) |
         (q)       (q)
     xi , xj ∈ D(q) , i ̸= j} of size M . In a training iteration, we randomly sample S query points,
     and candidate query pairs are chosen from all possible pairwise combinations within this set.
     At inference time, query points are sampled across the search space from a quasi-random Sobol
     sequence, and all possible pairs from the full set of combinations are considered. S should be
     set to a sufficiently large value and scaled with data dimension to ensure adequate exploration.
                                          (p)    (p) (p)
   • A prediction set D(p) = {(xi,1 , xi,2 , li )}N        i=1 containing N queries and preferences. Sim-
                                (p)
     ilarly, we generate D            by sampling pairwise combinations of a set of random points.
     This prediction set is used to compute an auxiliary binary classification loss: for each op-
     timization step, we randomly sample a subset of D(p) which refers as prediction context set
                         (ctxpred)    (ctxpred) (ctxpred) N (ctxpred)
     D(ctxpred) = {(xi,1           , xi,2      , li      )}i=1        , and all the individual points from the


                                                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      remaining P = N − N (ctxpred) pairs are collected as a prediction target set D(tarpred) =
          (tarpred) N (tarpred)
      {(xi         )}i=1 . The model is required to estimate the function values for each point
      in D(tarpred) conditioned on D(ctxpred) , and further recover the preference relationship of a pair.
It is worth mentioning that no reward information can leak from the query set to the prediction set as
entirely different instances are assigned to each set.
3.3   M ODEL ARCHITECTURE

PBBO differs from standard BO in two aspects: (1) preferential outcomes instead of exact latent
function values are observed, and (2) a pair of points is expected as the next query instead of a single
point. To address these challenges, PABBO leverages novel data encoding and decoding structures,
efficiently handling pairwise preference data. At the center of PABBO’s architecture lie conditional
neural processes, a class of models quite amenable for handling the sets that naturally arise due to
the permutation invariance of the optimization history. Specifically, the PABBO model architecture,
presented in Figure 2, consists of four main components: the data embedder femb , transformer block
ftfm , prediction head fp , and the acquisition head fa .
Firstly, inputs from all parts of the dataset are mapped into a shared embedding space via the data
embedder femb . The first and second instance within a pair xi,1 , xi,2 and their corresponding
preference li are encoded separately with individual MLPs into embeddings of the same size and
added up as E = E(xi,1 ) ⊕ E(xi,2 ) ⊕ E(li ) . For parts D(q) and D(tarpred) containing only a single
instance xi , E = E(xi ) . This gives us embeddings E(c) , E(p) , E(ctxpred) and E(tarpred) corresponding to
D(c) , D(q) , D(ctxpred) and D(tarpred) , respectively. More details and a discussion related to the choice
of this particular architecture can be found in Appendix A.
Next, embeddings are passed through the transformer block ftfm , which captures the interactions
between different parts of a meta-dataset. Dependencies between elements are controlled with
masking in self-attention layers of ftfm (see Figure S1). Precisely, D(c) , the observations collected by
the current step, can be attended by other elements in D(c) and all the query points in D(q) , while
each query point can only be attended by itself. Our interest is the Transformer outputs for query
set λ(q) = fftm (E(q) ). The same rule applies for the prediction context set D(ctxpred) and prediction
target set D(tarpred) , leading to the transformer outputs λ(tarpred) = fftm (E(tarpred) ). These outputs
λ = [λ(q) , λ(tarpred) ] are then processed with different decoders according to their specified task.
                                                      (q)   (q)       (q)   (q)
Subsequently, λ(q) are combined into pairs {(λi , λj ) | (xi , xj ) ∈ Q)} according to the
                                            (q)  (q)
candidate query pair set Q* . Each pair (λi , λj ) passes through the acquisition head fa along
                                                                                       (q)  (q)
with current step t and budget T to predict the acquisition function value qi,j = fa (λi , λj , t, T )
for associated query pair. This enables creating a policy for proposing the next-step query (xt,1 , xt,2 )
                                                (q)   (q)
from Q, mapping outputs of fa , q = {qi,j|(xi , xj )∈Q}, to a categorical distribution via SoftMax:
                                  (q)   (q)                       exp qi,j
                            πθ ((xi , xj ) | Ht , t, T ) = P                      .                   (2)
                                                                 qm ∈q exp qm
As defined in Section 3.1, the best objective function value obtained so far is chosen as the immediate
reward when training this policy, since the goal is to find the global optimum as efficiently as possible.
To further pursue a non-myopic solution, we consider the cumulative reward across the entire query
trajectory, incorporating a discount factor γ, which controls the rate at which future rewards are
discounted. The loss writes as the negative expected reward over the entire optimization trajectory:
                                     T
                                                           (q)    (q)
                                    X
                         L(q) = −       γ t−1 rt log πθ ((xt,1 , xt,2 ) | Ht , t, T ).                (3)
                                    t=1
In addition to the forward process fa , reward sparsity is handled by introducing an auxiliary path
leading to the prediction head fp , encouraging the learning of latent function shape from preferences.
                                     (tarpred)
For each prediction target point xi           ∈ D(tarpred) , fp parameterizes a Gaussian distribution:

                           (tarpred)             (tarpred)                      (tarpred)
                    p yi |xi            = N yi             ; (µi , σi2 ) := fp λi            .         (4)
*
  To reduce computational costs from evaluating all the possible pairwise combinations between query points,
which are of size O(S 2 ), we randomly sample M ≪ S 2 pairs as Q for each meta-task during pre-training.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using independent Gaussian likelihoods is common in the Neural Processes community (Garnelo
et al., 2018). Correlations can be accounted for if the downstream task requires it (Markou et al.,
2022). A similar choice is often found in PBO, using the probit likelihood (Brochu et al., 2010).
                             (tarpred)         (tarpred)
At any two target points xi             and xj           that constitute a query pair in D(p) , the predicted latent
                  (tarpred)        (tarpred)
function values ȳi         and ȳj          are obtained by sampling from p, thus capturing the randomness
                                                                                                 (tarpred)     (tarpred)
in the process as described by Equation 1. The final preference is ¯l(tarpred) := σ(ȳj                    − ȳi         )
with σ the Sigmoid function. As mentioned, at each optimization step, we generate a prediction task
with different contexts by shuffling the prediction set D(p) , creating different splits of D(ctxpred) and
D(tarpred) to fully utilize the data. fp is trained by minimizing the binary cross entropy (BCE) loss
between predicted preferred location ¯l(tarpred) and the ground truth l(tarpred) on all the prediction tasks:
                          T X P h                                                                       i
                                   (tarpred)       (tarpred)           (tarpred)             (tarpred)
                         X
             L(p) = −             lt,i       log(¯lt,i       ) + (1 − lt,i       ) log(1 − ¯lt,i       ) , (5)
                          t=1 i=1
       (tarpred)       (tarpred)
where lt,i       and ¯lt,i       represent the ground truth and predicted preference between a possible
pair of prediction target points at step t, respectively.
The final objective L for policy learning combines the two losses: L := L(q) + λL(p) . We fix λ = 1
in all the experiments. In practice, we warm up the model with only the prediction task by setting
L = L(p) in the initial training steps, the rationale being that the policy can only perform well once
the shape of the latent function has been learned. Algorithm 1 describes the complete meta-learning
training procedure, and Algorithm S1 describes how PABBO operates at test-time on a new task.

Algorithm 1 Preferential Amortized Black-box Optimization (PABBO)
Require: K meta-tasks, candidate query pair set size M , discount factor γ, query budget T
  for each training iteration do
      initialize D(p) , D(q) , sample Q of size M , set H1 ← {∅}
      for t = 1, . . . , T do                                                  ▷ start policy learning
           (xt,1 , xt,2 ) ∼ πθ (· | Ht , t, T )                 ▷ sample next query pair from policy
           lt = xt,1 ≻ xt,2                                ▷ comparison of two sampled query points
           rt =max1≤i≤t max{yt,1 , yt,2 }                                ▷ collect immediate reward
           Ht+1 ← Ht ∪ {(xt,1 , xt,2 , lt )}                                         ▷ update history
           Q ← Q\{(xt,1 , xt,2 )}                                                  ▷ update query set
           infer prediction target preference ¯l(tarpred)                 ▷ auxiliary prediction task
           D(p) → D(ctxpred) ∪ D(tarpred)                                ▷ update prediction dataset
      end for
      Update PABBO using L := L(q) + λL(p) (Equations 3 and 5)
  end for


4    R ELATED W ORK
Preferential Black-Box Optimization. While PBBO has been tackled using techniques like dueling
bandits (Bengs et al., 2021) or Reinforcement Learning (Myers et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2024), the
bulk of the work points to the Preferential Bayesian Optimization field. The latter mostly hinges on
an approximate GP surrogate, with vastly different results depending on the approximate inference
scheme (Takeno et al., 2023), and several dedicated acquisition functions have been proposed. These
include dueling Thompson sampling, or EUBO, a decision-theoretic AF (Lin et al., 2022). Unlike
standard BO, deriving regret bounds for PBO is cumbersome. Only one work has done so (Xu et al.,
2024), although convergence can be demonstrated, e.g. for dueling Thompson sampling (Astudillo
et al., 2024). Lastly, Bayesian Neural Networks were also trialed (Huang et al., 2022).
PBO has been extended to various settings: handling a batch of queries q > 2 (Siivola et al., 2021;
Astudillo et al., 2023), heteroscedastic noise (Sinaga et al., 2024) and multi-objective optimiza-
tion (Astudillo et al., 2024). On another note, preferential relations x1 ≻ x2 have been leveraged to
enhance vanilla BO loops: Hvarfner et al. (2024) investigate a user-defined prior that is integrated to
the GP surrogate, whereas Adachi et al. (2024) allow the prior to be iteratively updated.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amortization and Meta-Learning. Our architecture is closely related to Conditional Neural Pro-
cesses (CNPs) (Garnelo et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2019; Jha et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023), and its
more recent variant, Transformer-based Neural Processes (Nguyen & Grover, 2022; Müller et al.,
2022; Chang et al., 2024). CNPs have primarily focused on amortizing the predictive posterior distri-
bution via supervised learning on a collection of datasets, whilst our approach employs reinforcement
learning to train an optimization policy.
In recent years, multiple works have explored training neural networks to directly amortize black-box
optimization (Chen et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2024; Maraval et al., 2023; Amos, 2023; Song et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2022). These methods typically rely on direct function utilities for training. Recent
advancements also include the use of large language models to assist in Bayesian Optimization (Liu
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Aglietti et al., 2024). However, to the best of our knowledge, no
existing work has yet attempted to directly amortize optimization based on preferential feedback data.
Besides, since PBBO can be viewed as a sequential experimental design (SED) problem (Rainforth
et al., 2024), our work is also related to research on amortized SED. This line of work primarily
revolves around Deep Adaptive Design (DAD; Foster et al. 2021), which develops a comprehensive
framework to amortize experimental design. Subsequent work has extended this approach to settings
with implicit likelihoods (Ivanova et al., 2021) and has leveraged reinforcement learning to further
improve performance (Blau et al., 2022; Lim et al., 2022). Our work can be seen as a specialized
application of SED with specific downstream objectives (Huang et al., 2024).
Preference tuning for language models. Finally, recent advancements in preference learning
have further expanded its application in tuning the language models, particularly in tasks such
as reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) to align large-scale models with user
preferences. Christiano et al. (2017) proposes a framework for guiding policy optimization in RL with
human preference feedback, which has been applied to several natural language tasks (Zaheer et al.,
2017; Stiennon et al., 2020). While those works focus on relatively small models and specific tasks,
InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) extends it to large-scale models like GPT-3, allowing alignment
with user instructions across a wide range of tasks. Recently, Rafailov et al. (2024) proposes Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO), which shows that language models can be directly trained on
preference data without explicit reward modeling or RL optimization, significantly simplifying the
preference learning pipeline. While PABBO and these works both leverage preference feedback, they
serve fundamentally different purposes: language model alignment aims to steer model behavior
towards desired outputs in text spaces, whereas PABBO focuses on efficient optimization of black-box
functions, requiring different architectural designs and optimization strategies.

5   E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate PABBO on synthetic functions, described in Section 5.1, and against real-world examples
from the BO literature: hyperparameter optimization (Section 5.2) and human preferences datasets
(Section 5.3). Subsequently, Section 5.4 presents a series of ablation studies: replacing the latent
values in the rewards by pure rankings, examining different discount factor values γ in Equation 3,
and varying the number of query locations on which the acquisition function values are predicted.
Baselines. Our approach is benchmarked against five GP-based acquisition strategies from the PBO
realm: qEUBO (Astudillo et al., 2023), qEI / qNEI (Siivola et al., 2021), qTS (Hernández-Lobato
et al., 2017) and MPES (Nguyen et al., 2020). We also include a strategy where candidate pairs are
acquired at random. While qEUBO is a principled preferential acquisition strategy, qEI and qTS are
effectively batch BO strategies used in a PBO setting, a solution commonly employed in the field.
For instance, qTS samples two draws from the posterior, maximizes each draw, and provides each
maximizer as a candidate pair for comparison. Further details can be found in Appendix D.3.
As performance metric, we consider the simple regret f (x∗ ) − f (xbest         T ) where xT
                                                                                                best
                                                                                                     =
arg maxt∈{1,...,T } f (xt ). For pre-training, the (discounted) cumulative simple regret was used
(Equation 3), sending a stronger and less sparse signal than simple regret. But because our goal is
human preferences optimization, e.g., finding the best sushi product for a given user, we report simple
regret at inference time. However, for completeness, Figure S2 reports cumulative simple regret.
Implementation. PABBO is implemented using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). Hyperparameter
settings can be found in Appendix D.1. For qEUBO, qEI, qNEI, we used the implementation from


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   GP1D                          GP2D                         Forrester1D                       Beale2D                       Branin2D
                        100
                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                 10
                                                    100                           100
Simple Regret                                                                                                                                     101
                                                                                                                 102

                 10−1                                                            10−1
                                                                                                                 101
                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                 10−2                            10
                                                 10−1
                              0   10   20   30            0    10      20   30          0      10    20     30            0     10   20      30         0     10   20    30
                        200
                                                                                                                 150                              150
                                                    200
   Inference time (s)


                        150
                                                    150                          100
                                                                                                                 100                              100
                        100
                                                    100
                                                                                  50                              50                               50
                         50                          50

                          0                           0                            0                               0                                0
                              0   10   20      30         0    10      20   30          0       10   20     30            0     10   20      30         0     10   20    30

                                                                                            Iterations
                                       PABBO                  Random             qEUBO               qEI                  qTS         MPES                  qNEI


Figure 3: Simple regret and inference time on synthetic examples. Mean with 95% confidence
intervals computed across 30 runs with random starting pairs. PABBO consistently achieved the
lowest simple regret across all tasks, except for GP cases where it performs comparably to
qNEI, while offering a 10× speedup.

the BoTorch library (Balandat et al., 2020). For qTS and MPES our implementation is described in
Appendix D.3. The code to reproduce our experiments is available at https://github.com/
xinyuzc/PABBO.
5.1                           S YNTHETIC FUNCTIONS

We begin by benchmarking PABBO on two types of synthetic functions. The first type involves 30
draws from the same GPs that were used to build the pre-training dataset (See Appendix C for the
data generation process). We refer to this case as the in-distribution. The second type refers to
classical test functions: the Forrester, Branin, and Beale functions. These functions were not part of
the pre-training dataset used by PABBO, hence we refer to this case as out-of-distribution.
At each training epoch, we generate B different GP samples, to which a quadratic bowl is added to
increase the chances of a draw exhibiting a global optimum. Then, we draw 200 × D points, where D
is the dimension of x, half of which for the auxiliary prediction task and the rest for the optimization
task. For synthetic functions, the query set size was set to S = 256.
PABBO consistently ranks either as best or second to best method in terms of simple regret (Figure 3).
While this is expected for the in-distribution case, given its low dimensionality compared to our
model architecture, in the out-of-distribution setting, PABBO also achieves the lowest simple regret
across all three examples. Of note, the random strategy often outperforms certain GP baselines.
Regarding inference speed, PABBO offers an average 12-fold speed-up over the fastest GP-based
strategy across 5 problems, consistently over the whole trial.
Additionally, PABBO successfully recovers at least one of the three global optima of the Branin
function (Figure S11, left panel), and correctly identifies the global optimum of the Forrester
function (right panel). Beyond convergence to an optimum, PABBO also accurately learned the
shape of each function from preference data, a modality that only allows identification up to a
monotonic transformation.

5.2                           H YPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION

Next, we consider hyperparameter optimization (Pineda Arango et al., 2021). This challenge emulates
the task an ML expert would face when optimizing the hyperparameter of a given model. In real-


                                                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Search space No. 7609                     Search space No. 5636                     Search space No. 5859                            Candy                          Sushi
                10−1                                      100                                                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                                      −1
                                                                                                  10−1                                                                           10

Simple regret
                                                      10−1
                10−2                                                                                                                                                             10−2
                                                                                                       −2                                        −1
                                                                                                  10                                        10
                                                      10   −2                                                                                                                    10−3
                10−3                                                                              10−3                                                                            10−4
                       0     25      50      75     100         0       25     50      75     100           0    25       50         75   100         0   25      50     75     100    0   25    50     75   100
                                                                                                                      Iterations
                                                                    PABBO           Random                  qEUBO              qEI              qTS            qNEI           MPES



Figure 4: Simple regret on different search spaces from the HPO-B benchmark and human preferences
datasets. Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random starting pairs.
Attached to each PABBO baseline is a number corresponding to S, the size of the query set. On
average, PABBO ranks first on HPO-B tasks and second for human preferences datasets.

world scenarios, experts often find it easier to express preferences between pairs of hyperparameter
configurations, rather than assigning precise scalar utilities. The HPO-B benchmark contains multiple
search spaces, each corresponding to the optimization of different ML models.
Each search space contains multiple meta-datasets from different meta-tasks, and each meta-dataset
collects a list of hyperparameter configurations with their response values, {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , allowing us
to simulate preference for any two configurations given their responses. All the meta-datasets within
a search space have been categorized into three splits: meta-train, meta-validation, and meta-test.
We choose three representative search spaces and pre-train our model on the meta-train split associated
with each space, further splitting each set into two equal-sized, non-overlapping parts beforehand for
the auxiliary prediction and optimization tasks (see Appendix D.2). For evaluation, we take all points
from each meta-dataset of the meta-test split of the search space, allowing us to assess the average
performance of our model and the baselines across all meta-datasets.
Overall, PABBO achieves the best performance, closely followed by the qNEI baseline (Figure 4, first
three panels). It is worth noticing that on these higher-dimensional problems, all methods now clearly
outperform the random acquisition strategy.

5.3                        H UMAN PREFERENCES

We experiment with our model pre-trained with synthetic GP samples on two real-world human
preference datasets: the Candy* and Sushi* datasets. The Candy dataset provides the full ranking of 85
different candies from pairwise preference via online studies. Each candy object contains 2 continuous
features, sugarpercent and pricepercent. The Sushi dataset collects a preference score by
asking users to rate 100 different types of sushi on a five-point-scale. The overall score for each sushi
is obtained by averaging across users. Each sushi contains 4 continuous features. Following Siivola
et al. (2021), we generalize both datasets to continuous space by performing linear extrapolation, and
the out-of-bound values are filled with their nearest neighbors in the original dataset.
For both examples, we report the simple regret achieved by our model when using a query set of size
S = 512. (Figure 4, fourth and fifth panels). On these challenging out-of-distribution preference
learning tasks, PABBO remains competitive with qNEI and MPES, achieving the second and third
place for the candy and sushi datasets, respectively. Both problems are characterized by a large
variance in the results for all baselines.

5.4                        A BLATION STUDY

This last experimental section investigates whether certain modeling choices and hyperparameter
values may have a significant impact on the performance of PABBO. A set of more detailed ablation
studies can be found in Appendix B.3.
Access to latent values during pre-training. Even though latent values are always accessible for
synthetic datasets used for pre-training, this might not be the case for real-world preferential meta
datasets. A simple solution for proposing rewards without access to the true utility is to use rankings
from a fully ranked set to approximate the latent function values. We trained a 1-and-2-dimensional
models using a pre-training dataset of GP samples, substituting classical rewards for each meta-task
*                                                                                             *
                Available at data/candy-power-ranking                                               Available at https://www.kamishima.net/sushi/


                                                                                                                      9
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      (a) Ablation - Reward model                                   (b) Ablation - Discount factor                                 (c) Ablation - Query set size
                           Forrester 1D              2D GP - 30 draws              Branin 2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                         101


                                                                                                                                                                                    Inference time (s)
                                                                                                                               = 0.5                                     S = 128
                                 Values                                  101                                                                             101
Simple regret


                                                                                               Simple regret


                                                                                                                                        Simple regret
                 100             Rankings    100                                                                100            = 0.9
                                                                                                                               = 0.98
                                                                                                                                                                         S = 256
                                                                                                                                                                         S = 512
                                                                                                                               = 1.00                                    S = 1024                        100
                10 1                                                     100                                   10 1                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10 1
                10 2                                                                                           10 2
                                            10 1 0                      10 1                                                                            10 1                                         10 2 0
                       0         20                           20               0         20                           0   20                                   0        20                                     20
                                                                                                     Iterations
  Figure 5: Ablation studies. Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with
  random starting pairs. On low dimensional examples, PABBO maintains similar performance
  when substituting latent function values for rankings, and performs as expected when varying
  the discount factor γ and query set size S.
  by the rankings of corresponding samples. On the 1-dimensional Forrester function, this alternative
  version of PABBO still yields decent performances (Figure 5(a)).
  Discount factor γ. PABBO learns a policy πθ by taking the future discounted rewards into account
  across a time horizon T . A smaller discount factor prioritizes immediate queries, giving more weight
  to the early steps in the optimization process. In contrast, as γ approaches 1, the future queries
  become increasingly important, reflecting a more balanced consideration of both immediate and
  future rewards. We test with different discount factors on the 1-dimensional Forrester problem. The
  results in Figure 5(b) align with our expectation. When γ is small, we observe faster convergence
  in the early stages. However, since the future rewards are not sufficiently considered, the average
  performance over larger steps is less favorable compared to using a larger γ, which balances both
  immediate and future rewards, resulting in better long-term optimization outcomes.
  Query set size S. At inference time, a continuous search space is discretized into S query locations
  sampled from a quasi-random Sobol sequence, used to build a set of candidate query pairs consisting
  of all possible pairwise combinations, resulting in O(S 2 ) query pairs. S introduces a trade-off
  between performance and inference time: a denser grid guarantees adequate exploration of the search
  space, but longer inference times. For the 2-dimensional Branin problem, increasing the grid size
  S ∈ [128, 256, 512, 1024] leads to increased inference time, a consequence of the need to embed an
  increasing number of candidate pairs (Figure 5(c)). In terms of simple regret, a grid of size S = 1024
  achieves the best result, whereas S = 256 offers the best speed/accuracy tradeoff.

   6                   D ISCUSSION
  We introduced PABBO, a method to conduct preferential black-box optimization in a fully amortized
  manner. Leveraging an offline training phase on both synthetic and existing datasets, PABBO achieves
  considerably reduced inference time jointly with top-ranking performances compared to GP alterna-
  tives, based on our benchmarks. One way to explain this gap is that our pre-training dataset contains
  latent function values, which are always accessible for synthetic datasets, thus giving PABBO a
  significant advantage over preferential GPs. This being said, a dedicated ablation study demonstrated
  that replacing latent function values with pure rankings did not significantly affect PABBO’s results.
  Due to the model architecture and the difficulty of the task, learning to optimize from preferential data,
  PABBO requires large amounts of pre-collected data. While synthetic datasets might be expressive
  enough, specific applications falling out-of-distribution might pose an issue. More generally, this
  raises the question of how the pre-training dataset should be constructed. A current limitation of our
  approach is the size of the query set, S, which scales with task dimensionality, increasing inference
  times (Figure 5). Preliminary results suggest parallelization may help mitigate this issue. Additionally,
  a promising solution for high-dimensional tasks is developing a dimension-agnostic architecture that
  can handle inputs of varying dimensions. Currently, PABBO can only handle tasks with the same
  dimensionality, requiring separate models for tasks with different dimensions. Such a strategy could
  leverage low-dimensional tasks for high-dimensional ones. This is typically useful if the objective
  possesses a hidden low-dimensional structure, or decomposes additively. Finally, PABBO directly
  outputs acquisition values for a candidate pair, modeling the user’s latent goal, but does not account
  for the fact that ultimately, a human is performing the comparison. Introducing dedicated user models
  like the one presented by Sinaga et al. (2024) could be an interesting extension to this work.


                                                                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

XZ, DH and SK were supported by the Research Council of Finland (Flagship programme: Finnish
Center for Artificial Intelligence FCAI and decision 341763). SK was also supported by the UKRI
Turing AI World-Leading Researcher Fellowship, [EP/W002973/1]. The authors wish to thank Aalto
Science-IT project, for the computational and data storage resources provided.

R EFERENCES
Mahmoud M Abdelrahman and Clayton Miller. Targeting occupant feedback using digital twins:
 Adaptive spatial–temporal thermal preference sampling to optimize personal comfort models.
 Building and Environment, 2022.

Masaki Adachi, Brady Planden, David Howey, Michael A. Osborne, Sebastian Orbell, Natalia
 Ares, Krikamol Muandet, and Siu Lun Chau. Looping in the human: Collaborative and explain-
 able Bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, 2024.

Virginia Aglietti, Ira Ktena, Jessica Schrouff, Eleni Sgouritsa, Francisco JR Ruiz, Alan Malek, Alexis
  Bellot, and Silvia Chiappa. Funbo: Discovering acquisition functions for bayesian optimization
  with funsearch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04824, 2024.

Brandon Amos. Tutorial on amortized optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00665, 2023.

Raul Astudillo, Zhiyuan Jerry Lin, Eytan Bakshy, and Peter Frazier. qeubo: A decision-theoretic ac-
  quisition function for preferential bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of The 26th International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023.

Raul Astudillo, Kejun Li, Maegan Tucker, Chu Xin Cheng, Aaron D. Ames, and Yisong Yue.
  Preferential multi-objective bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14699, 2024.

Maximilian Balandat, Brian Karrer, Daniel Jiang, Samuel Daulton, Ben Letham, Andrew G Wilson,
 and Eytan Bakshy. BoTorch: A framework for efficient monte-carlo bayesian optimization. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Viktor Bengs, Robert Busa-Fekete, Adil El Mesaoudi-Paul, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Preference-based
  online learning with dueling bandits: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.

Tom Blau, Edwin V Bonilla, Iadine Chades, and Amir Dezfouli. Optimizing sequential experimental
  design with deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, 2022.

Eric Brochu, Vlad M. Cora, and Nando de Freitas. A tutorial on bayesian optimization of expensive
  cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.2599, 2010.

Paul E Chang, Nasrulloh Loka, Daolang Huang, Ulpu Remes, Samuel Kaski, and Luigi Acerbi.
  Amortized probabilistic conditioning for optimization, simulation and inference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.15320, 2024.

Guojin Chen, Keren Zhu, Seunggeun Kim, Hanqing Zhu, Yao Lai, Bei Yu, and David Z Pan. Llm-
  enhanced bayesian optimization for efficient analog layout constraint generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.05250, 2024.

Yutian Chen, Matthew W Hoffman, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Misha Denil, Timothy P Lillicrap,
  Matt Botvinick, and Nando Freitas. Learning to learn without gradient descent by gradient descent.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.

Yutian Chen, Xingyou Song, Chansoo Lee, Zi Wang, Richard Zhang, David Dohan, Kazuya
  Kawakami, Greg Kochanski, Arnaud Doucet, Marc’aurelio Ranzato, et al. Towards learning
  universal hyperparameter optimizers with transformers. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Wei Chu and Zoubin Ghahramani. Preference learning with Gaussian processes. In Proceedings of
 the 22nd international conference on Machine learning, 2005.
João P.L. Coutinho, Ivan Castillo, and Marco S. Reis. Human-in-the-loop controller tuning using
  preferential bayesian optimization. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 2024.
Kyle Cranmer, Johann Brehmer, and Gilles Louppe. The frontier of simulation-based inference.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2020.
Adam Foster, Desi R Ivanova, Ilyas Malik, and Tom Rainforth. Deep adaptive design: Amortizing
  sequential bayesian experimental design. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2021.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
 Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and SM Ali Eslami. Conditional neural processes. In
 International conference on machine learning, 2018.
Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2023.
Manuel Gloeckler, Michael Deistler, Christian Dietrich Weilbach, Frank Wood, and Jakob H. Macke.
 All-in-one simulation-based inference. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-
 ing, 2024.
Javier González, Zhenwen Dai, Andreas Damianou, and Neil D Lawrence. Preferential bayesian
  optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, James Requeima, Edward O Pyzer-Knapp, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik.
  Parallel and distributed thompson sampling for large-scale accelerated exploration of chemical
  space. In International conference on machine learning, 2017.
Bing-Jing Hsieh, Ping-Chun Hsieh, and Xi Liu. Reinforced few-shot acquisition function learning
  for bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Daolang Huang, Louis Filstroff, Petrus Mikkola, Runkai Zheng, and Samuel Kaski. Bayesian
  optimization augmented with actively elicited expert knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08742,
  2022.
Daolang Huang, Manuel Haussmann, Ulpu Remes, ST John, Grégoire Clarté, Kevin Luck, Samuel
  Kaski, and Luigi Acerbi. Practical equivariances via relational conditional neural processes.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Daolang Huang, Yujia Guo, Luigi Acerbi, and Samuel Kaski. Amortized bayesian experimental
  design for decision-making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37, 2024.
Carl Hvarfner, Frank Hutter, and Luigi Nardi. A general framework for user-guided bayesian
  optimization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Desi R Ivanova, Adam Foster, Steven Kleinegesse, Michael U Gutmann, and Thomas Rainforth.
  Implicit deep adaptive design: Policy-based experimental design without likelihoods. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2021.
Saurav Jha, Dong Gong, Xuesong Wang, Richard E Turner, and Lina Yao. The neural process family:
  Survey, applications and perspectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00517, 2022.
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. In
  Handbook of the fundamentals of financial decision making: Part I. World Scientific, 2013.
Hyunjik Kim, Andriy Mnih, Jonathan Schwarz, Marta Garnelo, Ali Eslami, Dan Rosenbaum, Oriol
 Vinyals, and Yee Whye Teh. Attentive neural processes. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuki Koyama, Issei Sato, and Masataka Goto. Sequential gallery for interactive visual design
  optimization. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2020.
Kejun Li, Maegan Tucker, Erdem Bıyık, Ellen Novoseller, Joel W Burdick, Yanan Sui, Dorsa Sadigh,
  Yisong Yue, and Aaron D Ames. Roial: Region of interest active learning for characterizing
  exoskeleton gait preference landscapes. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), 2021.
Vincent Lim, Ellen Novoseller, Jeffrey Ichnowski, Huang Huang, and Ken Goldberg. Policy-
  based bayesian experimental design for non-differentiable implicit models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.04272, 2022.
Zhiyuan Jerry Lin, Raul Astudillo, Peter Frazier, and Eytan Bakshy. Preference exploration for
  efficient bayesian optimization with multiple outcomes. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, 2022.
Tennison Liu, Nicolás Astorga, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Large language models
  to enhance bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03921, 2024.
Alexandre Maraval, Matthieu Zimmer, Antoine Grosnit, and Haitham Bou Ammar. End-to-end
  meta-bayesian optimisation with transformer neural processes. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.
Stratis Markou, James Requeima, Wessel Bruinsma, Anna Vaughan, and Richard E Turner. Practical
   conditional neural process via tractable dependent predictions. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.
Samuel Müller, Noah Hollmann, Sebastian Pineda Arango, Josif Grabocka, and Frank Hutter.
  Transformers can do bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Samuel Müller, Matthias Feurer, Noah Hollmann, and Frank Hutter. Pfns4bo: In-context learning for
  bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Vivek Myers, Erdem Bıyık, and Dorsa Sadigh. Active reward learning from online preferences. In
  2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023.
Quoc Phong Nguyen, Sebastian Tay, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet. Top-k ranking
  bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arxiv:2012.10688, 2020.
Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning
  via sequence modeling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, 2019.
Sebastian Pineda Arango, Hadi Jomaa, Martin Wistuba, and Josif Grabocka. Hpo-b: A large-scale
  reproducible benchmark for black-box hpo based on openml. In Proceedings of the Neural
  Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Tom Rainforth, Adam Foster, Desi R Ivanova, and Freddie Bickford Smith. Modern bayesian
  experimental design. Statistical Science, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning.
  MIT Press, 2006.
Eero Siivola, Akash Kumar Dhaka, Michael Riis Andersen, Javier González, Pablo Garcı́a Moreno,
  and Aki Vehtari. Preferential batch bayesian optimization. In 2021 IEEE 31st International
  Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), 2021.
Marshal Arijona Sinaga, Julien Martinelli, Vikas Garg, and Samuel Kaski. Heteroscedastic preferen-
 tial bayesian optimization with informative noise distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14657,
 2024.
Lei Song, Chenxiao Gao, Ke Xue, Chenyang Wu, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, Zongzhang Zhang, and Chao
  Qian. Reinforced in-context black-box optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17423, 2024.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Kevin Swersky, Yulia Rubanova, David Dohan, and Kevin Murphy. Amortized bayesian optimization
  over discrete spaces. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 769–778. PMLR,
  2020.
Shion Takeno, Masahiro Nomura, and Masayuki Karasuyama. Towards practical preferential Bayesian
  optimization with skew Gaussian processes. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2023.
Michael Volpp, Lukas P. Fröhlich, Kirsten Fischer, Andreas Doerr, Stefan Falkner, Frank Hutter, and
 Christian Daniel. Meta-learning acquisition functions for transfer learning in bayesian optimization.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Wenjie Xu, Wenbin Wang, Yuning Jiang, Bratislav Svetozarevic, and Colin Jones. Principled
 preferential bayesian optimization. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
 2024.
Adam X. Yang, Laurence Aitchison, and Henry Moss. MONGOOSE: Path-wise smooth bayesian
  optimisation via meta-learning. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic Inference &
 Generative Modeling, 2024.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix

The appendix is organized as follows:

       • Section A provides details about the inner mechanisms of PABBO. It contains an algorithm
         for test time inference, an illustrative figure for the masks employed in self-attention layers,
         a discussion on different modeling choices for PABBO’s architecture, and a description of
         our Batch PABBO extension for high-dimensional scalability.
       • Section B contains additional experiments and analyses:
            – Section B.1 presents cumulative regret results across all experiments from the main
               text.
            – Section B.2 evaluates PABBO’s performance on additional high-dimensional test func-
               tions, including 6D Ackley, 6D Hartmann, and a 16D HPO-B task.
            – Section B.3 provides comprehensive ablation studies on pre-training dataset composi-
               tion, auxiliary loss weight, discount factor, and query budget effects.
            – Section B.4 shows a visualization demonstrates about PABBO’s capabilities.
       • Section C gives the procedure for generating the synthetic datasets used by PABBO during
         meta-training.
       • Section D provides additional details regarding the experiment section. Specifically, a table
         for PABBO’s hyperparameters is provided, along with a description of the HPO-B datasets,
         the baselines employed, and the hardware used for training and inference.

A     F URTHER DETAILS ON PABBO
A.1   T EST-T IME A LGORITHM

Algorithm S1 PABBO - test time algorithm
Require: Query set size S, query budget T , initial observations H1 (possibly empty)
  Initialize D(q) with S quasi-random samples
  Q = {(xi , xj ) ∀(i, j) ∈ {1, . . . , S}2 , i ̸= j}
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
      D(c) ← Ht                                                                    ▷ update context set
      E(c) = femb (D(c) ), E(q) = femb (D(q) )                       ▷ embed context set and query set
      λ(q) = ftfm (E(q) ; E(c) )        ▷ Transformers output for query set conditioning on context set
                    (q)  (q)
      q = {fa (λi , λj , t, T ) ∀(xi , xj ) ∈ Q} ▷ predict acquisition function values for all query
  pairs
      πθ (Q | Ht , t, T ) = Categorical(q)                  ▷ form policy as a Categorical distribution
      (xt,1 , xt,2 ) ∼ πθ (Q | Ht , t, T )                        ▷ sample next query pair from policy
      lt = xt,1 ≻ xt,2                                                     ▷ observe binary preference
      Ht+1 ← Ht ∪ {(xt,1 , xt,2 , lt )}                                                ▷ update history
      Q ← Q\{(xt,1 , xt,2 )}                                                         ▷ update query set
  end for


A.2   A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS

PABBO employs separate MLPs for xi,1 , xi,2 and li , mapping each of them to separate embeddings
of Transformer input dimension as E(xi,1 ) , E(xi,2 ) , and E(li ) , with ⊕ denoting the component-wise
addition. When working on the context set D(c) and prediction context set D(ctxpred) , which consists
of duels (xi,1 , xi,2 , li ), the token embedding is obtained by adding the individual embeddings up,
i.e. E = E(xi,1 ) ⊕ E(xi,2 ) ⊕ E(li ) . When processing a single design from the query set D(q) or
prediction target set D(tarpred) , we directly use the individual embedding for that design as the token


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


embedding, i.e., E = E(xi,1 ) . Because (xi,1 , xi,2 , li ) forms a single atomic element in our context
set, Transformer architecture requires all elements in its input sequence to live in the same embedding
space: to pass these preference observations to the transformer, we need to make sure their dimensions
are aligned.
Given that PABBO encodes elements separately, for the same type of elements, like x, a shared
embedder can be used across all three sets. This enables parameter sharing for the embedders, as the
same embedder processes all x-type input, regardless of which set they belong to. Model complexity
benefits from this choice as the need to train separate embedding functions for each set is avoided.
Besides, separate embeddings confer distinct semantic meanings to features x and preference labels
l. Thus, separate MLPs can specialize in their respective tasks: feature embedders can focus on
capturing spatial relationships, and preference embedders can focus on binary relationship encoding.
This leads to an increased representation power.
On a similar note, one could have settled for using the same embedding for xi,1 and xi,2 . However, in
the particular case of preferential feedback, upon summing E(xi,1 ) and E(xi,2 ) the order information
would have been lost: the network would not know whether xi,1 > xi,2 , or the opposite. Therefore,
we opted for separate embedders for E(xi,1 ) and E(xi,2 ) .
The interactions between different elements in our transformer architecture are controlled through
attention masking, which determines which elements can attend to each other. Figure S1 illustrates
examples of these masks in self-attention layers. These carefully designed masks ensure that our
model processes information in a manner that preserves the causal structure of the preferential
optimization problem.

                         Observed pair 1 Observed pair 2   Query location 1 Query location 2                     Observed pair 1 Observed pair 2   Target location 1 Target location 2
                           from 𝒟 !        from 𝒟 !          from 𝒟 "         from 𝒟 #
                                                                                                                 from 𝒟 !"#$%&' from 𝒟 !"#$%&'     from 𝒟 "(%$%&' from 𝒟 "(%$%&'


      Observed pair 1                                                                          Observed pair 1
      from 𝒟 !                                                                                 from 𝒟 !"#$%&'


      Observed pair 2                                                                          Observed pair 2
      from 𝒟 !                                                                                 from 𝒟 !"#$%&'


      Query location 1                                                                         Target location 1
      from 𝒟 "                                                                                 from 𝒟 "(%$%&'


      Query location 2                                                                         Target location 2
      from 𝒟 #                                                                                 from 𝒟 "(%$%&'


Figure S1: Examples of masks in self-attention layers. Colored squares represent the elements from
the left column can attend to the elements on the top in the self-attention layers of the Transformer
block fftm . Left: An example of mask for the acquisition process, involving 2 samples from D(c) and
2 points from D(q) . Right: Mask example for the auxiliary prediction process, with 2 samples from
D(ctxpred) and 2 points from D(tarpred) .


A.3       BATCH PABBO FOR HIGH - DIMENSIONAL SCALABILITY

To address scalability challenges in high-dimensional spaces, we developed Batch PABBO, a par-
allelized extension of our standard approach. While the original PABBO processes a single query
set of size S, Batch PABBO evaluates B separate query sets of size S simultaneously, selecting
the best candidate pair from the combined pool of B × S candidates: at each optimization step,
B candidate pairs are independently proposed from the query sets, and the one with the highest
predicted acquisition function value is selected as the next query. This approach effectively increases
the exploration coverage while maintaining manageable computational requirements. We show the
results of batch PABBO in our additional high-dimensional experiments (Appendix B.2).


                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B                          A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

B.1                          C UMULATIVE REGRET RESULTS

While our main evaluation focuses on simple regret since our primary applications (such as human
preference optimization) prioritize finding the optimal solution rather than the path taken, we also
analyze the cumulative regret performance of PABBO. This metric is particularly relevant during
training, where we use the (discounted) cumulative simple regret as a reward function to provide
stronger learning signals (Equation 3). Figure S2 shows the cumulative simple regret across all
experiments presented in the main text.

                                     1D GP - 30 draws                         2D GP - 30 draws                           Forrester 1D                            Branin 2D
                                                                                                                                                  103
                                                                                                           102

                           101                                 101
                                                                                                                                                  102
                                                                                                           101
                           100
                                                               100
                                 0     10         20    30              0        10         20       30          0        10        20      30          0        10        20   30
                                         Beale2D                            Search Space No. 7609                    Search Space No. 5636                  Search Space No. 5859
Cumulative Simple Regret


                           106                                      1
                                                                                                           102
                                                               10
                           105
                                                                                                           101                                    101
                           104                                 100

                           103
                                                                                                           100                                    100
                                                              10−1
                                 0     10         20    30              0              50            100         0             50           100         0             50        100
                                            Candy                                     Sushi
                                                                                                                                         PABBO                        qTS
                                                               101
                           101                                                                                                           Random                       qNEI
                                                                                                                                         qEUBO                        MPES
                           100                                 100                                                                       qEI

                                 0           50         100             0              50            100

                                                                                                 Iterations

Figure S2: Cumulative simple regret plots for all experiments carried out in the main text. Mean
with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random starting pairs. PABBO achieves
competitive cumulative regret, ranking second on average across all tasks.


B.2                          H IGH - DIMENSIONAL FUNCTION EVALUATION

To further evaluate PABBO’s performance in higher-dimensional spaces, we conducted additional
experiments on three challenging benchmarks: the 6-dimensional Ackley function, the 6-dimensional
Hartmann function, and a 16-dimensional search space from the HPO-B benchmark. On the Ackley
function (Figure S3), we also tested our Batch PABBO (Appendix A.3) which allows PABBO to
evaluate multiple query sets simultaneously. The experiments reveal varied performance across
different functions. While PABBO performs well on the Ackley function (Figure S3) and the 16-
dimensional HPO-B task (Figure S5), it shows limitations on the Hartmann function (Figure S4). This
performance gap on Hartmann likely stems from its multimodal landscape with many local optima,
which differs significantly from the functions in our pre-training dataset. This observation suggests
that incorporating more diverse function types during pre-training could improve performance on
such challenging landscapes.

B.3                          F URTHER ABLATION STUDIES

To provide deeper insights into PABBO’s performance characteristics and design choices, we conduct
a series of additional ablation studies exploring various aspects of our model.


                                                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 20                                                                            1200


                                                                    Cumulative Simple Regret
                                                                                               1000
 Simple Regret   15
                                                                                                      800
                 10                                                                                   600

                                                                                                      400
                  5
                                                                                                      200
                  0
                                                                                                        0
                      0      10   20    30      40    50      60                                            0   10         20   30      40   50     60

                                                              Iterations
                      PABBO S = 1024          PABBO S = 256                                                     Random               qEUBO        MPES
                      PABBO S = 512           PABBO Batch B = 5, S = 256                                        qTS                  qEI          qNEI


Figure S3: Simple regret and cumulative simple regret on the 6-dimensional Ackley function. Mean
with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random starting pairs. Using paralleliza-
tion, we can mimic a larger query set size for PABBO, thus achieving faster convergence than
non-batch PABBO versions, for a significantly faster cumulative inference time (13s compared
to 40s for PABBO S = 1024).



                3.0
                                                                           Cumulative Simple Regret


                                                                                                      150
                2.5
Simple Regret


                2.0
                                                                                                      100
                1.5

                1.0                                                                                    50

                0.5
                                                                                                        0
                      0      10   20     30     40     50     60                                            0   10         20   30      40   50     60

                                                              Iterations

                          PABBO        Random           qTS                        qEUBO                             qEI             MPES         qNEI


Figure S4: Simple regret and cumulative simple regret on the 6-dimensional Hartmann function.
Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random starting pairs. We used a
query set size S = 1024 for PABBO. PABBO does not match the performance of most GP-based
baselines on this example.



B.3.1                     P RE - TRAINING DATASET COMPOSITION

The composition of the pre-training dataset is critical for the generalization capabilities of our model.
To quantify this effect, we compare two variants: PABBO RBF, pre-trained exclusively on GP draws
sampled using an RBF kernel, and the standard PABBO , pre-trained on a diverse mixture of kernels
as described in Appendix C.
As shown in Figure S6, training on a mixture of kernels leads to better performance compared to
using only the RBF kernel. This confirms our hypothesis that a more diverse pre-training dataset
enhances the model’s ability to generalize to various function landscapes.


                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     Search Space No. 5971


                                                                                                            Cumulative Simple Regret
                10−1                                                                                                                   101
Simple Regret


                10−2
                                                                                                                                       100

                10−3


                       0                          20        40          60          80         100                                               0         20              40           60        80   100
                                                               Iterations                                                                                                   Iterations
                                                       PABBO              Random              qEUBO                                              qEI            qTS              qNEI


Figure S5: Simple regret and cumulative simple regret on a 16-dimensional search space from the
HPO-B benchmark. Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random
starting pairs. We used a query set size S = 1024 for PABBO. PABBO ranks 2nd in terms of simple
regret and 3rd in terms of cumulative simple regret.



                                                                                                      Cumulative Simple regret
                            Simple regret


                                            100
                                                                                                                                 101


                                                  0     5        10     15     20        25    30                                            0         5    10        15        20      25   30
                                                                      Iterations                                                                                  Iterations
                                                                                          PABBO RBF                                              PABBO


Figure S6: Ablation study on the composition of the pre-training synthetic dataset on 30 2D GP
draws, with a query set size S = 256. Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 5
runs with random starting pairs. PABBO RBF is pre-trained on GP draws sampled using an RBF
kernel, whereas PABBO uses the procedure described in Section C. Both baselines use lengthscales
l ∼ U([1.5, 2]). As expected, pre-training on a dataset coming from a mixture of kernels rather
than only a RBF kernel yields better results, due to a more pronounced diversity of the synthetic
samples.



B.3.2                      L OSS WEIGHT AND EFFECT OF WARM - UP PHASE

We explore the impact of the loss weight hyperparameter λ in the combined loss function, as well as
the effect of the warm-up phase where the model is initially trained using only the prediction task.
The results in Figure S7 reveal that the warm-up phase plays a crucial role in PABBO’s performance.
This confirms our intuition that allowing the model to first learn the shape of the latent function
stabilizes the subsequent policy learning process. Interestingly, once the warm-up phase is included,
we notice that the specific value of λ has only a mild effect on the overall performance.


B.3.3                      D ISCOUNT FACTOR IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

We conduct a more comprehensive ablation study by considering a denser grid of γ values, spaced
between 0 to 1, with results shown in Figure S8. The conclusion aligns with the main text: smaller
γ values prioritize immediate rewards, leading to slightly faster convergence in the early stage but
worse performance in the long term. Additionally, we observe that γ < 0.5 deteriorates performance,
it might be that sparse reward signals hinder the model convergence. Based on these findings, we
recommend using a γ close to 1 when the primary goal is minimizing final regret. For scenarios
where early-stage performance is crucial, a γ between 0.5 and 1.0 can be considered.


                                                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                           Cumulative Simple Regret
2D GP - 30 draws
                                   100


                   Simple Regret
                                                                                                                      101


                                            0   5   10     15     20        25   30                                         0   5   10     15      20     25      30


                                                                                           Cumulative Simple Regret
                   Simple Regret


                                   101
Branin 2D


                                                                                                                      102
                                        0
                                   10



                                            0   5   10     15     20        25   30                                         0   5   10     15      20     25      30


                                                                                           Cumulative Simple Regret
                                   103
                   Simple Regret


                                   102                                                                                104
Beale 2D


                                   101


                                   100                                                                                103

                                            0   5   10     15     20        25   30                                         0   5   10     15      20     25      30
                                                         Iterations                                                                      Iterations

                                                    λ = 0 w/ burnin phase         λ = 2 w/ burnin phase                                  λ = 1 w/o burnin phase
                                                    λ = 1 w/ burnin phase         λ = 0 w/o burnin phase                                 λ = 2 w/o burnin phase


Figure S7: Ablation study on the loss weight hyperparameter λ in L = L(q) + λL(p) (Equations 3
and 5) on three 2D functions, with a query set size S = 256. During the warm-up phase, PABBO is
trained using only the prediction task L(p) . We observe a stark contrast depending on the presence
or not of the warm-up phase, which validates the usefulness of the prediction task, mainly as a
tool to stabilize training. Results are mildly affected by different values of λ.



B.3.4                               Q UERY BUDGET AND TEMPORAL INFORMATION

We now explore how the query budget T used during pre-training affects performance, as well as
the impact of passing temporal information t/T to the acquisition head. The results are shown
in Figure S9. Our results indicate that including t/T as input to the acquisition head improves
the performance, which means the temporal information t/T helps the model better capture the
progression of the optimization process, leading to more informed acquisition decisions. Additionally,
we observe that when t/T is included, a larger query budget T is associated with faster convergence
and the lowest cumulative simple regret.


B.3.5                               A BLATION ON THE PERCENTAGE OF CONTEXT AND TARGET PREDICTION SET

In the main experiments, we set a total number of samples for the prediction set and randomly
sample D(ctxpred) and assign the remaining pairs as D(tarpred) . To examine the effect of the percentage
of context and target prediction set, we train different PABBO for prediction task, when setting
N (ctxpred) = 10 with varying N (tarpred) = [1, 10, 100]. The result is shown in Figure S10.


                                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                            Cumulative Simple Regret
                                                                                                                                                                             102
                                  100

           Simple Regret
                                 10−1

                                 10−2
                                                                                                                                                                             101                                                                        γ
                                 10−3                                                                                                                                                                         0.0                0.2              0.4             0.6          0.8               0.98
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1                0.3              0.5             0.7          0.9               1.0

                                 10−4
                                        0               5              10               15              20             25           30                                              0               5                 10                 15                 20            25                30
                                                                                  Iterations                                                                                                                                           Iterations


                                                                                                                                            Final cumulative simple regret
                                                                                                                                                                             102
           Final simple regret


                                 10−1


                                 10−2
                                            0.0

                                                  0.1

                                                            0.2

                                                                  0.3

                                                                            0.4

                                                                                       0.5

                                                                                                 0.6

                                                                                                        0.7

                                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                                       0.9

                                                                                                                             0.98

                                                                                                                                      1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0

                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.98

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                             γ                                                                                                                                                γ


Figure S8: Ablation Study on the discount factor γ (Equation 3) on the 1D Forrester function, with a
query set size S = 256. Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random
starting pairs. As expected, an higher value of γ leads to a lower cumulative simple regret. The
picture is more nuanced for simple regret, even though as we progress towards a large number
of iterations, the conclusion appears to be similar.



                                                                                                                                                                              102
                       100
                                                                                                                                                          Cumulative Regret
Simple Regret


                10−1


                10−2                                                                                                                                                          101


                10−3
                                    0             10              20              30               40           50           60                                                         0           10                    20              30                40            50                60

                                                                                                                                    Iterations
                                                                                  T =8                        T = 32                T = 8 - t/T removed                                                         T = 32 - t/T removed
                                                                                  T = 16                      T = 64                T = 16 - t/T removed                                                        T = 64 - t/T removed



Figure S9: Simple regret and cumulative simple regret on the 1-dimensional Forrester function
depending on the query budget T and whether or not t/T is passed as input to the acquisition head
fa . Mean with 95% confidence intervals computed across 30 runs with random starting pairs. The
variance is mostly driven by whether or not t/T is passed to the acquisition head or not (see
Figure 2, right). When passing t/T , a large budget T is associated with the fastest convergence
and the lowest simple cumulative regret.


B.4                                 E XAMPLE OF INFERENCE FUNCTION SHAPE AND OPTIMUM ON TEST FUNCTIONS

To provide qualitative insight into PABBO’s learning capabilities, Figure S11 visualizes the function
landscapes learned by our model after 30 optimization steps on two test functions. For the 2D Branin
function (left), PABBO successfully identifies one of the three global optima. For the 1D Forrester
function (right), PABBO accurately captures both the overall shape and the location of the global
optimum.


                                                                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              0.8


                        Validation Accuracy
                                              0.7


                                              0.6                                             N tarpred 1
                                                                                              N tarpred 10
                                              0.5                                             N tarpred 100

                                                    0         50                 100            150                  200
                                                                           Iterations
Figure S10: Validation accuracy on 128 1-dimensional GP samples. Increasing the size of D(tarpred)
provides more loss terms during training, thereby enriching the training signal, and resulting
in faster convergence of the network.


                                                                                      200
                                                                                      100
                                                                                                          5
                                                                                       0
                                                                                     −100 Z               0
                                                                                     −200
                                                                                                  Y


                                                                                     −300               −5
                                                                                     −400
                                                                                                        −10
                                                                                     −500

                                                                                20                      −15

                                                                           15                                 0.00     0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00
                                                                      10                                                       X
     −10
           −5                                                     5
                                                                      Y
                0
                    X      5                                  0
                                               10
                                                         −5
                                                    15

                    true optimum                         inference optimum                    queries                 prediction


Figure S11: Optimum inference and function shape on test functions after 30 optimization steps for
the 2D Branin function (left) and 1D Forrester function (right) trialed in Section 5.1.


C    G ENERATIVE PROCESS OF SYNTHETIC DATASET

To generate the D−dimensional synthetic data in Section 5.1, we first sample from a GP, where

      • The kernel are equally sampled from the RBF, Matérn-1/2, Matérn-3/2 and Matérn-5/2 ker-
        nels, with the kernel standard deviation σ ∼ U([0.1, 2]) and lengthscale for each dimension
        ld ∼ N (1/3, 0.75) truncated to [0.05, 2].
      • Then we sample function mean as the maximal value of m observations from the Normal
        distribution N (0, σ 2 ). To account for very high optimum, exp(1) is added to the mean with
        a probability of 0.1.


                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 2
3.0                                                    0.0
                             2.5
2.5                                                    0.5                       4
                             3.0
                                                       1.0
2.0                          3.5                                                 6
                                                       1.5
      1        0         1         1    0         1            1   0       1          1    0          1
                                                           5
 2                                                                               1
                             0.5
 1                                                         4
                                                                                 2
 0                           0.0
 1                                                         3                     3
                             0.5
 2
      1        0         1         1    0         1            1   0       1          1    0          1
                                                                               4.50
 4                                                         4
                              2                                                4.25
 3
                                                           6                   4.00
 2                            3
                                                                               3.75
 1                                                         8
      1        0         1         1    0         1            1   0       1          1    0          1

2.0                          4.0                           2
                                                                                1.0
                             3.8
1.8                                                                             1.5
                             3.6                           4
1.6                                                                             2.0
                             3.4
                                                           6                    2.5
1.4
      1        0         1         1    0         1            1   0       1          1    0          1

Figure S12: Example of 1-dimensional synthetic data generated using the protocol defined in
Appendix C. The orange dot in each plot indicates the optimum of the sampled function.


          • With the defined prior, we randomly sample an optimum (x∗ , 0) inside [−1, 1]D and a total
            of N − 1 context points, where N = 100 × D. The context set is sampled from GP posterior
            conditioned on the optimum by first sampling M − 1 points conditioned on the optimum,
            and the rest of N − M points conditioned on these points and the optimum. M = 50 for
            1-dimensional data and 100 when D = 2, 3, 4.


          • To ensure the existence of global optimum, we additionally add a quadratic bowl at x∗ .


          • Finally, the function value is y = −(|y| + 18 ∥x∗ − x∥2 + ∆y). The offset ∆y ∼ U([−5, 5]),
            makes the maximal value y ∗ = (0 + ∆y) ∈ [−5, 5].



Figure S12 shows 16 randomly generated 1-dimensional synthetic functions.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     T RAINING AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
D.1   PABBO H YPERPARAMETERS

                                              Model Architecture
 Embedding dimension of Transformer                                                  64
 Point-wise feed-forward dimension of Transformer                                   128
 Number of self-attention layers in Transformer                                      6
 Number of self-attention heads in Transformer                                       4
 Number of hidden layers in data embedders                                           3
 Number of hidden layers in decoder (fp , fa )                                       1
 Hidden layer dimension of decoder (fp , fa )                                       128
                                                     Training
 Number of iterations for warm-up                                                  3000
 Total number of training iterations                                               8000
 Horizon of episodes (T )                                                            64
 Learning rate for warm-up                                                       1 · 10−3
 Learning rate after warm-up                                                     3 · 10−5
 Learning rate decay                                               Cosine decay to 0 over 8000 iterations
 Number of meta-tasks in a batch during warm-up (B)                                 128
 Number of meta-tasks in a batch after warm-up (B)                                   16
 Number of trajectories from one meta-task for policy learning                       20
 Weight on auxiliary loss (λ)                                                       1.0
 discount factor (γ)                                                               0.98
 Size of query set (S)                                                      min(300, 100 · D)
 Size of candidate query pair set (M )                                      min(300, 100 · D)
 Size of prediction set (N )                                                min(300, 100 · D)
 Maximal size of prediction context set (N (ctxpred) )           50(D = 1), 100(1 < D ≤ 4), 200(D > 4)
                                                 Environment
 Number of initial pairs during training                                             0
 Number of initial pairs during evaluation                                           1
 Observation noise of duel feedback (σnoise )                                       0.0

Table S1: Hyperparameter settings used for PABBO. Most of them remain consistent across all the
tasks. Additionally, the size of meta-datasets was scaled according to the search space dimension.


D.2   HPO DATASET DESCRIPTION AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

As mentioned in Section 5.2 and Appendix B.2, we experimented on four high-dimensional search
spaces from the HPO-B benchmarks (Pineda Arango et al., 2021), each corresponding to the hyper-
paramers of a certain model: No. 5636 for rpart(29), No. 5859 for rpart(31), No. 7609 for
ranger(16), and No. 5971 for xgboost(6). Both No. 5636 and No. 5859 are 6-dimensional
spaces, No. 7609 is a 9-dimensional space, and No. 5971 is a 16-dimensional problem. Meta-datasets
within each space are divided into three splits: meta-train, meta-validation, and meta-test.
An individual model is trained on the meta-train split of each search space. Each meta-dataset is
equally divided beforehand into two parts from which we sample either prediction set D(p) or query
set D(q) , so as to prevent any information leak from rewards. The only exception happens when a
meta-dataset has too few data points: we fit a GP to the original data points and sample from the
posterior to generate either D(p) or D(q) . As described in Section 3.2, we sample D(p) containing N
queries and preferences and D(q) with S query points from each meta-dataset at the beginning of
each training iteration.

D.3   D ETAILS OF BASELINES

The PBO baselines are implemented based on PairwiseGP model class from
BoTorch.          For qEUBO, qEI and qNEI, BoTorch provides ready-to-use acquisi-
tion class qExpectedUtilityOfBestOption,                     qExpectedImprovement and
qNoisyExpectedImprovement. For qTS, we sample two draws from the GP posterior
at: (1) locations from quasi-random Sobol sequences for continuous search spaces, or (2) locations
of all candidates for discrete search spaces. The maximum of each draw are chosen as the


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


next query. For MPES, we follow the implementation based on (Nguyen et al., 2020), which
is available at https://github.com/RaulAstudillo06/qEUBO/tree/main/src/
acquisition_functions. Finally, we select a pair of random points for continuous spaces and
a random pair of possible candidates for discrete spaces as a random strategy. Baseline inputs are all
normalized to (0, 1).

D.4   H ARDWARE

We train our model using up to 5 Tesla V100-SXM2-32GB GPUs, with training time of roughly
10, 25, and 29 hours for 1-, 2-, and 4-dimensional synthetic data respectively. There is significant
potential to shorten this pre-training process by creating the training samples beforehand, rather
than generating them online. For the HPO-B tasks on search spaces No. 5636 and No. 5859 (6
dimensions) and the search space No. 7609 (9 dimensions), training takes approximately 21.5 hours
per task. We evaluate all the models on 2x64 core AMD EPYC 7713 @2.0 GHz.


                                                 25
