Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A U NIFIED F RAMEWORK FOR F ORWARD AND I NVERSE
P ROBLEMS IN S UBSURFACE I MAGING USING L ATENT
S PACE T RANSLATIONS
 Naveen Gupta1∗, Medha Sawhney1∗, Arka Daw2∗, Youzuo Lin3 , Anuj Karpatne1
 1
  Virginia Tech 2 Oak Ridge National Lab 3 UNC at Chapel Hill



                                                 A BSTRACT

             In subsurface imaging, learning the mapping from velocity maps to seismic wave-
             forms (forward problem) and waveforms to velocity (inverse problem) is impor-
             tant for several applications. While traditional techniques for solving forward
             and inverse problems are computationally prohibitive, there is a growing inter-
             est in leveraging recent advances in deep learning to learn the mapping between
             velocity maps and seismic waveform images directly from data. Despite the va-
             riety of architectures explored in previous works, several open questions remain
             unanswered such as the effect of latent space sizes, the importance of manifold
             learning, the complexity of translation models, and the value of jointly solving
             forward and inverse problems. We propose a unified framework to systematically
             characterize prior research in this area termed the Generalized Forward-Inverse
             (GFI) framework, building on the assumption of manifolds and latent space trans-
             lations. We show that GFI encompasses previous works in deep learning for
             subsurface imaging, which can be viewed as specific instantiations of GFI. We
             also propose two new model architectures within the framework of GFI: Latent
             U-Net and Invertible X-Net, leveraging the power of U-Nets for domain trans-
             lation and the ability of IU-Nets to simultaneously learn forward and inverse
             translations, respectively. We show that our proposed models achieve state-of-
             the-art performance for forward and inverse problems on a wide range of syn-
             thetic datasets and also investigate their zero-shot effectiveness on two real-world-
             like datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/KGML-lab/
             Generalized-Forward-Inverse-Framework-for-DL4SI


1        I NTRODUCTION

The goal of subsurface imaging is to identify the structure and geophysical properties of layers
underneath the Earth’s surface such as velocity maps (v), which is useful for a number of applications
including energy exploration, carbon capture and sequestration, and developing earthquake early
warning systems (Zhang et al., 2013). A typical approach for subsurface imaging is to conduct
seismic surveys, where the elastic wave energy generated from one or more controlled sources is
made to propagate through the Earth’s layers that are refracted, reflected, and received as seismic
waveforms (p) on the surface by multiple receivers. Mathematically, the relation between velocity
maps and seismic waveforms is governed by the following acoustic wave equation:
                                                    1     ∂2
                             ∇2 p(x, z, t) −                  p(x, z, t) = s(x, z, t),               (1)
                                               v 2 (x, z) ∂t2

where x, z, and t represent the horizontal direction, depth, and time, respectively, and ∇2 is the
Laplacian operator. Using Equation 1, the forward problem in subsurface imaging is to compute
seismic waveforms p given velocity maps v by learning the forward mapping fv→p : V → P. The
inverse problem, also referred to as Full Waveform Inversion (FWI), is then to learn the reverse
mapping fp→v : P → V for inferring velocity maps v given observations of p.
     ∗
         Equal Contribution. Corresponding authors: dawa@ornl.gov, {naveengupta, medha}@vt.edu


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While solving the forward problem requires expensive numerical solutions (Tago et al., 2012) of
Equation 1, learning the inverse is even more computationally demanding as it involves iterating
over velocity maps v to minimize the difference between simulated waveforms from the forward
model and ground-truth observations of p (Tarantola, 1988). As a result, traditional techniques for
solving forward and inverse problems in subsurface imaging are difficult to scale in operational
settings at the desired resolutions. In response, there is a growing interest in the geophysics commu-
nity to leverage deep learning for subsurface imaging (DL4SI), in particular, using image-to-image-
translation methods to map seismic waveforms to velocity maps and back directly from data.
For example, several deep learning methods
have recently been proposed for FWI using
encoder-decoder architectures such as Inver-
sionNet (Wu & Lin, 2019) and VelocityGAN
(Zhang et al., 2019), where the encoder maps
seismic data to latent feature representations
that are decoded back to the velocity domain
(Lin et al., 2023). Techniques for solving
the forward problem include the seminal work
on physics-informed neural networks (PINNs)
(Raissi et al., 2019) and recent works such as
Fourier Neural Operators (Li et al., 2020). A
recent work has also pursued solving both for- Figure 1: A unified framework for solving for-
ward and inverse problems together using a ward and inverse problems in subsurface imaging.
common architecture, Auto-Linear (Feng et al.,
2024), where two auto-encoders are first separately trained to project velocity and waveform fields to
higher-dimensional manifolds, which are then linked via linear transforms for manifold translation.
Despite the variety of architectures explored in previous works in DL4SI, several open questions still
remain unanswered such as: (1) How does the size of latent spaces in encoder-decoder frameworks
influence the quality of domain translations in DL4SI? While previous works such as InversionNet
used lower-dimensional embeddings in their bottleneck layers, recent methods such as Auto-Linear
advocate for higher-dimensional mappings. (2) Do we need complex architectures for latent space
translations or are linear transforms sufficient? (3) What is the role of manifold learning in DL4SI
where latent spaces are used not just for translation but also for reconstruction? (4) Can we simulta-
neously solve both forward and inverse problems using joint frameworks?
To answer these questions, we propose a unified framework to systematically characterize prior
research in DL4SI termed the Generalized Forward-Inverse (GFI) framework (see Figure 1). The
GFI framework builds on two key philosophies that are at the core of prior research in DL4SI. First,
we assume that both velocity v and seismic waveforms p can be projected to latent space manifolds
ṽ and p̃ using encoder-decoder pairs that allow reconstruction of the original domains, referred to
as the manifold assumption. Second, we assume that it is possible to learn bidirectional translations
between the two manifolds ṽ and p̃, referred to as the latent space translation assumption. We
show that GFI encompasses previous works in DL4SI including InversionNet, VelocityGAN, and
Auto-Linear, which can be viewed as specific instantiations of GFI. This unifying perspective helps
us analyze the field of DL4SI going beyond specific architecture choices and also discover novel
formulations in DL4SI such as those explored in this paper.
In particular, we propose two new architectures within the framework of GFI: Latent U-Net (see Fig-
ure 2a) and Invertible X-Net (see Figure 2b). Latent U-Net uses two separate U-Nets (Ronneberger
et al., 2015) to model latent space translations in both directions. This takes inspiration from the
success of U-Nets in mainstream computer vision applications to explore their benefits in DL4SI.
Invertible-XNet uses Invertible U-Net (IU-Net) (Etmann et al., 2020) to simultaneously learn both
forward and inverse translations in the latent space using a single architecture. Invertible U-Nets
builds on the idea of Invertible Neural Networks (INNs) (Ardizzone et al., 2018) to learn bijective
mappings between input and output domains in DL4SI. We show that both Latent U-Net and Invert-
ible X-Net achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance for forward and inverse problems on a wide
range of benchmark datasets commonly used in DL4SI. We show that jointly solving forward and
inverse problems using Invertible X-Net especially helps in improving the accuracy on the forward
problem. We also investigate the zero-shot effectiveness of our proposed approaches on synthetic
and real-world-like datasets, contributing to novel insights in the field of DL4SI.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (a) Latent U-Net architecture                          (b) Invertible X-Net architecture

      Figure 2: Schematic representation of proposed Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net model.


2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1    D EEP L EARNING FOR S UBSURFACE I MAGING (DL4SI)

Solving inverse problems in DL4SI has received considerable attention in recent years, thanks to the
seminal work by Deng et al. (2022) in creating OpenFWI, an open-access synthetic dataset involving
paired examples of velocity and waveforms with varying levels of complexity. This has enabled
the formulation of FWI as an image-to-image translation problem, where the relationship between
waveforms and velocity is learned through supervised, unsupervised, or self-supervised methods
(Lin et al., 2023). One of the early works in supervised learning for FWI includes InversionNet
(Wu & Lin, 2019), which uses an encoder-decoder architecture to project waveforms into flattened
vector representations acting as the bottleneck layer, which are decoded back to velocity maps.
VelocityGAN (Zhang et al., 2019) builds on the idea of InversionNet by using an adversarial training
scheme for learning the model parameters along with prediction loss. These works have also been
extended for estimating 3D velocity fields in Feng et al. (2021).
Since ground-truth observations of velocity maps are difficult to obtain in real-world settings, a
number of unsupervised and self-supervised formulations have also been explored for FWI. This
includes the framework of UPFWI (Jin et al., 2021) that uses the supervision of a physics-based
forward model of the wave equation to enforce cycle-consistency with a data-driven inverse model.
While the training of UPFWI is completely unsupervised and achieves comparable performance
as InversionNet in some settings, it requires computationally expensive simulations of a forward
model at every training epoch, restricting its scalability. Recent advancements, such as IFWI Du
et al. (2024), FWIPLR Sun et al. (2023), and FWIRLG Yang & Ma (2023), integrate physics-based
constraints and deep learning to tackle challenges like low-quality data and geological complexity.
A recent line of work in semi-supervised learning for FWI involves the framework of Auto-Linear
(Feng et al., 2024). In this framework, both velocity and waveforms are first mapped to higher-
dimensional manifolds using two auto-encoders separately trained to minimize reconstruction loss
in their respective domains. This is followed by a supervised learning of translations between the
manifolds using two independent linear transforms (one for forward and one for inverse), building
on previous observations of linearity in high-dimensional spaces for FWI (Feng et al., 2022).
2.2    D OMAIN T RANSLATION M ETHODS

The goal in domain translation (Isola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2018) is to learn the
mapping between input and output domains (e.g., the CT scan of a patient and the organ segmenta-
tion from the scan), either in a paired or unpaired setting. A recent work on Latent Space Mapping
(LSM) (Mayet et al., 2023) has introduced a unifying framework for domain translation based on
the manifold assumption (i.e., both input and output domains reside in low-dimensional manifolds
learned by minimizing reconstruction loss) and shared latent space assumption (i.e., both manifolds
reside in a shared latent space making it possible to translate from one manifold to another). We
take inspiration from LSMs in domain translation to develop our proposed framework of GFI.

3     P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGIES
3.1    G ENERALIZED F ORWARD I NVERSE F RAMEWORK

As shown schematically in Figure 1, our proposed framework of GFI unifies the learning of the
forward problem fv→p : V → P and the inverse problem fp→v : P → V using a common archi-


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tecture involving latent space translations. The GFI framework is inspired by two key assumptions.
First, according to the manifold assumption, we assume that the velocity maps v ∈ V and seismic
waveforms p ∈ P can be projected to their corresponding latent space representations, ṽ and p̃,
respectively, which can be mapped back to their reconstructions in the original space, v̂ and p̂. Note
that the sizes of the latent spaces can be smaller or larger than the original spaces. Further, the size
of ṽ may not match with the size of p̃ (e.g., in Auto-Linear). Second, according to the latent space
translation assumption, we assume that the problem of learning forward and inverse mappings in
the original spaces of velocity and waveforms can be reformulated as learning translations in their
latent spaces. We provide theoretical justifications for the existence of these latent space translations
in the Appendix A. Note that these assumptions can also be relaxed in specific instantiations of GFI.
Formally, let Ev : V → Ṽ and Ep : P → P̃ be the encoders that map velocity and waveforms
to their respective latent representations, ṽ = Ev (v) and p̃ = Ep (p). Similarly, let Dv : Ṽ → V
and Dp : P̃ → P be the decoders that map the latent representations back to the original spaces.
Additionally, let Lṽ→p̃ : Ṽ → P̃ and Lp̃→ṽ : P̃ → Ṽ be the latent space translations between ṽ and
p̃ and vice versa. The forward and inverse mappings between velocity v and waveform p can then
be formulated as:
                                     p̂ = fv→p (v) = Dp ◦ Lṽ→p̃ ◦ Ev (v)                                    (2)
                                     v̂ = fp→v (p) = Dv ◦ Lp̃→ṽ ◦ Ep (p)                                    (3)

Learning GFI with Paired Data: Let us assume that we have a paired i.i.d. dataset (v, p) ∼
q(v, p), where q(v, p) is a joint probability distribution. We can then learn the parameters of the GFI
framework in a supervised manner by optimizing the following loss functions:
                              min           Eq(v,p) L(Dp ◦ Lṽ→p̃ ◦ Ev (v), p) = L(p̂, p)                    (4)
                        θEv ,θLṽ→p̃ ,θDp

                              min           Eq(v,p) L(Dv ◦ Lp̃→ṽ ◦ Ep (p), v) = L(v̂, v)                    (5)
                        θEp ,θLp̃→ṽ ,θDv

where L denotes a loss function such as the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss, Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) loss, or even an adversarial loss if trained with a discriminator.

3.2   P RIOR W ORKS IN DL4SI AS S PECIAL C ASES OF GFI

In this section, we revisit previous works in DL4SI and describe them using GFI terminologies, i.e.,
modeling mode (forward/inverse), size of latent space, whether they use manifold learning or not,
and the nature of latent space translations. Table 1 summarizes prior works as specific realizations
of the unifying GFI Framework. Schematic illustrations of all prior works in the framework of GFI
are provided in the Appendix Figure 9.

             Table 1: Characterizing prior and proposed works using GFI Framework.

                                                                 Manifold   Latent Space       Sizes of
                     Model             Modeling Mode             Learning    Translation     Latent Spaces
                  InversionNet               Inverse               No          Identity          Low
                  VelocityGAN                Inverse               No          Identity          Low
                      FNO                    Forward               No       Fourier Layers       N/A
                                         Forward and                                           High and
                  Auto-Linear         Inverse Disjointly           Yes         Linear          Different
                  Latent U-Net           Forward and                                           Low and
                     (ours)           Inverse Disjointly         Possible       U-Net           Same
                 Invertible X-Net        Forward and                                           Low and
                      (ours)        Inverse Simultaneously       Implicit      IU-Net           Same



InversionNet and VelocityGAN: Both InversionNet and VelocityGAN operate exclusively in the
inverse mode, mapping seismic waveforms to velocity maps. They utilize the same encoder-decoder
architecture, with the encoder Ep projecting seismic waveforms (p) to a lower-dimensional latent
space and the decoder Dv reconstructing the velocity maps (v) from this representation. The sizes of
the latent spaces are low-dimensional, determined by the bottleneck layer of the U-Net architecture.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In terms of latent space translation, these models rely on an identity mapping in the bottleneck
layer, Lp̃→ṽ = I. However, we can also interpret them as having a U-Net for translation, if we view
the first few and last few layers as the encoder-decoder pair while the intermediate layers perform
translation. The sizes of the latent spaces are low-dimensional and they do not perform manifold
learning since the latent spaces of p̃ and ṽ are solely used for translation and not for reconstruction.
Auto-Linear: Auto-Linear operates in both forward and inverse modes, using two disjoint latent
space translations. It follows a two-stage approach: first, encoder-decoder pairs ( Ev , Dv , Ep and
Dp ) are independently trained using reconstruction loss to project v and p into high-dimensional
latent spaces (ṽ and p̃), where dim(ṽ) ̸= dim(p̃). Second, linear transforms Lṽ→p̃ and Lp̃→ṽ
are trained for translation, keeping the encoders and decoders frozen. Auto-Linear leverages the
manifold assumption as the latent manifolds ṽ and p̃ are useful for reconstruction. The sizes of the
latent spaces are higher-dimensional, designed specifically to facilitate linear mappings.

3.3   P ROPOSED M ODEL : L ATENT U-N ET

We propose a novel architecture to solve forward and inverse problems using two latent space trans-
lation models implemented using U-Nets, termed Latent U-Net. As shown in Figure 2a, Latent
U-Net uses ConvNet backbones for both encoder-decoder pairs: (Ev , Dv ) and (Ep , Dp ), to project
v and p to lower-dimensional representations. We also constrain the sizes of the latent spaces of
ṽ and p̃ to be identical, i.e., dim(ṽ) = dim(p̃), so that we can train two separate U-Net models to
implement the latent space mappings Lṽ→p̃ and Lp̃→ṽ . Note that InversionNet can also be viewed
as a special case of Latent U-Net in inverse-only mode with subtle architectural differences such as
absence of skip connections, design of encoder/decoder and translation layers, and different dimen-
sions of ṽ and p̃.
We train Latent U-Net in an end-to-end manner to directly learn latent spaces useful for translation.
This is in contrast to the two-stage training process employed in Auto-Linear where latent spaces are
first pre-trained for reconstruction, followed by translation. Specifically, for the forward problem,
the components Dp , Lṽ→p̃ , and Ev are trained together by optimizing Equation 4, while for the
inverse problem, the components Dv , Lp̃→ṽ , and Ep are trained together by optimizing Equation 5.
Since the training of forward and inverse modeling components of Latent U-Net are disjoint from
each other, Latent U-Net does not explicitly learns manifolds useful for reconstruction. However, it
is possible to modify the training objective of Latent U-Net by adding reconstruction losses in both
forward and inverse problems to perform manifold learning. See Appendix sections D.3.1 for details

3.4   P ROPOSED M ODEL : I NVERTIBLE X-N ET

We propose another novel architecture within the GFI framework termed Invertible X-Net to answer
the question: “can we learn a single latent space translation model that can simultaneously solve
both forward and inverse problems?” Recently, Invertible Neural Networks (INNs) (Ardizzone et al.,
2018) have been introduced as a specialized class of neural networks capable of learning bijective
mappings between inputs and outputs. INNs are inherently invertible by design; once the INN is
trained to learn a forward mapping f : X → Y between inputs x ∈ X and outputs y ∈ Y, the
inverse mapping f −1 : Y → X can be obtained for free. A variant of INN has also been developed
for image-to-image translation problems using the U-Net backbone, termed IU-Net (Etmann et al.,
2020). However, one of the key constraints of INN and IU-Net is that they require dim(X ) =
dim(Y), which is difficult to ensure in subsurface imaging problems (since velocity and waveforms
reside in entirely different spaces).
This is where we can leverage the GFI framework to employ IU-Net in the latent spaces of veloc-
ity and waveforms, which can be constrained to be of the same size (just like Latent-UNets), i.e.,
dim(ṽ) = dim(p̃). By using a single IU-Net, we can simultaneously learn both forward and inverse
translations in the latent space, Lp̃→ṽ and Lṽ→p̃ . We refer to this formulation as Invertible “X”-Net
(owing to the cross-shape of translations between the latent spaces) defined as follows:

                                                                                 −1
                      p̃ = Lṽ→p̃ (ṽ) = fIU-Net (ṽ);       ṽ = Lp̃→ṽ (p̃) = fIU-Net (p̃)         (6)
                                                                        −1
                      p̂ = Dp ◦ fIU-Net (ṽ) ◦ Ev (v);       v̂ = Dv ◦ fIU-Net (p̃) ◦ Ep (p)         (7)


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The objective function for training Invertible X-Net involves prediction losses on both velocity maps
and waveforms defined as follows:
           LX-Net = Lforward + Linverse                                                             (8)
                                                                          −1
                  = Eq(v,p) L(Dp ◦ fIU-Net ◦ Ev (v), p) + Eq(v,p) L(Dv ◦ fIU-Net ◦ Ep (p), v)       (9)
Note that Invertible X-Nets facilitate bidirectional training as both the forward and inverse mod-
eling components are trained simultaneously. As a result, both encoder-decoder pairs of Invertible
X-Nets implicitly learn manifolds useful for reconstruction. Also, Invertible X-Net offers several
key advantages over baselines. First, it simultaneously addresses both the forward and inverse prob-
lems within a single model architecture, whereas other baselines typically require training separate
models for each task (e.g., Latent U-Net and Auto-Linear), leading to greater parameter efficiency.
Additionally, the use of IU-Net ensures that the mappings between the latent spaces of velocity maps
and seismic waveforms are bijective, guaranteeing a one-to-one mapping between these represen-
tations – a property not necessarily true for other models such as Latent U-nets and Auto-Linear.
Further, the bidirectional training of the forward and inverse problems introduces a strong regular-
ization effect as the gradients of the forward loss Lforward affects the parameters of fIU-Net , thereby
affecting both forward and inverse performance. Similarly, the gradients of the inverse loss Linverse
also impact both forward and inverse performance by updating the parameters of fIU-Net . Further
details about the Invertible X-Net architecture are provided in Appendix Section D.3.2.
Cycle Loss for Training Invertible X-Net: Another advantage of Invertible X-net is that the ar-
chitecture can be trained with unpaired examples using cycle-loss consistency (Zhu et al., 2017).
We consider both variants of Invertible X-Net (with and without cycle loss) in our experiments to
demonstrate its effect on generalization performance.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

4.1   DATASETS

We consider the OpenFWI collection of datasets (Deng et al., 2022), comprising multi-structural
benchmark datasets for DL4SI grouped into: Vel, Fault, and Style Families. The Vel Family in-
cludes four datasets with simple geological patterns, while the Fault Family contains four datasets
with fault-like deformations, presenting greater modeling challenges. The Style Family uses style
transfer methods to create complex geological settings. The waveform data is structured as (# source
× recording time × receiver length), resulting in a shape of (5×1000×70) for five uniformly spaced
seismic sources and 70 receivers over 1000 milliseconds. In contrast, the velocity maps are repre-
sented as (1 × depth × receiver length), with a shape of (1 × 70 × 70) reflecting spatial dimensions
of depth and horizontal coverage. We also conduct out-of-distribution evaluations on the Marmousi
(Martin et al., 2006) and Overthrust datasets (Aminzadeh et al., 1996). They are standard bench-
marks that closely mimic real-world scenarios and exceed the complexity of OpenFWI datasets.

4.2   M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net: We use two variants for Latent U-Net: (1) (Small) with 17M
parameters, and (2) (Large) with 33M parameters. For Invertible X-Net, we used an architecture
with 24M parameters trained with and without cycle loss. See Appendix D.1 and D.3for details.
Baselines: For the inverse problem, we considered InversionNet, VelocityGAN, and Auto-Linear as
baselines. We obtained their trained model checkpoints to reproduce their results. For the forward
problem, we implemented FNO (Li et al., 2020) and a U-Net model (termed WaveformNet) as
baseline models (see Appendix C for details), along with using Auto-Linear.
Training Details: The input seismic waveforms were standardized using a StandardScaler to center
the data with a zero mean and unit standard deviation, while the velocity data were scaled through
MinMax normalization. See Appendix D.2 for details on hyper-parameter settings. To make a fair
comparison with baseline methods, we kept the original train-test splits and reported results in the
unnormalized space of both velocity and waveforms. We used Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean
Square Error (MSE), and Structured Similarity (SSIM) as evaluation metrics since neither metric
alone is fully comprehensive. MAE captures pixel-level accuracy while SSIM highlights structural
similarity.

                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
Quantitative Comparisons: Figure 3a compares SSIM on velocity predictions while solving the
inverse problem across different OpenFWI datasets. We can see that our proposed models, which
capture complex non-linear relationships in the latent space using U-Net and IU-Net architectures,
consistently outperform baseline methods InversionNet, VelocityGAN, & Auto-Linear across ma-
jority of datasets. Overall, the large Latent U-Net model shows the best performance in inverse
modeling followed by the small Latent U-Net model. On complex datasets such as Style family
and CFB, Invertible X-Net with and without cycle loss are also comparable to the small Latent U-
Net model. In addition to SSIM, we also evaluate baselines using other metrics reported in Table
7(Appendix E.1) and compare MAE across models in Appendix figure 3a.
Figure 3b compares the performance of baseline methods on the forward problem (see Appendix
E.2 Table 9 for other evaluation metrics). We can see that both Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible
X-Net show better performance than most baselines across all datasets. However, in contrast to the
trends observed in the inverse problem, we observe that Invertible X-Net with and without cycle loss
shows the best performance compared to Latent U-Net models. We further notice that for simple
datasets such as FVA and FFA, FNO has significantly higher SSIM compared to other models. We
later qualitatively explain this pattern by showing that FNO tends to capture dominant modes of the
waveform distribution while neglecting subtler reflection patterns.


                     (a) Inverse problem                     (b) Forward problem

Figure 3: Comparison of Latent U-Nets (Small and Large), Invertible X-Net, Invertible X-Net (Cy-
cle) with different baseline methods across different OpenFWI datasets.

Qualitative Comparisons: In Figure 4a, we compare inverse model predictions on three datasets,
CVB, CFB, and STA, choosing one from each family of OpenFWI. We observe that our proposed
methods (Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net) produce considerably better velocity maps than the two
SOTA baselines, InversionNet and Auto-Linear. We chose these 3 datasets as they are complex and
have high heterogeneity as the velocity rapidly changes in all directions. For heterogeneous velocity
maps, the predictions of baseline methods are smooth and they fail to delineate sharp changes in
velocities. On the other hand, Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net are able to predict better velocity
fields capturing rapid variations in both shallow and deeper parts (highlighted using black-boxes in


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the figure). Between Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible X-Net, we can see that the performance
of Latent U-Net is slightly better especially on CFB and STA datasets. Note that Invertible X-Net
uses a smaller number of parameters (24M) compared to Latent U-Net (Large) (33M). We provide
additional visualizations of more baseline methods and across other datasets in the Appendix H.
Figure 4b shows visualizations of model predictions for the forward problem on three datasets. Since
these datasets are heterogeneous, the recorded seismic waveforms exhibit convoluted interference
patterns. In particular, we can see that in all ground truth visualizations, there is a direct arrival
in the shallower layers represented as a ‘slanted line’ signature. While capturing the direct arrival
is relatively simple, the primary challenge in solving forward problems is to capture the subtler
reflections in the deeper layers, where even small magnitudes of errors can result in large differences
in inferred velocity maps. We can see that while all baseline methods are able to predict shallow
waveforms easily (like direct arrivals), methods such as FNO and Auto-Linear are struggling to
predict the seismic waveforms, especially in the deeper regions (highlighted using black-boxes in the
Figure). On the other hand, our proposed models consistently improve results over baselines across
all datasets. Additional visualizations for the forward problem are provided in the Appendix H.
Building on these quantitative and qualitative results, we provide key insights on four open questions
in the field of DL4SI in the following.


               (a) Inverse problem                                  (b) Forward problem

Figure 4: Visualization of model predictions for inverse and forward problems across different Open-
FWI datasets: CVB, CFB, STA.


Figure 5: Effect of latent dimensions and skip connections (across latent dimensions) on the per-
formance of Latent U-Net (Large) (a and b) and Invertible X-Net (c). ‘A’ and ‘B’ show ‘low’ and
‘high’ complexity scenarios for each data group.

5.1     K EY I NSIGHTS ON O PEN Q UESTIONS IN DL4SI

5.1.1    W HAT IS THE E FFECT OF L ATENT S PACE S IZES ON T RANSLATION P ERFORMANCE ?
In Figure 5, we investigate the impact of varying latent space sizes on the quality of domain trans-
lations using the Latent U-Net (Large) (a) and Invertible X-Net(c) models on the inverse problem.
We compare MAE by reducing latent space dimensions from 70 × 70 to 8 × 8. We can see that the
quality of translations is not affected much for ‘A’-family of OpenFWI datasets, while the ‘B’-family
shows monotonically increasing trend in MAE as we reduce latent dimension. Since the ‘A’-family


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


was intentionally created to represent simpler velocity distributions, even the smallest latent space
(8 × 8) is sufficient to estimate velocity maps. However, the ‘B’-family of datasets represent more
complex velocity distributions, requiring a sufficiently larger latent space for the translation. This
indicates that the ideal size of the latent space should be decided based on the requirements of the
problem being solved.

5.1.2   D O W E N EED C OMPLEX A RCHITECTURES FOR T RANSLATIONS ?
We further study the role of model size on translation performance by comparing Latent U-Net
(Small) and Latent U-Net (Large) with varying latent dimensions in Figure 18b (b). We find that
for a given latent dimension, Latent U-Net (Large) outperforms Latent U-Net (Small), motivating
architectures with sufficient complexity for domain translations. We further study the impact of
using skip connections in the latent space translation models on varying latent space dimensions in
Figure 5 (b). We can see that adding skip connections shows marginal improvements in performance
for larger latent dimensions. However, when the number of dimensions is low (less than 20), we can
see a sharp degradation in performance by removing skip-connections. This indicates that smaller
latent representations are weaker and thus insufficient for domain translation in U-Net frameworks
without being augmented with skip connections.

5.1.3   W HAT IS THE ROLE OF MANIFOLD LEARNING IN DL4SI?
Manifold learning for latent spaces in domain
translation can follow three strategies: (1)
the “Reconstruct then Translate” (Auto-Linear),
where encoder-decoder pairs are first trained for
reconstruction, followed by translation on frozen
latent spaces; (2)“Directly Translate” strategy
(Latent U-Net), which jointly trains encoder-
decoder pairs and translation models to optimize
latent spaces for translation; and (3) a hybrid
“Reconstruct and Translate” approach, where the
model is trained with both reconstruction and
translation losses. To investigate their impact, we
evaluate these approaches across varying training
data fractions for OpenFWI families (Figure 6).
                                                    Figure 6: Comparison of Latent U-Net (Large)
Our findings reveal that the “Directly Translate”
                                                    across three training objectives: direct transla-
approach consistently outperforms the other two,
                                                    tion, reconstruction followed by translation, and
highlighting that latent spaces optimized solely
                                                    combined learning of both, evaluated at differ-
for translation are most effective. Hence, mani-
                                                    ent fractions of training data.
fold learning, while beneficial for reconstruction,
may lead to suboptimal performance when translation is the primary goal. We see a similar trend
for Latent U-Net (Small) and Invertible X-Net shown in Appendix F.3 Figure 22.
5.1.4   I S IT U SEFUL TO J OINTLY S OLVE F ORWARD AND I NVERSE P ROBLEMS ?
As discussed in the quantitative comparisons of Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible X-Net on the
forward problem in Figure 3b, we see a surprising trend that Invertible X-Net generally outperforms
Latent U-Net (Large) despite having smaller number of parameters. Analysis of its training behav-
ior reveals that Invertible X-Net initially focuses on solving the inverse problem, gradually shifting
to the forward problem in later epochs. (see Appendix E.3 Figures 12 and 13 for visualizations).
This is facilitated by the combined loss function, where gradients from the inverse problem enhance
forward problem optimization once a good velocity solution is achieved. This bidirectional learning
enables Invertible X-Net to outperform Latent U-Net (Large). Further comparisons in Appendix E.3
confirm that Invertible X-Net trained only on the forward problem performs worse than both Latent
U-Net (Large) and the jointly trained Invertible X-Net, emphasizing the advantage of joint optimiza-
tion.With average ranks of 2.7 (MAE) and 1.9 (SSIM) for inverse problems, and 1.4 (MAE) and 1.1
(SSIM) for forward problems (Appendix Tables 7 and 9), Invertible X-Net offers a balanced and
efficient solution for joint tasks with just 26M parameters. In contrast, Latent U-Net, while slightly
better for inverse-only tasks, requires 70M parameters for both forward and inverse problems (35M
x2), making Invertible X-Net the more practical and effective choice for the combined optimization.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2   Z ERO - SHOT G ENERALIZATION R ESULTS

Extrapolating across OpenFWI Datasets: To assess the out-of-distribution generalizability of
best-performing models on unseen datasets, in Figure 7, we evaluate zero-shot performance of mod-
els trained across all datasets (shown as rows) when tested across all datasets (shown as columns),
for both forward and inverse problems. Here, the color intensity indicates difference in SSIM perfor-
mance of two competing methods. We can see that Invertible X-Net outperforms other baselines for
both forward and inverse problems across majority of train-test cases. The only exception is when
the models are trained on FVB, a relatively simpler dataset than other data families such as CurveVel
and FlatVel. From a geophysics perspective, we expect to have better generalizability for models
trained on complex geological settings and tested on relatively simpler ones, as complex geological
structures can be thought of as juxtapositions of simpler geological structures. Additionally, we
compare the zero-shot generalization for all methods in detail in Appendix E.4 (Figures 14 - 17).


(a) Invertible X-Net vs   (b) Invertible X-Net vs        (c) Invertible X-Net vs   (d) Invertible X-Net vs
InversionNet (Inverse)    Auto-Linear (Inverse)          FNO (Forward)             Auto-Linear (Forward)

Figure 7: Zero-shot generalization comparison for both inverse and forward problem using SSIM
difference across all OpenFWI datasets. Red color indicates our proposed method (Invertible X-Net)
is better whereas blue color indicate otherwise.


               (a) Inverse problem                                      (b) Forward problem

Figure 8: Zero-shot generalization (both forward and inverse) on Marmousi and Overthrust datasets
using models trained on STA and STB datasets, respectively.

Extrapolating on Marmousi and Overthrust Datasets: We show the zero-shot generalizability of
our models on the more complex and real-world-like geological settings of Marmousi and Overthrust
in Figure 8. Here, we chose models trained on the most complex OpenFWI datasets, i.e., STA
(for Marmousi) and STB (for overthrust) datasets, and compared their zero-shot performance in
predicting velocity maps (inverse problem). We observe that none of the baselines are able to invert
velocity maps at high resolution. However, the predictions of Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net
are still able to delineate the sharp changes in velocity maps especially in the shallow part of the
data. On the forward problem, our models are able to accurately predict seismic waveforms for both
Marmousi and Overthrust data relative to baselines.

6     C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
In this work, we introduced a unified framework for solving both forward and inverse problems in
subsurface imaging, termed the Generalized-Forward-Inverse (GFI) framework. Within this frame-
work, we proposed two novel architectures, Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net, that leverage the
power of U-Nets and IU-Nets to perform latent space translations, respectively. Our study addresses
several key questions left unanswered by prior research in DL4SI. Future research directions include
training a single model for all datasets together, given that models trained on complex geological
environments can effectively extrapolate on unseen simpler geological structures.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

All the code required to train and evaluate the proposed methods, as well as the baselines, has
been uploaded to an anonymous GitHub repository: https://github.com/KGML-lab/
Generalized-Forward-Inverse-Framework-for-DL4SI. The data and correspond-
ing processing code used in this work are sourced from the OpenFWI website: https://
openfwi-lanl.github.io/docs/data.html. The dataset is further described in Ap-
pendix Section B and Table 2. The model architecture and hyper-parameter details for all proposed
models and baselines are thoroughly discussed in Appendix Section D.


8   E THICS S TATEMENT

We would like to emphasize that the primary goal of this paper is to facilitate a scientific inquiry of
DL4SI. While advancements in subsurface imaging have traditionally been used for energy explo-
ration, there are several emerging applications of subsurface imaging with positive societal conse-
quences such as Carbon Sequestration, Earthquake Hazard Warning, and Environmental Monitoring.
Research in DL4SI thus has similar characteristics as research in mainstream AI applications such
as computer vision and language modeling, with a diverse range of societal, environmental, and
economic impacts.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by NSF awards IIS-2239328 and IIS-2107332. We are grateful
to the Advanced Research Computing (ARC) Center at Virginia Tech for providing access to GPU
compute resources for this project. This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, un-
der contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The US government
retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US gov-
ernment retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the
published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for US government purposes. DOE will
provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE
Public Access Plan ( https://www.energy.gov/doe-public-access-plan).


R EFERENCES
Fred Aminzadeh, N Burkhard, J Long, Tim Kunz, and P Duclos. Three dimensional seg/eaeg mod-
  els—an update. The Leading Edge, 15(2):131–134, 1996.

Lynton Ardizzone, Jakob Kruse, Sebastian Wirkert, Daniel Rahner, Eric W Pellegrini, Ralf S
  Klessen, Lena Maier-Hein, Carsten Rother, and Ullrich Köthe. Analyzing inverse problems with
  invertible neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04730, 2018.

Yunjey Choi, Minje Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul Choo. Star-
  gan: Unified generative adversarial networks for multi-domain image-to-image translation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8789–8797,
  2018.

Chengyuan Deng, Shihang Feng, Hanchen Wang, Xitong Zhang, Peng Jin, Yinan Feng, Qili Zeng,
  Yinpeng Chen, and Youzuo Lin. Openfwi: Large-scale multi-structural benchmark datasets for
  full waveform inversion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:6007–6020,
  2022.

Bo Du, Jian Sun, Anqi Jia, Ning Wang, and Huaishan Liu. Physics-informed robust and implicit
  full waveform inversion without prior and low-frequency information. IEEE Transactions on
  Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 62:1–12, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3416547.

Christian Etmann, Rihuan Ke, and Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb. iunets: Fully invertible u-nets with
  learnable up-and downsampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05220, 2020.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shihang Feng, Youzuo Lin, and Brendt Wohlberg. Multiscale data-driven seismic full-waveform
  inversion with field data study. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, pp. 1–14,
  2021.
Yinan Feng, Yinpeng Chen, Shihang Feng, Peng Jin, Zicheng Liu, and Youzuo Lin. An intriguing
  property of geophysics inversion. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6434–
  6446. PMLR, 2022.
Yinan Feng, Yinpeng Chen, Peng Jin, Shihang Feng, and Youzuo Lin. Auto-linear phenomenon in
  subsurface imaging. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria
  Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 13153–13174. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v235/feng24a.html.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134, 2017.
Peng Jin, Xitong Zhang, Yinpeng Chen, Sharon Xiaolei Huang, Zicheng Liu, and Youzuo Lin. Un-
  supervised learning of full-waveform inversion: Connecting cnn and partial differential equation
  in a loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07584, 2021.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential
  equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Youzuo Lin, James Theiler, and Brendt Wohlberg. Physics-guided data-driven seismic inversion:
  Recent progress and future opportunities in full-waveform inversion. IEEE Signal Processing
  Magazine, 40(1):115–133, 2023.
Gary S Martin, Robert Wiley, and Kurt J Marfurt. Marmousi2: An elastic upgrade for marmousi.
  The leading edge, 25(2):156–166, 2006.
Tsiry Mayet, Simon Bernard, Clement Chatelain, and Romain Herault. Domain translation via latent
  space mapping. In 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–10.
  IEEE, 2023.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
  ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Pengpeng Sun, Fangshu Yang, Hongxian Liang, and Jianwei Ma. Full-waveform inversion using a
  learned regularization. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 61:1–15, 2023.
  doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3322964.
J Tago, V Cruz-Atienza, E Chaljub, Romain Brossier, O Coutant, S Garambois, V Prieux, S Operto,
   D Mercerat, J Virieux, et al. Modelling seismic wave propagation for geophysical imaging. In
   Seismic waves-research and analysis. IntechOpen, 2012.
Albert Tarantola. Theoretical background for the inversion of seismic waveforms, including elastic-
  ity and attenuation. Scattering and attenuations of seismic waves, part i, pp. 365–399, 1988.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yue Wu and Youzuo Lin. Inversionnet: An efficient and accurate data-driven full waveform inver-
  sion. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging, 6:419–433, 2019.
Fangshu Yang and Jianwei Ma. Wasserstein distance-based full-waveform inversion with a regu-
  larizer powered by learned gradient. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 61:
  1–13, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3241723.
Rui Zhang, Ranjana Ghosh, Mrinal K Sen, and Sanjay Srinivasan. Time-lapse surface seismic
  inversion with thin bed resolution for monitoring co2 sequestration: A case study from cranfield,
  mississippi. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 18:430–438, 2013.
Zhongping Zhang, Yue Wu, Zheng Zhou, and Youzuo Lin. Velocitygan: Subsurface velocity image
  estimation using conditional adversarial networks. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applica-
  tions of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 705–714. IEEE, 2019.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDICES

A    T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATIONS FOR L ATENT S PACE T RANSLATION
     A SSUMPTION

In this Section, we provide two Lemmas to theoretically support our Latent Space Translation as-
sumption for the Generalized-Forward Inverse (GFI) Framework.
Lemma A.1 (Forward Latent Space Translation Assumption). Let f : V → P be an arbitrary
forward operator mapping velocity maps V to seismic waveforms P. Let Ev : V → Ṽ and Dv : Ṽ →
V denote the encoder and decoder for the velocity space V, respectively. Similarly, let Ep : P → P̃
and Dp : P̃ → P denote the encoder and decoder for the seismic waveform space P. Here, ṽ ∈ Ṽ
and p̃ ∈ P̃ represent the latent space encodings. If we assume that the auto-encoder for the velocity
are optimal, i.e., Dv ◦ Ev (v) = v̂ ≈ v, then there exists a functional mapping in the latent space
Lṽ→p̃ : Ṽ → P̃.

Proof. Given the forward operator f : V → P, by definition, for any v ∈ V, there exists p ∈ P such
that p = f (v).
Let the latent space representations ṽ ∈ Ṽ and p̃ ∈ P̃ be defined by the auto-encoders as follows:
                                      ṽ = Ev (v),     v̂ = Dv (ṽ)                               (10)
                                      p̃ = Ep (p),     p̂ = Dp (p̃)                               (11)

To construct the latent space mapping p̃ = Lṽ→p̃ (ṽ), consider the sequence of compositions involv-
ing the encoders, decoders, and the forward operator f :
                         p̃ = Ep (p)
                            = Ep (f (v)) (since p = f (v))
                            = Ep (f (v̂)) (assuming reconstruction: v̂ ≈ v)
                            = Ep (f (Dv (ṽ))) (since v̂ = Dv (ṽ))                               (12)

Thus, by definition of the composition of functions, the latent space mapping can be expressed as:


                                        Lṽ→p̃ = Ep ◦ f ◦ Dv                                      (13)



Lemma A.2 (Inverse Latent Space Translation Assumption). Let f −1 : P → V be an arbitrary
inverse operator mapping seismic waveforms P to velocity maps V that is unique. Let Ep : P → P̃
and Dp : P̃ → P denote the encoder and decoder for the seismic waveform space P, respectively.
Similarly, let Ev : V → Ṽ and Dv : Ṽ → V denote the encoder and decoder for the velocity space
V. Here, p̃ ∈ P̃ and ṽ ∈ Ṽ represent the latent space encodings. If we assume that the auto-encoder
for the seismic waveform space is optimal, i.e., Dp ◦ Ep (p) = p̂ ≈ p, then there exists a functional
mapping in the latent space Lp̃→ṽ : P̃ → Ṽ.


Proof. Given the inverse operator f −1 : P → V, by definition, for any p ∈ P, there exists v ∈ V
such that v = f −1 (p).
Let the latent space representations p̃ ∈ P̃ and ṽ ∈ Ṽ be defined by the auto-encoders as follows:
                                      p̃ = Ep (p),     p̂ = Dp (p̃)                               (14)
                                      ṽ = Ev (v),     v̂ = Dv (ṽ)                               (15)


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To construct the latent space mapping ṽ = Lp̃→ṽ (p̃), consider the sequence of compositions involv-
ing the encoders, decoders, and the inverse operator f −1 :
                        ṽ = Ev (v)
                          = Ev (f −1 (p)) (since v = f −1 (p))
                          = Ev (f −1 (p̂)) (assuming reconstruction: p̂ ≈ p)
                          = Ev (f −1 (Dp (p̃))) (since p̂ = Dp (p̃))                              (16)

Thus, by definition of the composition of functions, the latent space mapping can be expressed as:


                                      Lp̃→ṽ = Ev ◦ f −1 ◦ Dp                                     (17)


                    Dataset       Examples      Velocity shape     Waveform shape
                   FlatVel-A       30,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                   FlatVel-B       30,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                  CurveVel-A       30,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                  CurveVel-B       30,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                  FlatFault-A      60,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                  FlatFault-B      60,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                 CurveFault-A      60,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                 CurveFault-B      60,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                    Style-A        67,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)
                    Style-B        67,000         (1, 70, 70)       (5, 1000, 70)

Table 2: Statistics on the number of samples, the size of the velocity and waveforms for each dataset
in OpenFWI Deng et al. (2022).


B    DATASET D ESCRIPTION
The OpenFWI comprises multi-structural benchmark datasets of significant size that can be used for
solving full waveform inversion (FWI) using machine learning techniques (Deng et al., 2022). In
particular, the repository contains 3 major groups of data: (1) Vel Family, (2) Fault Family, and (3)
Style Family. These groups represent simple to complex sub-surface geological settings with seismic
velocity and waveforms information. The Vel family is the simplest geological patterns including
four datasets - (1) FlatVel-A (FVA), (2) FlatVel-B (FVB), (3) CurveVel-A (CVA), and (4) CurveVel-
B (CVB). The difference between FlatVel and CurveVel is that the former represents low-energy
geological environments where the rock layers are deposited horizontally and the latter consists of
curved layers which are formed due to structural deformation of flat layers. The Fault family also
has four datasets - (1) FlatFault-A (FFA), (2) FlatFault-B (FFB), (3) CurveFault-A (CFA), and (4)
CurveFault-B (CFB). Unlike Vel datasets, the Fault family contains fault-like deformations, which is
fracturing of rocks under certain pressure conditions. Due to the presence of faults, the Fault family
becomes more complicated and challenging to model. The Style family has two datasets - (1) Style-
A (STA), and (2) Style-B (STB). This dataset is generated using the style transfer method where the
COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) is set as the content images and the Marmousi dataset is set as the
style image. This is the most complex OpenFWI dataset as it represents highly complex geological
settings where the velocity is changing rapidly and abruptly. In summary, the details about the Vel
and Fault datasets are described in table 2.
The waveform data is represented as (# source × recording time × receiver length) whereas the
velocity follow (1 × depth × receiver length) shape. In seismic surveys, the wave arrival time is
recorded at the surface and thus, the waveform data for a single source is represented as a function of
time and receiver length. In total, there are 5 seismic sources uniformly spaced along the surface, and


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


wavefields are recorded by 70 receivers (uniformly spaced) along the surface for 1000 milliseconds.
Therefore, the seismic wavefields are of the shape (5 × 1000 × 70). On the other hand, velocity maps
are represented as functions of spatial dimensions, depth and horizontal coverage, and thus have the
shape (1 × 70 × 70).

C     P RIOR W ORKS IN DL4SI AS SPECIAL CASES OF GFI
Figure 9 provides additional schematic illustrations of prior works in DL4SI such as InversionNet,
WaveformNet, and AutoLinear as special cases of our proposed GFI framework.


                             Figure 9: Prior Works exprerssed as GFI


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
D.1   C YCLE L OSS FOR I NVERTIBLE X-N ET

Given the velocity maps v and the waveforms p, the predictions for the waveform and velocity can
be obtained using the Invertible X-Net as follows:
                                p̂ = fv→p (v) = Dp ◦ Lṽ→p̃ ◦ Ev (v)                           (18)
                                v̂ = fp→v (p) = Dv ◦ Lp̃→ṽ ◦ Ep (p)                           (19)

Now, the Invertible X-Net architecture can be further applied on p̂ and v̂ to create the following
transformations:
                                p̂ˆ = fv→p (v̂) = Dp ◦ Lṽ→p̃ ◦ Ev (v̂)                        (20)
                                v̂ˆ = fp→v (p̂) = Dv ◦ Lp̃→ṽ ◦ Ep (p̂)                        (21)

The cycle-loss for Invertible X-Net can be mathematically defined as follows:
                                                  ˆ + L(v, v̂)
                                    Lcycle = L(p, p̂)      ˆ                                   (22)

where L is the loss function that can be MSE, MAE or Elastic Loss. Note that the formulation of
Cycle-Loss does not rely on paired examples, and can be applied on un-paired data as well. The
combined loss function including cycle-loss can be given as:


                             LX-Net (Cycle) = Lforward + Linverse + Lcycle                     (23)

For training Invertible X-Net (Cycle) model, we use loss function shown in Equation 23.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2     A DDITIONAL T RAINING D ETAILS

For training, we normalize the velocity using min-max normalization and seismic waveform using
standard normalization to rescale the data to mean 0 and standard deviation as 1. Table 5 shows
other hyperparameter details for training Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net models on OpenFWI
datasets.
Since the baseline models have different normalization schemes than our models, we compare model
predictions during evaluation by unnormalizing the predictions to original domains. For exam-
ple, AutoLinear uses min-max normalization for velocity and a combination of log-normalization
xnorm = (loge (1 + |x|) ∗ sign(x) followed by min-max in the log-normalized domain for waveform.
We unnormalized both the velocity and waveform predictions so that we can measure and visualize
errors in the predictions in the original space, allowing easy comparison across models.


D.3     M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

We summarize details related to model architecture, layers, and number of parameters related to
seismic and velocity encoder-decoder architecture in Table 3, and regarding the latent models used
for translation in Table 4. Further, we compare our model parameters with baseline models in Table
6.


D.3.1    L ATENT U-N ET

Latent U-Net architectures are specifically adapted to subsurface imaging by employing U-Net-
based encoder-decoder pairs designed to handle domain-specific input and output dimensions, such
as velocity maps and seismic waveforms, while enabling latent dimension processing. Both the
Large and Small variants utilize identical encoder and decoder designs, featuring 5 layers in the en-
coder and 6 layers in the decoder. These layers operate on an embedding dimension of 128x70x70,
with channel sizes ranging from 8 to 128 in the encoder and 128 to 1 (velocity) or 128 to 5 (wave-
form) in the decoder.
The Large Latent U-Net incorporates 2 depth levels and 4 convolutional blocks per depth level in its
latent space translation model, resulting in a total parameter size of 34.96M. The Small variant, de-
signed for reduced complexity, includes 1 convolutional block per depth level in its latent translation
model, reducing the total parameter size to 18.13M.


D.3.2    I NVERTIBLE X-N ET

Invertible X-Net leverages an iUNet-based architecture to achieve bidirectional mappings, en-
abling consistent forward (velocity-to-waveform) and inverse (waveform-to-velocity) transforma-
tions within a shared framework. iUNet introduces invertible coupling blocks, ensuring bijectivity
for the latent space translation model. Max pooling is replaced with orthogonal convolutional fil-
ters for downsampling, while upsampling is performed using orthogonal deconvolution filters to
maintain invertibility.
While the latent space translation model in Invertible X-Net is fully invertible due to its iUNet
structure, the encoder-decoder pairs are not invertible. Therefore, Invertible X-Net as a whole is
not fully invertible. However, by employing two separate encoder-decoder pairs for velocity and
waveform domains, Invertible X-Net achieves an architecture that enables bidirectional mappings
between the two domains while preserving consistency.
Invertible X-Net features 4 depth levels, with 4 invertible coupling blocks per level, and adopts an
encoder-decoder structure similar to Latent U-Net, with 5 encoder layers and 6 decoder layers, an
embedding dimension of 128x70x70, and channel sizes ranging from 8 to 128. The latent translation
model - iUNet consists of 25.78M parameters, contributing to a total model size of 26.06M.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 3: Architecture Details of Seismic Waveform and Velocity Encoder-Decoder models.

                                              #Embedding
               Model            #Layers                               Channels             #Params
                                                  Dim
         Velocity Encoder             5        128x70x70      [8, 16, 32, 64, 128]           11632
         Velocity Decoder             6        128x70x70     [128, 64, 32, 16, 1, 1]         27877
        Seismic Waveform
                                      5        128x70x70         [8, 16, 32, 64, 128]        55680
             Encoder
        Seismic Waveform
                                      6        128x70x70     [128, 64, 32, 16, 5, 5]        186497
             Decoder


     Table 4: Architecture details of Latent U-Net and IU-Net latent space translation models

                                                       #Conv blocks/
                          Model            #Depths                         #Params
                                                      Coupling Blocks
                       Latent U-Net           2              4              34.68M
                          IU-Net              4              4              25.78M


     Table 5: Hyperparameter details for training Latent U-Net and Invertible X-Net models.

                      Model               #Epochs    Optimizer     LR      LR Scheduler
                   Latent U-Net             450       Adam         2e-3      StepLR
                 Invertible X-Net           450       Adam         2e-3      StepLR


Table 6: Comparison of encoder, decoder, and latent model parameters for our model (Latent U-Net
and Invertible X-Net) with other baseline models. The parameters for Latent U-Nets and Invertible
X-Nets are calculated for Latent dimension 70.

                       #Vel Encoder   #Vel Decoder   #Amp Encoder     #Amp Decoder      #Translation    #Total
       Model
                         Params         Params         Params           Params            Params       Params
         FNO                 -              -              -               -                 -          7.38M
     InversionNet            -           9.34M         35.76M              -              Identity     24.41M
    VelocityGAN              -           9.34M         35.76M              -              Identity     24.41M
      Autolinear         12.98M          9.98M          2.29M           10.18M             16.5K       35.45M
 Latent U-Net(Small)      11.6K         27.88K         55.68K           186.5K            17.86M       18.13M
 Latent U-Net(Large)      11.6K         27.88K         55.68K           186.5K            34.68M       34.96M
   Invertible X-Net       11.6K         27.88K         55.68K           186.5K            25.78M       26.06M


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              (a) Inverse problem                                             (b) Forward problem

Figure 10: Comparison of Latent U-Nets (Small and Large), Invertible X-Net, Invertible X-Net
(Cycle) with different baseline methods across different OpenFWI datasets.


E     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
E.1       A DDITIONAL I NVERSE M ODELING R ESULTS

We provide more detailed comparison of our models with other baseline models in Table 7. Our
proposed models consistently outperform baseline models on multiple datasets indicating superior
generalizability on in-distributions examples.
Additionally, we also show zero shot generalization of our models on the Marmousi and Overthrust
dataset in Tables 8. Our model Invertible X-Net shows generalizability in SSIM indicating that
overall prediction has better geological understanding than other baseline models.

Table 7: Comparison of our models (Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible X-Net) with other baseline
models for the inverse problem across 10 OpenFWI datasets. The bold highlights the best perform-
ing model on that dataset.

 Metric       Model           FVA       FVB        CVA         CVB        FFA        FFB        CFA        CFB         STA        STB      Average Rank
           InversionNet       19.67     52.77      102.77     224.57      25.80     158.31     38.90      246.94      93.96      103.37        2.8
 MAE ↓     Auto-Linear        12.16     70.05      110.72     273.02      24.55     181.39     41.38      268.47      107.85     95.63         3.5
           Latent U-Net       9.01      28.11      48.05      123.56      30.91     92.91      27.05      185.22      67.00      71.41         1.3
          Invertible X-Net    23.80     34.94      57.86      139.81      59.45     94.11      198.56     181.03      67.09      121.42        2.7
           InversionNet      1002.74   17271.62   36438.33   188044.46   4081.10   68214.92   9490.73    136327.84   23626.76   58622.35       2.8
 MSE ↓     Auto-Linear       1053.03   33907.57   42391.39   236457.48   5952.25   81789.80   13715.42   154713.12   31274.60   21819.14       3.5
           Latent U-Net      216.92    6464.06    12609.65   91784.50    2348.22   33935.12   3771.38    93249.92    14353.55   14564.94       1.3
          Invertible X-Net   1245.52   6969.42    14659.46   96121.90    7719.55   32559.95   77105.41   86512.36    13106.96   31550.22       2.4
           InversionNet      0.9894     0.9461     0.8073     0.6726     0.9765     0.7208     0.9566     0.6136      0.8858     0.6314         3
 SSIM ↑    Auto-Linear       0.9887     0.9044     0.8056     0.6169      0.97      0.6865     0.9424     0.5695      0.8422     0.7274        3.8
           Latent U-Net      0.9967     0.9809     0.9273     0.8156      0.991     0.8515      0.98      0.6930      0.9298     0.8064        1.3
          Invertible X-Net   0.9917     0.9769     0.9135     0.8076     0.9826     0.8532     0.9316     0.7116      0.9360     0.7913        1.9


                                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Comparison of our models (Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible X-Net) on real world like
datasets - Marmousi, Overthrust, Marmousi Smooth, Overthrust Smooth for the Inverse Problem.
The bold highlights the best performing model on that dataset.

  Metric               Model               Marmousi           Overthrust         Marmousi Smooth                Overthrust Smooth
                   InversionNet                 282.39             273.80               179.34                        148.34
  MAE ↓            Auto-Linear                  285.38             298.89               206.38                        207.41
                  Latnet U-Net                  322.13             264.40               242.71                        198.53
                Invertible X-Net                298.39             308.50               245.86                        258.26
                   InversionNet            160084.5           135988.73                67978.40                     37804.58
  MSE ↓            Auto-Linear             159517.41          157434.56                78207.07                     71128.92
                  Latnet U-Net             217508.17          122398.64               112685.39                     69122.58
                Invertible X-Net           180250.47          179093.10               107344.46                     124700.75
                   InversionNet                  0.46              0.4519               0.6044                        0.7217
  SSIM ↑           Auto-Linear                  0.438              0.4097               0.5423                        0.6447
                  Latnet U-Net                  0.438              0.4807               0.6371                        0.7031
                Invertible X-Net                0.504              0.4827               0.6633                        0.6952



E.2       A DDITIONAL F ORWARD M ODELING R ESULTS

Similar to the inverse problem, we provide detailed comparison of our models with other baseline
models in Table 9 and 10. Our proposed models consistently outperform baseline models on multiple
datasets indicating superior in-distributions generalizability.

Table 9: Comparison of our models (Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible X-Net) with other baseline
models for the forward problem across 10 OpenFWI datasets. The bold highlights the best perform-
ing model on that dataset.

 Metric        Model          FVA      FVB        CVA     CVB        FFA      FFB     CFA      CFB       STA       STB     Average Rank
                FNO           0.0077   0.0385    0.0700   0.1405    0.0282   0.0829   0.0605   0.1075   0.0292    0.0379       2.4
 MAE ↓       Auto-Linear      0.0340   0.0906    0.0744   0.1537    0.0541   0.1048   0.0703   0.1356   0.0492    0.0584       3.9
            Latent U-Net      0.0389   0.0473    0.0581   0.1098    0.0512   0.059    0.0576   0.0891   0.0269    0.0354       2.3
           Invertible X-Net   0.0257   0.0527    0.0532   0.0887    0.0457   0.0477   0.0404   0.0671   0.0235    0.0341       1.4
                FNO           0.0004   0.0066    0.0259   0.0825    0.0059   0.0358   0.0251   0.0471   0.0041    0.0053       1.9
 MSE ↓       Auto-Linear      0.0084   0.0427    0.0303   0.1045    0.0217   0.0625   0.033    0.0866   0.0174    0.0173       3.7
            Latent U-Net      0.0173   0.0127    0.0160   0.0489    0.0344   0.0175   0.0442   0.0297   0.0053    0.0082       2.6
           Invertible X-Net   0.0062   0.0176    0.0175   0.0305    0.0185   0.0117   0.0126   0.0163   0.004     0.0087       1.8
                FNO           0.9967   0.9781    0.8881   0.8354    0.9667   0.8702   0.9166   0.8160   0.9655    0.9417       3.1
 SSIM ↑      Auto-Linear      0.9694   0.9289    0.9038   0.8567    0.9470   0.8736   0.9253   0.8188   0.9569    0.9300       3.5
            Latent U-Net      0.9764   0.9779    0.9237    0.89     0.9659   0.9283   0.9571   0.8636   0.9819    0.9702       2.3
           Invertible X-Net   0.9887   0.9782    0.9559   0.9221    0.9744   0.954    0.9757   0.9156   0.989     0.9805       1.1


E.3       I MPORTANCE OF C OMBINED L OSS F UNCTION FOR I NVERTIBLE -XN ET

In this section, we focus on the training of the Invertible X-Net model using a combined loss func-
tion (incorporating both the forward and inverse problems), as opposed to training it solely with a
forward loss function. Figure 11 shows that when model is trained using only forward loss, then
its performance falls short compared to the Latent U-Net (Large) model. This discrepancy can be
attributed to the fact that the Latent U-Net has a higher model complexity than Invertible X-Net,
despite their similar sizes. Nonetheless, when the Invertible X-Net model is trained with combined
loss (forward and inverse), the model is able to outperform Latent U-Net model with a good mar-


                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Comparison of our models (Latent U-Net (Large) and Invertible X-Net) on real world like
datasets - Marmousi, Overthrust, Marmousi Smooth, Overthrust Smooth for the Forward Problem.
The bold highlights the best performing model on that dataset.

  Metric         Model          Marmousi     Overthrust    Marmousi Smooth      Overthrust Smooth
                  FNO            0.1484        0.2726           0.1077                0.1892
  MAE ↓       Auto-Linear        0.2818        0.3018           0.2821                0.2730
              Latnet U-Net       0.1338        0.2502           0.1013                0.1875
            Invertible X-Net     0.1425        0.2311           0.1056                0.2062
                  FNO            0.1110        0.580            0.0811                0.3495
  MSE ↓       Auto-Linear        0.4227        0.6203           0.5325                0.5593
              Latnet U-Net       0.1116        0.5494           0.0927                0.4133
            Invertible X-Net     0.1168        0.4026           0.08130               0.5049
                  FNO            0.8148        0.7404           0.9021                0.8447
  SSIM ↑      Auto-Linear        0.6344        0.672            0.6670                0.7192
              Latnet U-Net       0.8343        0.7700           0.9143                0.8626
            Invertible X-Net      0.827        0.7863           0.9112                0.8500



gin. This highlights the value of joint training, demonstrating that simultaneously learning both the
forward and inverse problems can lead to better results than learning the two models separately.
In Figures 12 and 13, we illustrate asymmetry in learning the translation for the forward and inverse
problems using CVB and CFA datasets. From the figures, we observe that the model learns the
inverse mapping in the initial epochs and gradually starts to learn the solution to the forward prob-
lem in later epochs. Since the network optimizes the combined loss function on both velocity and
waveform together, the gradients from the combined loss help the model to achieve better forward
solution. This corroborates with our hypothesis that the model trained on combined loss is able to
learn the connection between forward and inverse problem.


Figure 11: Comparison of Latent U-Net (Large), Invertible X-Net, Invertible X-Net (Forward Only),
and Invertible X-Net (Cycle) on the forward problem across various OpenFWI datasets.


E.4   Z ERO - SHOT P ERFORMANCE

In this part, we provide detailed insights into zero shot performance of our models (Latent U-Net
(Large) and Invertible X-Net) with other baselines across all datasets. This investigation helps us
understand overall out-of-distribution generalization of a model and underscore the importance of
learning the translation problem in the latent space.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5    I NVERSE P ROBLEM

Figure 14 and 15 show generalization performance of Invertible X-Net and Latent U-Net (Large)
models respectively on the inverse problem using MAE, MSE, and SSIM metrics. As described
in the main paper, we show models trained across all dataset as rows and evaluated across all test
datasets as columns. For comparison, we evaluate metrics such as MAE, MSE, and SSIM and
calculate its difference between our models and other baseline models. For MAE and MSE, when
the color intensity is blue, our model show better generalizability and vice-versa whereas, for SSIM,
when the color intensity is red indicates better generalization of our model and vice-versa.
From Figure 14, we observe that the Invertible X-Net shows superior generalization over the base-
line models (AutoLinear, InversionNet, and VelocityGAN) across all metrics except on the FVB
dataset. Figure 14 (d) compare Invertible X-Net with Latent U-Net (Large) model where we see
that Invertible X-Net shows better generalization on complex datasets such as CFB, STA, and STB
datasets, while Latent U-Net is better on relatively simpler datasets such as CVA, CFA, and more.
Similarly, Figure 15 shows the comparison of Latent U-Net (Large) model with other baseline mod-
els. As expected, we observe that our model is able to generalize much better than all the baseline
models.

E.6    F ORWARD P ROBLEM

Similar to the inverse problem, we analyze out-of-distribution generalization of our models against
baseline models across all evaluation metrics.
Figures 16 and 17 compares the performance of our models Invertible X-Net and Latent U-Net
(Large) against baselines. In Figure 16, we observe strong generalization of Invertible X-Net over
all baselines - AutoLinear, FNO, and WaveformNet. Figure 16 (d) shows the comparative perfor-
mance of Invertible X-Net against Latent U-Net (Large) where we see that Invertible X-Net domi-
nates overall across all metrics. In Figure 17, we compare the Latent U-Net (Large) model against
same baselines as above. The figure indicates Latent U-Net (Large) model has much stronger gen-
eralizability than baseline models consistently.

F     A BLATION S TUDIES
F.1   E FFECT OF VARYING L ATENT S PACE S IZES

Figure 18a (a) shows how the performance of Latent U-Net model is affected with change in the
latent space size. As the latent space size is reduced, the MAE and MSE metrics for mapping seismic
waveform to velocity is increasing, while the SSIM is decreasing. The impact is more pronounced
on complex datasets such as B group of datasets. These datasets represent geologically complex
datasets and therefore may require larger latent space to encode geological heterogeneity. In Figure
18b, we compare the large Latent U-Net with the small Latent U-Net model, while latent space size
is also reduced. We observe that the performance gap between the two models reduces as the latent
space size is also reduced. This underscore the importance of latent space size for encoding the
geological features for an effective translation.
Further, we provide visualizations of the first two primary PCA and t-SNE components of the ve-
locity latent space in Figure 19 and 20 respectively. We take the encoder trained on a dataset and
get the latent space encoding on several datasets. This visualization shows the in-distribution and
out-of-distribution generality of our encoders and highlights the importance of the manifold for la-
tent space translation. Overall, we observe that the larger latent space 70 × 70 have better structure
than 8 × 8, indicating that the ideal size of latent space should be decided based on the complexity
of dataset and problem being solved.

F.2   E FFECT OF S KIP C ONNECTIONS FOR L ATENT U-N ET

In this section, we study the impact of skip connections of Latent U-Net model for the inverse
problem. Figure 21 shows how the MAE and MSE are increasing and SSIM is decreasing when the
latent space size is decreasing from 70 × 70 to 8 × 8. We observe that the impact of skip connections
is more pronounced at smaller latent space size as opposed to larger space.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3       E FFECT OF M ANIFOLD L EARNING

Figure 22 for Latent U-Net Small further elaborates on our finding that direct translation learning
consistently outperforms the two-stage approach, where translation follows reconstruction.


G        N OISE E XPERIMENTS

Table 11: Quantitative results on CurveFault-B with Gaussian noise of varying variance σ 2 added
during testing for the inverse problem.

 Model                            σ2 = 0                          σ 2 = 1e-5                          σ 2 = 5e-5                          σ 2 = 1e-4                        σ 2 = 5e-4
                                                                 PSNR=84.07dB                       PSNR=77..08dB                       PSNR=74.07dB                      PSNR=67.08dB

                    MAE            MSE        SSIM      MAE          MSE         SSIM      MAE           MSE         SSIM       MAE         MSE         SSIM     MAE          MSE         SSIM
 Latnet U-Net       185.22       93248.64    0.6930    185.54      93538.78     0.6926     187.03     94674.546     0.6917     188.56     95777.95     0.6906    195.94     101444.7     0.6844
 Degradation (%)     (-)            (-)        (-)     0.17%        0.31%       0.05%      0.97%        1.52%        0.20%     1.80%       2.71%        0.35%    5.78%        8.78%      1.24%
 Invertible X-Net   180.97       86465.25    0.7117    181.32      86673.38     0.7115     182.83      87674.14     0.7106     184.17     88585.86     0.7097    192.22     94728.94     0.7036
 Degradation (%)     (-)            (-)        (-)     0.19%        0.24%       0.02%      1.02%        1.39%        0.15%     1.76%       2.45%        0.27%    6.21%        9.55%      1.13%
 Auto-Linear        268.47       154713.10   0.5695    270.29     156201.81     0.5682     277.05     162156.50     0.5632     285.34    169892.26     0.5572    325.02     211616.29    0.5190
 Degradation (%)     (-)            (-)        (-)     0.67%        0.96%       0.21%      3.19%        4.81%        1.10%     6.28%       9.81%        2.15%   21.06%       36.77%      8.86%


Table 12: Quantitative results on FlatFault-B with Gaussian noise of varying variance σ 2 added
during testing for the inverse problem.

 Model                            σ2 = 0                         σ 2 = 1e-5                          σ 2 = 5e-5                         σ 2 = 1e-4                         σ 2 = 5e-4
                                                                PSNR=84.07dB                       PSNR=77..08dB                       PSNR=74.07dB                       PSNR=67.08dB

                    MAE           MSE        SSIM      MAE         MSE         SSIM       MAE          MSE         SSIM       MAE          MSE         SSIM     MAE           MSE        SSIM
 Latnet U-Net       92.93        33925.46    0.8515    93.47      34137.49     0.8511     95.43      34907.52      0.8499     98.19      36002.58      0.8482   108.83      40770.50     0.8417
 Degradation (%)      (-)           (-)       (-)      0.58%       0.62%       0.05%      2.68%        2.89%       0.18%      5.66%       6.12%        0.38%    17.10%      20.17%       1.15%
 Invertible X-Net   94.05        32548.49    0.8532    96.23      33283.08     0.8529     104.75     36522.60       0.85      110.30     39016.04      0.8474   122.66      45509.88     0.8382
 Degradation (%)      (-)           (-)       (-)      2.31%       2.25%       0.03%      11.37%      12.20%       0.37%      17.27%      19.87%       0.67%    30.41%      39.82%       1.76%
 Auto-Linear        181.39       81789.80    0.6865    187.40     85327.79     0.6821     206.58     98616.76      0.6664     221.79    110396.50      0.6511   283.50     167482.73     0.5796
 Degradation (%)      (-)           (-)       (-)      3.31%       4.32%       0.64%      13.88%      20.57%       2.93%      22.26%      34.97%       5.16%    56.28%      104.77%      15.57%


Table 13: Quantitative results on CurveFault-B with Gaussian noise of varying variance σ 2 added
during testing for the forward problem.

 Model                             σ2 = 0                          σ 2 = 1e-5                          σ 2 = 5e-5                         σ 2 = 1e-4                       σ 2 = 5e-4
                                                                 PSNR=56.02dB                        PSNR=49.03dB                       PSNR=46.02dB                      PSNR=39.03dB

                      MAE           MSE       SSIM       MAE         MSE         SSIM        MAE          MSE        SSIM        MAE         MSE        SSIM     MAE          MSE        SSIM
 Latnet U-Net         0.0891       0.0297     0.8636     0.0891      0.0297      0.8635     0.0892       0.0297      0.8634     0.0897      0.0301     0.8630    0.0966      0.0396      0.8565
 Degradation (%)           (-)        (-)       (-)       0%          0%         0.01%       0.13%       0.30%       0.01%      0.60%       1.40%      0.06%     8.37%       33.47%      0.82%
 Invertible X-Net     0.0671       0.0163     0.9157     0.0672      0.0164      0.9156     0.0674       0.0164      0.9152     0.0678      0.0166     0.9147    0.0719      0.0193      0.9090
 Degradation (%)           (-)        (-)       (-)      0.07%       0.07%      0.009%       0.42%       0.54%       0.04%      1.00%       1.68%      0.10%     7.08%       18.18%      0.73%
 Auto-Linear          0.1356       0.0866     0.8188     0.1356      0.0868      0.8187     0.1360       0.0873      0.8183     0.1365      0.088      0.8179    0.139       0.0919      0.8159
 Degradation (%)           (-)        (-)       (-)      0.06%       0.14%       0.01%       0.34%       0.78%       0.05%      0.70%       1.61%      0.09%     2.53%       6.03%       0.35%


H        A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATIONS

Here, we provide additional visualization of the waveform and velocity predictions for baselines
and our models, namely Latent-UNet (small), Latent-UNet (large), Invertible-XNet, and Invertible-
XNet (cycle), for both forward and inverse problems. Please note that we show the prediction of
seismic waveform and velocity in the original space by unnormalizing the predictions for every
model (Figures 23 - 34).


                                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: Quantitative results on FlatFault-B with Gaussian noise of varying variance σ 2 added
during testing for the forward problem.

    Model                       σ2 = 0                     σ 2 = 1e-5                     σ 2 = 5e-5                     σ 2 = 1e-4                     σ 2 = 5e-4
                                                        PSNR=56.02dB                  PSNR=49.03dB                   PSNR=46.02dB                      PSNR=39.03dB

                       MAE      MSE      SSIM     MAE        MSE        SSIM     MAE        MSE        SSIM     MAE        MSE        SSIM     MAE         MSE        SSIM
    Latent U-Net       0.0594   0.0175   0.9283   0.0594    0.0175      0.9283   0.0598    0.0179      0.9279   0.0606    0.0187      0.9271   0.0694     0.0325     0.9178
    Degradation (%)     (-)      (-)      (-)      0%         0%         0%      0.66%     2.16%       0.04%    1.99%     6.99%       0.12%    16.87%     85.99%      1.12%
    Invertible X-Net   0.0477   0.0117   0.9540   0.0478    0.0117      0.9540   0.0482    0.0119      0.9536   0.0487    0.0122      0.9531   0.0535      0.016     0.9463
    Degradation (%)     (-)      (-)      (-)     0.17%     0.33%        0%      0.94%     1.88%       0.04%    1.93%     4.26%       0.10%    12.16%     36.39%      0.80%
    Auto-Linear        0.1048   0.0625   0.8736   0.1051    0.0628      0.8734   0.1061    0.0641      0.8726   0.1072    0.0656      0.8717   0.112      0.0727      0.868
    Degradation (%)     (-)      (-)      (-)     0.25%     0.54%       0.02%    1.19%     2.59%       0.11%    2.24%     5.06%       0.21%    6.86%      16.37%      0.64%


I        C ODE A PPENDIX
All the code required to train and evaluate the proposed methods, as well as the baselines, has
been uploaded to an anonymous GitHub repository: https://github.com/KGML-lab/
Generalized-Forward-Inverse-Framework-for-DL4SI. The data and correspond-
ing processing code used in this work are sourced from the OpenFWI website: https://
openfwi-lanl.github.io/docs/data.html.


                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           (a) Epoch: 1


                                          (b) Epoch: 10


                                          (c) Epoch: 20

Figure 12: Training of Invertible X-Net model on the CVB dataset illustrating velocity and seismic
waveform learning with epochs.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           (a) Epoch: 1


                                          (b) Epoch: 10


                                          (c) Epoch: 20

Figure 13: Training of Invertible X-Net model on the CFA dataset illustrating velocity and seismic
waveform learning with epochs.



                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  (a) Invertible X-Net - AutoLinear


                                  (b) Invertible X-Net - InversionNet


                                 (c) Invertible X-Net - VelocityGAN


                              (d) Invertible X-Net - Latent U-Net (Large)

Figure 14: Out-of-distribution zero shot generalizations for the inverse problem of Invertible X-Net
with AutoLinear, InversionNet, VelocityGAN, Latent U-Net (Large).


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               (a) Latent U-Net (Large) - AutoLinear


                              (b) Latent U-Net (Large) - InversionNet


                              (c) Latent U-Net (Large) - VelocityGAN

Figure 15: Out-of-distribution zero shot generalizations for the inverse problem of Latent U-Net
(Large) with AutoLinear, InversionNet, VelocityGAN.


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  (a) Invertible X-Net - AutoLinear


                                     (b) Invertible X-Net - FNO


                                 (c) Invertible X-Net - WaveformNet


                              (d) Invertible X-Net - Latent-UNet (Large)

Figure 16: Out-of-distribution zero shot generalizations for the forward problem of Invertible X-Net
with AutoLinear, FNO, WaveformNet (U-Net like model), and Latent U-Net (Large).


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               (a) Latnet U-Net (Large) - AutoLinear


                                  (b) Latnet U-Net (Large) - FNO


                              (c) Latnet U-Net (Large) - WaveformNet

Figure 17: Out-of-distribution zero shot generalizations for the forward problem of Latent U-Net
with AutoLinear, FNO, and WaveformNet (U-Net like model).


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (a) Effect of Latent dimension on U-Net Large


              (b) Effect of Latent dimension on U-Net Small in comparison to U-Net Small

Figure 18: Effect of the size of latent sizes on the performance of large and small Latent U-Net
(small and large) on the OpenFWI datasets.


    Figure 19: Visualizing the PCA projection of Velocity latent space for 8 × 8 and 70 × 70.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 20: Comparing the t-SNE plot of latent space for velocity encoder.


Figure 21: Effect of the size of latent space and skip vs no skip connections on the performance of
large and small Latent U-Net models across OpenFWI datasets.


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Latent U-Net Small                        (b) Invetible X-Net

Figure 22: Comparison of Latent U-Net’s and Invertible X-Net’s performance across three learning
objectives: translation directly, reconstruction followed by translation, and combined learning of
both, evaluated at different training fractions.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: Zero shot generalization results of model trained on Style-A dataset on Marmousi and
Overthrust dataset samples and their smoothened versions.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 24: Zero shot generalization results of model trained on Style-B dataset on Marmousi and
Overthrust dataset samples and their smoothened versions.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 25: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on FVA dataset.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 26: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on FVB dataset.


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 27: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on CVA dataset.


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 28: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on CVB dataset.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 29: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on FFA dataset.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 30: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on FFB dataset.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 31: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on CFA dataset.


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 32: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on CFB dataset.


                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 33: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on STA dataset.


                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 34: Visualization of predictions for forward and inverse problems on STB dataset.


                                               45
