Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONFORMALIZED I NTERACTIVE I MITATION L EARNING :
H ANDLING E XPERT S HIFT & I NTERMITTENT F EEDBACK
  Michelle Zhaoa , Reid Simmonsa , Henny Admonia , Aaditya Ramdas†b , Andrea Bajcsy†a
 a
   Robotics Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
 b
   Departments of Statistics and Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University
 {mzhao2, hadmoni, rsimmons, aramdas, abajcsy}@andrew.cmu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         In interactive imitation learning (IL), uncertainty quantification offers a way for
         the learner (i.e. robot) to contend with distribution shifts encountered during de-
         ployment by actively seeking additional feedback from an expert (i.e. human)
         online. Prior works use mechanisms like ensemble disagreement or Monte Carlo
         dropout to quantify when black-box IL policies are uncertain; however, these
         approaches can lead to overconfident estimates when faced with deployment-time
         distribution shifts. Instead, we contend that we need uncertainty quantification
         algorithms that can leverage the expert human feedback received during deploy-
         ment time to adapt the robot’s uncertainty online. To tackle this, we draw upon
         online conformal prediction, a distribution-free method for constructing prediction
         intervals online given a stream of ground-truth labels. Human labels, however,
         are intermittent in the interactive IL setting. Thus, from the conformal prediction
         side, we introduce a novel uncertainty quantification algorithm called intermittent
         quantile tracking (IQT) that leverages a probabilistic model of intermittent labels,
         maintains asymptotic coverage guarantees, and empirically achieves desired cov-
         erage levels. From the interactive IL side, we develop ConformalDAgger, a new
         approach wherein the robot uses prediction intervals calibrated by IQT as a reliable
         measure of deployment-time uncertainty to actively query for more expert feedback.
         We compare ConformalDAgger to prior uncertainty-aware DAgger methods in
         scenarios where the distribution shift is (and isn’t) present because of changes
         in the expert’s policy. We find that in simulated and hardware deployments on
         a 7DOF robotic manipulator, ConformalDAgger detects high uncertainty when
         the expert shifts and increases the number of interventions compared to base-
         lines, allowing the robot to more quickly learn the new behavior. Project page at
         cmu-intentlab.github.io/conformalized-interactive-il/.

1 I NTRODUCTION
End-to-end robot policies trained via imitation learning (IL) have proven to be an extremely powerful
way to learn complex robot behaviors from expert human demonstrations (Schaal, 1996; Price &
Boutilier, 2003; Argall et al., 2009; Levine et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2022; Chi et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2024). At the same time, distribution shift is a core challenge in this domain, hampering the reliability
of deploying such robot policies in the real world (Chang et al., 2021).
One way to combat this is via uncertainty quantification. By training an ensemble of policies (Menda
et al., 2019) or via monte-carlo dropout during training (Cui et al., 2019), the robot learner can
detect uncertain states and actively elicit additional action labels from the human expert online via an
interactive IL framework (such DAgger (Ross et al., 2011)). At their core, these prior uncertainty-
aware IL methods look to the training demonstration data as a proxy for deployment-time uncertainty.
Any human expert labels requested at deployment time using this uncertainty estimate are simply
stored for later re-training; the uncertainty estimate itself is not adapted online to the expert data nor
does it inform any subsequent queries during the deployment episode.
Instead, we contend that the human feedback requested and received during deployment time is a
valuable uncertainty quantification signal that should be leveraged to update the robot’s uncertainty
estimate online. If properly accounted for, the updated uncertainty estimate will influence when
the robot asks for more help, enabling it to targetedly probe the human expert to improve policy


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             human feedback          robot’s planned action            ConformalDAgger uncertainty

    Stationary Expert                                                  Expert Shift

    0                                                                    1



             H feedback                                                         H feedback
           R asks for help                                                    R asks for help

    R acting independently                                            R acting independently

                   0.1                                                                 0.1
    ConformalDAgger                                                     ConformalDAgger
       uncertainty                                                         uncertainty
                   0.0                                                                 0.0
                                Time in trajectory                                                       Time in trajectory



Figure 1: Conformalized Interactive Imitation Learning. The robot learns an initial policy via
imitation learning to wipe a line drawing by following a straight path. When the initial policy is
deployed, ConformalDAgger calibrates the robot’s uncertainty (represented by red prediction interval
boxes) based on feedback received from the human during the interactive IL loop. (left) The robot
refrains from asking questions when its uncertainty is low because the expert policy at deployment
time is aligned to the demonstrations on which the learner was trained. (right) When the human shifts
in their task strategy, uncertainty increases and the robot starts to query for more expert labels.
performance. The challenge is how to do this online uncertainty update in the presence of the
end-to-end “black box” policies underlying modern imitation learning.
To tackle this, we take inspiration from online conformal prediction (Gibbs & Candes, 2021) which
is a distribution-free way to represent uncertainty via prediction sets constructed on the output of a
black-box model. Our first contribution is extending online conformal prediction to the case where
labels are observed intermittently, as is the case in interactive IL with an expert. Specifically, we
instantiate Intermittent Quantile Tracking (IQT), an algorithm which adjusts prediction intervals
online to ensure that the true label lies within the predicted interval with high-probability despite
probabilistic access to labels. On standard conformal time series datasets, we empirically find that
IQT achieves empirical coverage close to the desired level by boosting the size of the calibrated
intervals based on the likelihood of observing feedback.
With our intermittent conformal algorithm in hand, we develop ConformalDAgger, a new interactive
IL approach wherein the robot uses prediction intervals calibrated by IQT as a reliable measure
of deployment-time uncertainty to actively query for more expert feedback. We instantiate Con-
formalDAgger in a simulated 4D robot goal-reaching task and in hardware on a 7 degree-of-freedom
robotic manipulator that uses a state-of-the-art Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023) learned via IL to
perform a sponging task (Figure 1). We study how ConformalDAgger compares to prior uncertainty-
aware DAgger methods when the deployment-time and training-time datasets are from the same
distribution (left, Figure 1) as well as a shifted one (right, Figure 1). Specifically, we instantiate a po-
tential source of distribution shift as expert policy shift: the training-time expert wipes a line-drawing
with a straight-line path while the deployment-time expert refines their strategy to be a zigzag path
(Figure 1). We find that ConformalDAgger automatically increases uncertainty online when the
expert shifts, resulting in more expert labels queries compared to EnsembleDAgger and allowing our
approach to rapidly learn a policy aligned with the expert’s intentions.

2       R ELATED W ORK
Interactive Imitation Learning (IL) with Online Experts. Interactive IL is a branch of imitation
learning wherein a robot learner can query a (human) expert to receive additional labels either
during or after task execution (Celemin et al., 2022). The utility of in-the-loop expert interventions is
mitigating distribution shift between training and deployment of the policy. Distribution shift can stem
from a multitude of reasons, including covariate shift (Spencer et al., 2021) (e.g., encountering new
observations of the environment during policy execution), or expert shift: wherein the expert’s latent
strategy changes over time (Hong et al., 2024; Sagheb et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2021) A foundational
approach for interactive IL is DAgger (Dataset Aggregation) (Ross et al., 2011), which iteratively
augments the training dataset by aggregating data from the expert and learner policies and assuming
the expert is stationary. In the online case, the robot learner can cede control to the expert at any time
to get additional state-action data (also known as robot-gated feedback) or the expert can actively


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


intervene at any time (also known as human-gated feedback) (Kelly et al., 2019). From the learner’s
perspective, a key question is when to request feedback from the expert so that it minimizes expert
effort but also minimizes negative events caused by an erroneous policy (e.g., running into a wall).
On one hand, prior works focus on minimizing human effort by constraining robot requests via a
limited human attention model (Hoque et al., 2023) or a budget of human interventions (Hoque
et al., 2021a;b). On the other hand, prior works prioritize deployment-time safety by classifying safe
versus unsafe states (SafeDAgger (Zhang & Cho, 2017), Replay Estimation (Swamy et al., 2022)),
estimating uncertainty via ensemble disagreement (EnsembleDAgger (Menda et al., 2019)), or Monte
Carlo dropout (Cui et al., 2019). We present ConformalDAgger, which uses our novel uncertainty
quantification method grounded in conformal prediction to adaptively increase the learner requests
for help under uncertainty and decrease the number of requests when confident.
Online Conformal Prediction. Conformal prediction is a distribution-free uncertainty quantification
method for constructing prediction intervals for both classification and regression problems (An-
gelopoulos & Bates, 2023; Romano et al., 2019; 2020; Zaffran et al., 2022), as well as for offline
or online data. We focus on the online setting (e.g., timeseries) where uncertainty quantification is
performed on streaming pairs of input-label data that are not necessarily i.i.d. (Gibbs & Candes,
2021). Broadly speaking, there are two predominant algorithms in this setting: adaptive conformal
inference (ACI) (Gibbs & Candes, 2021; Gibbs & Candès, 2024; Bhatnagar et al., 2023; Zaffran et al.,
2022) and quantile tracking (QT) (Angelopoulos et al., 2023). Both are online gradient descent-based
methods which guarantee asymptotic coverage in the online setting. Unlike ACI which is prone to
infinitely sized intervals after a series of miscoverage events, QT directly estimates the value of the
empirical quantile itself, ensuring coverage with finite intervals. In this work, we relax the assumption
that labels must be observed at each time point in the streaming data and extend the online conformal
paradigm to ensure coverage in the intermittent label regime.

3    O NLINE C ONFORMAL P REDICTION WITH I NTERMITTENT L ABELS
From the uncertainty quantification side, our core technical contribution is extending online conformal
prediction to settings where ground truth labels are intermittently observed. We present our algorithm
in the context of quantile tracking for relevance to our interactive IL experiments. However, we also
derive an extension of ACI (Gibbs & Candes, 2021) to intermittent labels in the Appendix Section D.
Setting. We focus on online conformal prediction in the
                                                                           xt 1   yt 1      xt      yt
adversarial setting, such as time-series forecasting. This
considers an arbitrary sequence of data points (xt , yt ) 2
X ⇥ Y, for t = 1, 2, ..., that are not necessarily I.I.D. Our            obst 1   errt 1   obst    errt
goal is to produce prediction sets on the output of any
base prediction model such that the sets contain the true
                                                                                  qt 1              qt
label with a specified coverage probability. Mathemati-
cally, at each time t, we observe xt and seek to cover the        Figure 2: Graphical Model of IQT. IQT
true label yt with a set Ct (xt ), which depends on a base        introduces random variable obst , which
prediction model, fˆ : X ! Y. The base model takes                represents the receiving of ground truth
as input the current xt and outputs prediction ŷt ; in the       observations at t. obst is distributed ac-
non-intermittent case, we observe the ground-truth label          cording to pt , which may depend on xt
yt after each prediction.                                         or history through t 1.
Background: Quantile Tracking. The quantile tracking (QT) algorithm from Angelopoulos et al.
(2024) implicitly seeks to track the value of the 1 ↵ quantile via online gradient descent on the
quantile loss (Koenker & Bassett Jr, 1978). As in Angelopoulos et al. (2024), we leverage a bounded
nonconformity score function: s : X ⇥ Y ! [0, B] where 0 < B < 1, to quantify the error made
by the initial prediction of the base model. We assume the nonconformity score function s(xt , yt ) is
negatively oriented (lower values indicate less nonconformity or greater prediction accuracy). Let
qt represents the estimated 1 ↵ quantile of the score sequence st , t 2 N. Prediction intervals are
constructed using the nonconformity score function:
                                  Ct (xt ) = {y 2 Y : s(xt , yt )  qt }                                     (1)
To expand or contract the prediction intervals, the level qt is adjusted via the online update:
                                      qt+1 = qt +       t (errt   ↵),                                        (2)
where   t > 0 is a time-varying step size and errt =          / t (xt ) is the empirical miscoverage at t.
                                                           yt 2C



                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Intuitively, this update increases the quantile threshold when the model continuously miscovers and
decreases it when the model coverage is performant. For arbitrary step size t with no assumptions
on the sequence of data points (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), ... and an initial quantile threshold q1 2 [0, B], the
quantile tracking update satisfies Equation 3 (Theorem 2 of Angelopoulos et al. (2024)):
                        T
                    1X                                     B + max1tT           t
                             yt 2Ct (xt )   (1    ↵)                                 · ||   1:T ||1     (3)
                    T t=1                                        T

where is defined 1 = 1 1 and t = t 1          1
                                            t 1 for t 2, and 1:T = ( 1 , . . . , T ). We can
                   P T
see that limT !1 T t=1 1 errt approaches 1 ↵. This guarantees quantile tracking gives the
                 1

1 ↵ long-term empirical coverage frequency.
Intermittent Quantile Tracking (IQT). Our paradigm lifts the assumption that the ground truth
label yt is observed constantly. Instead, it is observed with some probability at each timestep. Let the
binary random variable obst 2 {0, 1} represent whether the robot observes label yt at timestep t:
                                               ⇢
                                                 1, if yt observed
                                     obst :=                                                         (4)
                                                 0, otherwise .
We introduce a probabilistic observation model, pt := P(obst = 1 | xt ), where pt represents
the probability of receiving feedback, which can be dependent on input xt (and past history, this
possibility is demonstrated by the dotted line in Figure 2). A key observation under the paradigm of
intermittent labels is that errt may not at every timestep be accessible to the algorithm if yt is not
provided, but the value of errt exists at every timestep even if unobservable.
Our quantile tracking update under probabilistic observations, which we call Intermittent Quantile
Tracking (IQT), is defined in Equation 5 as:
                                                      t
                                       qt+1 = qt +        (errt   ↵)obst                                 (5)
                                                     pt
Proposition 1. Let (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), ... be an arbitrary sequence of data points, and let s : X ⇥Y !
[0, B]. Let t be an arbitrary positive sequence, and fix an initial threshold q1 2 [0, B]. Then
Intermittent Quantile Tracking (IQT) satisfies for all T 1:
                               T
                            1X                    B + max1tT ptt
                                  errt      ↵                             · ||   1:T ||1                (6)
                            T t=1                            T

This guarantees IQT gives the 1 ↵ long-term empirical coverage frequency, even with intermittent
ground truth access, regardless of the underlying data generation process. While these asymptotic
coverage guarantees are sound in theory, we believe it is important to acknowledge that typical robot
deployment conditions are finite-horizon. Nevertheless our empirical findings in Section 5 indicate
the practical utility of IQT’s uncertainty estimates to obtain extra human feedback during deployment.
Refer to full proof in Appendix Section C. Note that when feedback is constant (i.e. pt = 1), obst = 1
for all timesteps, and IQT reduces to online quantile tracking with arbitrary step sizes.
Practical Note: Choosing Gamma. In practice, an important decision is the choice of t . Prior
works in quantile tracking with constant labels (Angelopoulos et al., 2023) choose t = lrB̂t , where
B̂t := maxt krt 1 s(xr , yr ), k represents a look-back window across the previous timesteps with
observed ground truth labels, and lr is a small constant. On our domains, we find that choosing t
such that it contains B̂t improves empirical coverage over the choice of a constant t = .
3.1 E XPERIMENTS : I NTERMITTENT Q UANTILE T RACKING ON S TANDARD T IMESERIES DATA
We first empirically evaluate our approach for intermittent conformal quantile tracking on time
series benchmarks used in the online conformal prediction literature. The goal of testing on standard
conformal datasets is to evaluate (1) how different choices of step size t affect the empirical coverage
of IQT, and (2) validate that under probabilistically intermittent observations, IQT maintains coverage
close to the desired level. We use the findings from these experiments to inform how we leverage
intermittent quantile tracking in the interactive imitation learning domain.
Setup. We test on three benchmark datasets from Angelopoulos et al. (2023): (1) Amazon stock
prices, (2) Google stock prices (Nguyen, 2018), and the (3) Elec2 dataset (Harries, 1999). We test


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  lr = 1                                           lr = 0.1                                         lr = 0.01
                      Coverage                Interval Size             Coverage                Interval Size            Coverage                Interval Size

         1.0
                                    1000
    IQT-pi
                                    500
         0.0
         1.0
                                    1000
 IQT-pd
                                    500
         0.0
               1000   2000       3000      1000   2000        3000   1000   2000     3000     1000     2000     3000   1000   2000     3000     1000     2000    3000



Figure 3: IQT on Amazon Stocks with AR base model: Coverage & Interval Visualization.
We set pt = 0.1, 8t to see true price labels only 10% of the time and show the prediction interval
for 1 seed and coverage averaged over 5 seeds (shaded error on coverage plots show std deviation).
IQT-pd is prone to large intervals when lr is large, and boosts coverage over IQT-pi when lr is small.
four base prediction models, fˆ, all trained via darts (Herzen et al., 2022) to see if IQT consistently
maintains coverage close to the desired level. We present the Autoregressive (AR) model with 3 lags
for brevity in the main text and defer the other model results to the Appendix. Our nonconformity
score is the asymmetric (signed) residual score. We measure (1) marginal coverage over the time
series, (2) longest miscoverage error sequence, and (3) mean prediction interval size.
Observation Models. We test three different observation frequencies: (1) infrequent pt = 0.1, 8t,
(2) partial pt = 0.5, 8t, and (3) frequent pt = 0.9, 8t. We focus in this section on the results for
infrequent observations, and discuss further results in the Appendix Section E.
Methods. We compare two variants of our IQT algorithm by controlling if time-varying step-size t
in Equation 5 depends or does not depend on pt . For each variant, we test lr 2 [1, 0.1, 0.01]. IQT
with a pt -independent update (IQT-pi) uses t = lrB̂t pt . The quantile tracking update reduces to
qt+1 = qt + lrB̂t (errt ↵)obst . Since the pt term cancels out in the update, we refer to this model as
the p-independent update. IQT with a pt -dependent update (IQT-pd) uses t = lrB̂t . Since the pt
term remains in the update qt+1 = qt + lrpB̂tt (errt ↵)obst , we refer to this model as the p-dependent
update. For both variants, we set our desired coverage to 1 ↵ = 0.9 for all experiments. We set
lookback window k = 100 timesteps for the Amazon stock price data.
Results. We center our discussion on the Amazon stock price results for IQT-pd and IQT-pi with
AR base model under ground truth labels observed with pt = 0.1 frequency, as the intermittent
setting is our focus. See Appendix Section E for further results on other base models and datasets.
Inversely scaling the quantile tracking step size by pt causes IQT-pd to construct larger intervals than
IQT-pi. Figure 3 shows the prediction coverage as a moving average (window=50) for 5 random
seeds and interval sizes for one seed. When lr is high (1.0), IQT-pi and IQT-pd achieve comparable
coverage, but IQT-pd is prone to constructing much larger prediction intervals than IQT-pi. Smaller
and midsized learning rates (lr = 0.01, 0.1) regulate the size of IQT-pd intervals, leading to tight
prediction intervals which maintain desired coverage levels.

4     C ONFORMAL DAGGER : A C ALIBRATED A PPROACH TO A SKING FOR
      E XPERT F EEDBACK
Since intermittent quantile tracking enables us to rigorously quantify the learner’s uncertainty despite
the fact that the labels are only revealed intermittently (i.e., when the expert intervenes), we can
develop ConformalDAgger: a new way for the robot to tradeoff between acting autonomously and
strategically asking for help when uncertainty increases.
Setup. ConformalDAgger treats the robot’s policy as the base model fˆ := ⇡ r on which we
perform intermittent quantile tracking. The initial novice policy ⇡0r : X ! A is trained on initial
demonstration data D0 of task T performed by the expert ⇡0h . Here, X represents the policy’s inputs
(e.g., image observations, proprioception), Y ⌘ A are the labels representing the robot’s actions (e.g.,
future end-effector positions). During deployment, the robot policy generates a sequence of input-
predicted action pairs (xt , art ) 2 X ⇥ Y for t = 1, 2, ..., that are temporally correlated. Relatedly, for
each input xt the learner observes, there is a corresponding expert action (xt , aht ) 2 X ⇥ Y that is
the ground-truth label we seek to cover via our IQT prediction intervals Ct (xt ).


                                                                              5
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


How ConformalDAgger works
            Offline       Deployment Episode
                             xt                    Intermittent Quantile Tracking                                         Human
           State-Action
              Buffer                     r          atr                          High uncertainty

                                                                                                                  ath ?
                                                                    Calibrated
                                                                     Interval                       P(obstr xt)            xt   h   ath
                 r                    Update IQT    qtlo, qthi                            Low
                                                                                          uncertainty


          Robot policy                   Chance human acts P(obsth xt )


                                                                                                            ConformalDAgger


 Figure 4: ConformalDAgger Framework. After obtaining an initial learner policy ⇡ r (left),
 ConformalDAgger calibrates uncertainty during the interactive deployment episode with the expert
 via intermittent quantile tracking (center). When the size of the uncertainty intervals is high, the
 robot actively queries the user for feedback. When uncertainty is low, the robot executes its predicted
 action and the human may independently intervene with some low probability. After deployment
 episode ends, the data is aggregated and the learner retrained (arrow from right to left).
 Algorithm 1 ConformalDAgger (changes from DAgger (Ross et al., 2011) highlighted)
  1: Collect initial demonstration data D0 from expert ⇡0h and train initial learner policy ⇡0r .
  2: for interactive deployment episode i = 0 : M do
  3:     Initialize q0lo , q0hi .
  4:     for deployment timestep t = 1 : H do
  5:         Get predicted action label: art      ⇡ir (xt )
  6:         Construct calibrated uncertainty interval: Ct (xt ) = [art qtlo , art + qthi ].
  7:         Compute robot query likelihood (e.g. P(obsrt | ot ; ⌧ ) = 1 if u(xt ; ⇡ r ) > ⌧ , else 0.)
  8:         if robot queries (w.p. P(obsrt | ot ; ⌧ )) or human intervenes (w.p. P(obsht | ot )) then
                                  lo,hi
  9:              IQT update: qt+1      qtlo,hi + ptt (errt ↵)obst w/ expert action aht         ⇡ih (xt ).
 10:         else
                                  lo,hi
 11:              IQT update: qt+1      qtlo,hi
 12:      Aggregated dataset with observed state and expert action pairs: Di+1                                            Di [ {(x, ⇡ih (x))}
 13:      Retrain learner: ⇡i+1
                            r
                                  arg min⇡ L(Di+1 )

 Observation Model. A key component of IQT is the observation likelihood model, pt = P(obst =
 1 | xt ). A nice byproduct of this model is that we can naturally derive a feedback model that is
 simultaneously human- and robot-gated by decomposing the observation model into the combination
 of both gating functions. Intuitively, the likelihood of observing the expert feedback at t is given by
 the probability that the human chooses to give feedback or the robot asks the expert for feedback. Let
 obsht 2 {0, 1} be a random variable representing observing a human-gated feedback (if obsht = 1)
 where the expert initiates providing an action label aht = ⇡ h (xt ) for xt . Let obsrt 2 {0, 1} be a
 random variable representing robot-gated feedback, where the robot asks the expert for a label if
 obsrt = 1. We assume that if the robot elects to ask a question, the human will respond with probability
 1. Our observation model takes the form: pt := P(obst = 1 | xt ) = P(obsht = 1 _ obsrt = 1 | xt ) =
 P(obsht = 1 | xt ) + P(obsrt = 1 | xt ) P(obsht = 1 | xt )P(obsrt = 1 | xt ). While our approach is
 not prescriptive about these models, in our experiments we model P(obsht = 1 | xt ) = c as a small
 constant to represent infrequent human interventions. We describe the robot-gated likelihood model
 P(obsrt = 1 | xt ) below, informed by our uncertainty estimates.

 Quantifying Uncertainty: IQT. In the interactive IL setting, IQT begins with initial upper and lower
 quantiles in the action (i.e. “label”) space, q0lo , q0hi 2 A. The nonconformity score is a residual on the
 predicted (ar ) versus expert (ah ) action. Let slo          r h
                                                          t (at , at ) = at
                                                                           r
                                                                                aht be the lower residual (referred to
 as slo
     t  for brevity), and s hi r h
                            t  (a t , a t ) =   a h
                                                  t   a r
                                                        t  be the  upper  residual  (referred to as shi
                                                                                                     t ). If the expert
 action at is observed, we compute the upper and lower miscoverage of qtlo , qthi as two indicator
          h

 vectors: errlo
              t = (st < qt ) and errt = (st < qt ). IQT then updates the quantile estimates online
                      lo     lo              hi      hi       hi

 to obtain qt+1 , qt+1 via the update rule from equation 5. At the next timestep, the adjusted prediction
             lo    hi

 interval is constructed with Ct+1 (xt+1 ) = [art+1 qt+1             lo
                                                                        , art+1 + qt+1
                                                                                    hi
                                                                                        ]. If the expert action is not
 observed, obst = 0, then qt+1 = qt and qt+1 = qt and the prediction interval size remains the same.
                               lo          lo       hi        hi



                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that although errt is not known in the case where the expert does not provide an action label,
IQT does not require it; IQT simply makes no change to the quantile estimate. In our simulated and
hardware experiments, our action space, q0lo , and q0hi , are vector-valued. Our experiments instantiate
IQT for continuous vectors, but the approach extends to discrete-valued action spaces.
Leveraging Uncertainty: Asking for Help. Finally, the calibrated intervals Ct+1 (xt+1 ) constructed
by IQT enable us to design a new robot-gated feedback mechanism. Specifically, the model P(obsrt |
xt ) is informed by the calibrated interval size, u(xt+1 ) := ||Ct+1 (xt+1 )||2 . In simulation, we use
P(obsrt | xt ) = ( [u(xt ; ⇡ r ) ⌧ ]) where ⌧ acts as an uncertainty threshold on u(xt ; ⇡ r ), is a
temperature hyperparameter, and is the sigmoid function. In hardware experiments, we set ⌧ as a
hard threshold on on u(xt ; ⇡ r ) above which P(obsrt | xt ) = 1, and below which P(obsrt | xt ) = 0.
ConformalDAgger Algorithm. We summarize ConformalDAgger in Algorithm 1, highlighting the
difference from traditional DAgger (Ross et al., 2011). The learner interacts with the intermittent
expert during M interactive episodes. At the start of each, q lo , q hi and are reset. Each episode lasts
H time steps and the intermittently-observed expert state-action pairs (xt , aht ) are aggregated with
the prior training data in a fixed size training buffer to form the updated dataset, Di+1 , which enables
us to retrain the learner ⇡i+1
                            r
                                for the next deployment episode.

5     S IMULATED I NTERATIVE I MITATION L EARNING E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate ConformalDAgger, we run a series of simulated experiments with access to an oracle
expert. We ground our experiments in a simulated robot goal-reaching task (left, Figure 5) and study
scenarios where the distribution shift occurs due to the expert’s changing preference in goal location.
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Task & Initial Learner Policy. The robot learns a neural network policy ⇡ r : X ! A to move a cup
from a start to the expert’s desired goal location. We model input x 2 X ✓ R12 as the xyz position
of the robot as well as its binary gripper state (open or closed) across the previous 3 timesteps. The
labels are actions, a 2 A ✓ R4 , represented as next xyz position and gripper state. The robot always
starts at an initial x with the gripper state closed (holding a cup) and must keep holding the cup while
moving it to the unknown goal location that the expert prefers; let {g0 , g1 } be two such goals. Before
the first interactive deployment (i = 0), we simulate the expert as initially giving demonstrations
placing the cup at g0 , where ⇡i=0  h
                                       (x) = x + ! maxdg0(|g0x x|) , where maxd (·) is a maximum over
dimensions. The step size is regulated to be at most ! = 0.01. The initial robot policy ⇡i=0
                                                                                           r
                                                                                                is trained
on a dataset D0 of 10 expert trajectories with synthetically injected noise drawn from N (1, 0.5) for
robustness as in (Laskey et al., 2017). See Appendix F for policy implementation details.
Simulated Expert Policies. To induce controlled distribution shift, we study three expert policies
(left, column of Figure 5). (1) Stationary: the expert has a fixed goal, g0 , across all deployment
episodes. (2) Shift: the expert goal shifts from g0 to g1 at deployment episode i = 5. For example, the
expert may have decided that a different cup location is easier to reach. (3) Drift: expert’s goal slowly
drifts from g0 to g1 over the course of deployment episodes (in Figure 5 the drift from g0 ! g1a
occurs at episode i = 5, g1a ! g1b occurs at episode i = 8, and g1b ! g1 occurs at episode i = 11).
For example, the expert may start with a conservative goal location initially (e.g., a goal nearby) and
incrementally move the cup closer and closer to their target goal that may be further out of reach.
(4) Environment Shift: Under environment shift, the policy experiences covariate shift, where the
deployment-time state distribution differs from the training distribution. Because the policy is trained
on inputs which capture the robot’s position, we instantiated environment shift by changing the
starting position of the robot in the first episode, maintaining this new position for all latter episodes.
Interactive Deployment Episodes & Learner Re-training. We consider M = 15 deployment
episodes before re-training the learner. Each deployment episode has two interactive task executions.
The task ends when the cup has reached the correct goal position, g ⇤ , or when the maximum timesteps
(100) have been reached. The expert answers queries with optimal actions under their current
policy ah = ⇡ih (x). Following DAgger (Ross et al., 2011), after each deployment episode, the
state-action pairs where the expert provided action labels are aggregated into the training dataset,
forming aggregated buffer Di+1 for the next deployment episode i + 1. We constrain the size of the
replay buffer to 300 datapoints, dropping the old experiences.
Methods. We compare ConformalDAgger to EnsembleDAgger (Menda et al., 2019), LazyDAgger
(Hoque et al., 2021b), and SafeDAgger (Zhang & Cho, 2017). We performed a hyperparameter


                                                    7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              0, s0
                                              Miscoverage ( )    % of Episode H Intervened   Expert Decision Deviation ( ) Expert Trajectory Deviation ( )
              No Shift                P
                                                                                                                                          ConformalDAgger
                                                                                                                                          EnsembleDAgger
                                                                                                                                            LazyDAgger
                                                                                                                                            SafeDAgger



              Expert Shift        0       1


                       Expert Drift
                                                    5                          5                          5                           5
              0          1a      1b       1


                                                    5   8   11                 5   8   11                 5   8   11                  5      8   11
              Environment Shift
                  s0     P     s0     Q


                                               1                 15       1                  15     1                   15       1                         15

                                                                           Interactive Deployment Episode



P = 0.2
     Figure 5: Simulated Robot Results. When the expert shifts or drifts (middle rows), ConformalDAg-
     ger increases the number of requests for expert feedback compared to EnsembleDAgger and
     SafeDAgger, but has less interventions than LazyDAgger. This decreases miscoverage and expert
     deviation after re-training. With a stationary expert (top) or environment shift (bottom), both Ensem-
     bleDAgger and ConformalDAgger perform similarly. Shading is std. error across 5 seeds.
     sensitivity analysis for all methods (see B) and selected thresholds such that all approaches ask
     infrequent questions in the first few interactive deployment episodes, where no shift has occurred.
     ConformalDAgger uses an uncertainty threshold ⌧ = 0.06, temperature = 100, lookback window
     k = 100, lr = 0.6, and initial q0lo,hi = 0.01. The uncertainty threshold ⌧ is heuristically tuned to
     ask few, but infrequent questions in the first interactive deployment episode. EnsembleDAgger
     queries an expert online when there is high action prediction variance across an ensemble of learner
     policies, and when a safety classifier detects dissimilarity between expert and robot actions. We use 3
     ensemble members and an uncertainty threshold of ⌧ = 0.06 for the ensemble disagreement and a
     safety classifier threshold of s = 0.03. LazyDAgger uses s = 0.03 to begin human intervention, and
     only switches back to autonomous mode when the deviation between the learner’s prediction and
     expert’s action are below a context-switching threshold, 0.1 ⇤ s. To make SafeDAgger’s number of
     initial interventions comparable, we decrease the safety classifier threshold to s = 0.01.
     Metrics. We measure the quality of our uncertainty quantification via the miscoverage rate and
     human effort via the intervention percentage of the deployment trajectory. We compute the
     miscoverage for EnsembleDAgger using three times the standard deviation as the prediction interval.
     We measure the quality of the learned policy via two metrics. Decision deviation simulates the
     learner’s behavior under its current policy and queries the expert at each learner state to obtain an
     expert action label. We measure the average L2 distance between the predicted and expert action.
     Trajectory deviation forward simulates both the expert and the learner acting independently under
     their policies, starting from the same initial x. We compare the L2 distance between the trajectories.
     5.2 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
     We focus results on infrequent human-gated feedback where P(obsht = 1 | xt ) = 0.2, 8t. In
     Appendix F, we present experiments with frequent (=0.9) and partial (=0.5) feedback. Irrespective of
     the human-gated likelihood, the learner can always actively ask for feedback based on P(obsrt | xt ).
     Takeaway 1: When the expert shifts, ConformalDAgger asks for more help immediately
     compared to EnsembleDAggerand SafeDAgger, enabling the algorithm to more quickly align to
     the expert with fewer human interventions than LazyDAgger. Consider deployment episode i = 5
     where the expert shifts from goal 0 to goal 1 (center row, Figure 5). ConformalDAgger immediately
     increases the number of expert feedback requests: before shift, the expert intervened ⇠20% of the
     time but in the 5th episode they intervene ⇠60% of the time. In contrast, EnsembleDAgger remains
     close to ⇠30%. Relatedly, ConformalDAgger has consistently lower miscoverage rate (max = 0.4
     at shift; converges to 0.2) compared to the baseline (max = 1.0 at shift, converges to 0.4). Due to


                                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the extra solicited feedback, ConformalDAgger’s ultimate decision and trajectory deviations are
minimized in the subsequent retrained policies.
Takeaway 2: ConformalDAgger automatically asks for more help each time the expert drifts.
In the third row of Figure 5, we see ConformalDAgger maintain a similar level of queries as
EnsembleDAgger during the first shift (at episode 5) and last shift (episode 11) but increases
feedback during the intermediate shift (at episode 8). Despite these similarities, EnsembleDAgger’s
miscoverage rate is consistently higher than ConformalDAgger’s and EnsembleDAgger’s re-trained
policy on average does not adapt as quickly (with higher expert decision and trajectory deviation).
We hypothesize that this is because ConformalDAgger asks frequent questions consistently across all
seeds compared to EnsembleDAgger (i.e. lower variance in Fig 5).
Takeaway 3: With a stationary expert, ConformalDAgger and baselines are similar. We find that
without distribution shift (top row, Figure 5), all methods ask for minimal help (staying near the 20%
human-gated probability), with LazyDAgger asking slightly more questions, and achieve similar
performance in alignment to the expert.
Takeaway 4: Under environment shift, ConformalDAgger is comparable to baselines. In the
fourth row of Figure 5, we see that EnsembleDAgger and ConformalDAgger balance intervention
frequency with policy learning quality marginally better than LazyDAgger or SafeDAgger.
6 H ARDWARE E XPERIMENTS
Finally, we deployed ConformalDAgger in hardware on a 7 degree-of-freedom robotic manipulator
that uses a state-of-the-art Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023) trained via IL to perform a sponging
task (Figure 1). The goal of our hardware experiments is to demonstrate how our approach can scale
to a high-dimensional, real-world policy and understand how ConformalDAgger enables the robot
learner to query a real human teleoperator. Our goal is to train the robot to perform a real-world
cleaning task where it wipes up a line drawn by an Expo marker on a whiteboard with sponge.
Human Expert. The human expert teleoperates the robot via a Meta Quest 3 remote controller. They
initially provide 50 demonstrated trajectories moving in a straight-line path along the marker line
to construct the initial training dataset, D0 . We model human-gated interventions with probability
P(obsht = 1 | xt ) = 0.2, 8t. To control this rate, our interface queries the user with 20% probability
at the any timepoint along deployment to simulate that consistent independent intervention rate. We
induce a potential distribution shift during interactive deployment episodes by changing the expert’s
wiping strategy from a straight line to a zig-zag pattern.
Learner Policy. We represent the robot’s policy as a CNN-based diffusion policy (Chi et al., 2023).
The policy predicts ar 2 A ⌘ Y as 16 future actions, where each action is an end-effector position
and quaternion orientation. The inputs x 2 X are the current and previous image observations from
the wrist and third-person camera. Image observations are encoded using a ResNet-18 visual encoder
(trained end-to-end with the diffusion policy) and the action-generating process is conditioned on
encoded observation features with FiLM (Perez et al., 2018). The initial policy ⇡0r is trained for
50K iterations (training parameters in Appendix Sec H.1). The robot is deployed to interactively
execute the task 25 times after which its policy is retrained. This is an interactive deployment
where the robot queries the user via our ConformalDAgger algorithm, or the user can independently
intervene intermittently. During expert feedback, the human teleoperates the robot for a sequence
of 16 timesteps, after which, if the robot doesn’t ask for feedback, control is handed back over to
the robot. After the interactive deployment, the initial learner policy is fine-tuned for an additional
35K iterations. We reset the learning-rate schedule, aggregate datapoints at which the expert gave
feedback, and cap the training buffer size at 6k most recent input-action pairs.
ConformalDAgger Hyperparameters. We apply IQT on only the predicted end-effector position,
because we reason about nonconformity via the signed residual in Euclidean space. For quaternion
rotation, we calibrate only the positional output to avoid the complexity of multiple IQT processes
for positional and rotational nonconformities.
We initialize q0lo , q0hi = 0.01, our desired coverage level is ↵ = 0.1, and t = 0.15B̂t , where the
lookback window for B̂t is 20. We use a simple model for P(obsr | xt ) = 1 that asks for help if the
L2 norm of the uncertainty interval Ct (xt ) exceeds threshold ⌧ = 0.07.
Baseline. Because the diffusion policy implicitly represents the action distribution present in the
training data, we sample from the policy N=3 times and evaluate variance over the predicted action in


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Interactive Deployment                                                                                                     Learned Robot Behavior
                                                        Cumulative # Robot-gated Human Interventions    Initial Policy                     Retrained Policy After Interactive Deployment


                         # Robot-gated. Interventions
                                                                  ConformalDAgger                                        ConformalDAgger    EnsembleDAgger          LazyDAgger             SafeDAgger
                                                                   EnsembleDAgger
                0                                                   LazyDAgger
                                                                    SafeDAgger


     Expert Stationary


                                                                Normalized Trajectory Timestep
                                                         Cumulative # Robot-gated Human Interventions
                                                                                                                         ConformalDAgger   EnsembleDAgger           LazyDAgger             SafeDAgger

                         # Robot-gated. Interventions
            1


      Expert Shift

                                                                Normalized Trajectory Timestep



Figure 6: Hardware Results. (bottom, left) Conformal enables the robot to significantly increase
the number of questions when the expert shifts their strategy while Safe and Ensemble only increase
slightly. (bottom, right) Qualitatively, Conformal learns a higher quality zigzag strategy. Lazy
exhibits a similar an intervention profile to Conformal, but because the algorithm doesn’t ask for help
consistently in each episode, it does not receive enough additional data to learn the shifted policy.
order to capture the notion of epistemic uncertainty. We consider this an implicit EnsembleDAgger:
we use the implicit ensemble approach from (Wolleb et al., 2022) by sampling multiple times from
the same diffusion model. The safety classifier is a fully connected network that takes as input the
ResNet-18 embeddings of the camera images concatenated with robot proprioceptive state. We set
the classifier threshold s to be the mean of the distribution of expert-learner divergence over the
training datapoints. EnsembleDAgger’s uncertainty threshold is 0.005, at approximately the mean
of the distribution of ensembles variances (over position and orientation predicted by the policy)
over the training data, tuned such that the learner asks occasional but not excessive questions. We
also compared with LazyDAgger (threshold of 0.25 ⇤ s, informed by Hoque et al. (2021a)), and
SafeDAgger. All models use the same initial learner policy.
Results. The left of Figure 6 shows quantitative results for both methods. ConformalDAgger
increases the cumulative number of robot-requested interventions up to about 35 timesteps of human
feedback when interacting with the shifted expert (who switches to a zig-zag pattern) compared to the
stationary expert (who always wipes in a straight line) which does not induce as frequent of questions.
To better understand this, we analyzed Figure 1, which shows ConformalDAgger engaging with
each type of expert in one interactive deployment episode. Here, we see how ConformalDAgger has
uncertainty when interacting with the stationary expert (due to inherent noise in the VR-teleoperated
intermittent human interventions) but the robot’s uncertainty never rises above the threshold the robot
initiates expert feedback. This is in stark contrast to the expert shift scenario (right of Figure 1) where
half-way through the deployment episode the uncertainty intervals become large enough to trigger
robot asking for help. On the other hand, with the shifted expert, EnsembleDAgger and SafeDAgger
do not request as many interventions as LazyDAgger and ConformalDAgger, (Figure 6). When
LazyDAgger asks for help the queries follow a similar profile as ConformalDAgger, but it does not
reliably ask every episode, leading to less data for learning the shifted strategy. We hypothesize that
this may be because the training demonstrations have low variance while the sponge is in contact with
the whiteboard, but higher variance as the robot approaches the table. Because EnsembleDAgger’s
and SafeDAgger’s uncertainty is uncalibrated to the deployment-time expert’s data, it is unable to
identify the need for additional feedback when it reaches the whiteboard. Qualitative results are
shown on the right of Figure 6. As expected, all approaches remain aligned with the stationary expert
when retrained. However, under the shifted expert, rollouts from the retrained ConformalDAgger
policy exhibit a more distinct zig-zag pattern, compared to EnsembleDAgger and SafeDAgger,
likely because the approaches did not ask for as much help.

7 C ONCLUSION
We first extend uncertainty quantification via online conformal prediction to handle intermittent
labels, such as those observed in interactive imitation learning. We then propose ConformalDAgger,
a unification of our online conformal prediction algorithm with interactive imitation learning. Our ap-
proach provides asymptotic coverage guarantees for deployed end-to-end policies, uses the calibrated
uncertainty measure to detect expert distribution shifts and actively query for more feedback, and
empirically enables the robot learner update its policy to better align with the expert.


                                                                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Gokul Swamy for insightful conversations and the detailed review,
Yilin Wu for help with diffusion policy and robot hardware setup. MZ is supported by an NDSEG
fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Anastasios Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction. Founda-
  tions and Trends in Machine Learning, 16(4):494–591, 2023.
Anastasios Angelopoulos, Emmanuel Candes, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Conformal pid control for time
  series prediction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:23047–23074, 2023.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Rina Foygel Barber, and Stephen Bates. Online conformal prediction
 with decaying step sizes. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning
  from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.
Vassilis Assimakopoulos and Konstantinos Nikolopoulos. The theta model: a decomposition approach
  to forecasting. International Journal of Forecasting, 16(4):521–530, 2000.
Aadyot Bhatnagar, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Improved online conformal prediction
  via strongly adaptive online learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2337–2363. PMLR, 2023.
Carlos Celemin, Rodrigo Pérez-Dattari, Eugenio Chisari, Giovanni Franzese, Leandro de Souza Rosa,
  Ravi Prakash, Zlatan Ajanović, Marta Ferraz, Abhinav Valada, Jens Kober, et al. Interactive
  imitation learning in robotics: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 10(1-2):1–197,
  2022.
Jonathan Chang, Masatoshi Uehara, Dhruv Sreenivas, Rahul Kidambi, and Wen Sun. Mitigating
  covariate shift in imitation learning via offline data with partial coverage. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:965–979, 2021.
Yuxiao Chen, Ugo Rosolia, Chuchu Fan, Aaron Ames, and Richard Murray. Reactive motion planning
  with probabilistic safety guarantees. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1958–1970. PMLR,
  2021.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Robotics: Science and
  Systems (RSS), 2023.
Yuchen Cui, David Isele, Scott Niekum, and Kikuo Fujimura. Uncertainty-aware data aggregation for
  deep imitation learning. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  pp. 761–767. IEEE, 2019.
Thomas G Dietterich and Jesse Hostetler. Conformal prediction intervals for Markov decision process
  trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04860, 2022.
Anushri Dixit, Lars Lindemann, Skylar X Wei, Matthew Cleaveland, George J Pappas, and Joel W
  Burdick. Adaptive conformal prediction for motion planning among dynamic agents. In Learning
  for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 300–314. PMLR, 2023.
Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel Candes. Adaptive conformal inference under distribution shift. Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1660–1672, 2021.
Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel J Candès. Conformal inference for online prediction with arbitrary
   distribution shifts. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(162):1–36, 2024.
Michael Harries. Splice-2 comparative evaluation: Electricity pricing. 1999.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Julien Herzen, Francesco Lässig, Samuele Giuliano Piazzetta, Thomas Neuer, Léo Tafti, Guillaume
  Raille, Tomas Van Pottelbergh, Marek Pasieka, Andrzej Skrodzki, and Nicolas Huguenin. Darts:
  User-friendly modern machine learning for time series. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23
  (124):1–6, 2022.
Joey Hong, Sergey Levine, and Anca Dragan. Learning to influence human behavior with offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ryan Hoque, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ellen Novoseller, Albert Wilcox, Daniel S Brown, and Ken
  Goldberg. Thriftydagger: Budget-aware novelty and risk gating for interactive imitation learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08273, 2021a.
Ryan Hoque, Ashwin Balakrishna, Carl Putterman, Michael Luo, Daniel S Brown, Daniel Seita,
  Brijen Thananjeyan, Ellen Novoseller, and Ken Goldberg. Lazydagger: Reducing context switching
  in interactive imitation learning. In 2021 IEEE 17th international conference on automation science
  and engineering (case), pp. 502–509. IEEE, 2021b.
Ryan Hoque, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Satvik Sharma, Karthik Dharmarajan, Brijen Thananjeyan,
  Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Fleet-dagger: Interactive robot fleet learning with scalable
  human supervision. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 368–380. PMLR, 2023.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.
Michael Kelly, Chelsea Sidrane, Katherine Driggs-Campbell, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Hg-dagger:
 Interactive imitation learning with human experts. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics
 and Automation (ICRA), pp. 8077–8083. IEEE, 2019.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
 Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. OpenVLA: An open-source
 vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Roger Koenker and Gilbert Bassett Jr. Regression quantiles. Econometrica: journal of the Economet-
  ric Society, pp. 33–50, 1978.
Michael Laskey, Jonathan Lee, Roy Fox, Anca Dragan, and Ken Goldberg. Dart: Noise injection for
 robust imitation learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 143–156. PMLR, 2017.
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
  visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(39):1–40, 2016.
Justin Lidard, Hang Pham, Ariel Bachman, Bryan Boateng, and Anirudha Majumdar. Risk-calibrated
  human-robot interaction via set-valued intent prediction. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2024.
Albert Lin and Somil Bansal. Verification of neural reachable tubes via scenario optimization and
  conformal prediction. In 6th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference, pp. 719–731.
  PMLR, 2024.
Lars Lindemann, Matthew Cleaveland, Gihyun Shim, and George J Pappas. Safe planning in dynamic
  environments using conformal prediction. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.
Rachel Luo, Shengjia Zhao, Jonathan Kuck, Boris Ivanovic, Silvio Savarese, Edward Schmerling, and
  Marco Pavone. Sample-efficient safety assurances using conformal prediction. In International
  Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics, pp. 149–169. Springer, 2022.
Kunal Menda, Katherine Driggs-Campbell, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. EnsembleDAgger: A
  Bayesian approach to safe imitation learning. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5041–5048. IEEE, 2019.
Anish Muthali, Haotian Shen, Sampada Deglurkar, Michael H Lim, Rebecca Roelofs, Aleksandra
  Faust, and Claire Tomlin. Multi-agent reachability calibration with conformal prediction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.00432, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cam Nguyen. S&P 500 stock data, 2018. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  camnugent/sandp500.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Bob Price and Craig Boutilier. Accelerating reinforcement learning through implicit imitation.
  Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 19:569–629, 2003.
Allen Z Ren, Anushri Dixit, Alexandra Bodrova, Sumeet Singh, Stephen Tu, Noah Brown, Pen Xu,
  Leila Takayama Takayama, Fei Xia, Jake Varley, et al. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty align-
  ment for large language model planners. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Proceedings
  of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized quantile regression. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel Candes. Classification with valid and adaptive coverage.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3581–3591, 2020.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
  prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference
  on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
  2011.
Shahabedin Sagheb, Ye-Ji Mun, Neema Ahmadian, Benjamin A Christie, Andrea Bajcsy, Katherine
  Driggs-Campbell, and Dylan P Losey. Towards robots that influence humans over long-term
  interaction. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
  7490–7496. IEEE, 2023.
Stefan Schaal. Learning from demonstration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 9,
  1996.
Jonathan Spencer, Sanjiban Choudhury, Arun Venkatraman, Brian Ziebart, and J Andrew Bag-
  nell. Feedback in imitation learning: The three regimes of covariate shift. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.02872, 2021.
Gokul Swamy, Nived Rajaraman, Matt Peng, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Bagnell, Steven Z Wu, Jiantao
  Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Minimax optimal online imitation learning via replay estimation.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:7077–7088, 2022.
Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq, Jean-Francois Ton, Rob Cornish, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud Doucet.
 Conformal off-policy prediction in contextual bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 35:31512–31524, 2022.
Sean J Taylor and Benjamin Letham. Forecasting at scale. The American Statistician, 72(1):37–45,
  2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Julia Wolleb, Robin Sandkühler, Florentin Bieder, Philippe Valmaggia, and Philippe C Cattin.
  Diffusion models for implicit image segmentation ensembles. In International Conference on
  Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, pp. 1336–1348. PMLR, 2022.
Annie Xie, Dylan Losey, Ryan Tolsma, Chelsea Finn, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning latent representa-
  tions to influence multi-agent interaction. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 575–588. PMLR,
  2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Margaux Zaffran, Olivier Féron, Yannig Goude, Julie Josse, and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Adaptive
 conformal predictions for time series. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 25834–25866. PMLR, 2022.
Jiakai Zhang and Kyunghyun Cho. Query-efficient imitation learning for end-to-end autonomous
   driving. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.


                                               14
