Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PACMANN : E FFICIENT P RIVATE A PPROXIMATE N EAR -
EST N EIGHBOR S EARCH

 Mingxun Zhou, Elaine Shi & Giulia Fanti
 Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
 {mingxunz,rshi,gfanti}@andrew.cmu.edu



                                                   A BSTRACT

             We propose a new private Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search scheme
             named PACMANN that allows a client to perform ANN search in a vector database
             without revealing the query vector to the server. Unlike prior constructions that
             run encrypted search on the server side, PACMANN carefully offloads limited com-
             putation and storage to the client, no longer requiring computationally-intensive
             cryptographic techniques. Specifically, clients run a graph-based ANN search,
             where in each hop on the graph, the client privately retrieves local graph informa-
             tion from the server. To make this efficient, we combine two ideas: (1) we adapt a
             leading graph-based ANN search algorithm to be compatible with private informa-
             tion retrieval (PIR) for subgraph retrieval; (2) we use a recent class of PIR schemes
             that trade offline preprocessing for online computational efficiency. PACMANN
             achieves significantly better search quality than the state-of-the-art private ANN
             search schemes, showing up to 2.5× better search accuracy on real-world datasets
             than prior work and reaching 90% quality of a state-of-the-art non-private ANN
             algorithm. Moreover on large datasets with up to 100 million vectors, PACMANN
             shows better scalability than prior private ANN schemes with up to 62% reduction
             in computation time and 22% reduction in overall latency.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Today, most search systems require clients to
send a plaintext query to the server, which per-
forms a search over the database and returns                  Server
                                                                                            ① Graph Building
the most relevant document(s). This architec-                            𝑣! , 𝑣" , … , 𝑣#
ture poses a serious privacy risk to users, whose
search queries can leak privacy-sensitive infor-                                      ② PIR
                                                                                  Preprocessing
mation (aol, 2006). To this end, an impor-                                                                     ……
                                                                                                                    ④ PIR
                                                                                                                    Graph
tant problem is that of private search: algo-                 Client
                                                                                                                    Accesses
                                                                                         ③ ANN Queries
rithms that allow a user to search a database                             Local
                                                                          Hints
without revealing their query to the server in
plaintext. To date, there have been several pro-
posed private search algorithms, which provide
cryptographic privacy guarantees over the user’s
query (Henzinger et al., 2023; Asi et al., 2024;           Figure 1: The high-level overview of PACMANN.
Servan-Schreiber et al., 2022).1 However, ex-              1) The server builds a graph structure on the
isting algorithms suffer from poor tradeoffs               database vectors. 2) The client and the server run
between: (1) search quality and/or (2) effi-               the preprocessing protocol for the PIR scheme,
ciency. For example, consider Tiptoe (Hen-                 storing the local hint in client’s storage. 3) The
zinger et al., 2023), the state-of-the-art private         client makes ANN queries. 4) The client runs the
search algorithm with cryptographically strong             graph traversal algorithm locally, but uses the PIR
privacy guarantees. Tiptoe incurs a linear com-            scheme to access the graph information remotely.
putation cost for the server per query; that is,
    1
        Cryptographic privacy means that the server learns cryptographically negligible information about the query.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Non-private ANN
                                                                            Non-private ANN


                 Tiptoe (simulated)
                                                                             TiptoeTiptoe (simulated)
                                                                                    (simulated)


        (a) Results on MS-MARCO dataset.                       (b) Results on SIFT-100M dataset.

Figure 2: Tradeoff between search quality and latency. “Linear Alg.” is an SIMD-optimized linear
algorithm that lower bounds the latency of Tiptoe (Henzinger et al., 2023), the state-of-the-art private
search algorithm. As a safe lower bound, we do not include network latency for “Linear Alg.”.
“Cluster” is a clustering-based algorithm that upper bounds the quality of Tiptoe. The intersection of
the two can be viewed as our (simulated) result for Tiptoe. We upper bound search quality with NGT,
a state-of-the-art non-private ANN search algorithm (Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018). We plot PACMANN
result in both the LAN (5ms RTT) and WAN (50ms RTT) settings.


the server needs to at least scan through the entire database for each query. Although Tiptoe is
parallelizable, the linear computation cost may be a bottleneck for large-scale applications. At the
same time, Tiptoe’s search accuracy is limited. For example, it only achieves around 40% of the
non-private search accuracy in the MS-MARCO dataset.
Typical private search algorithms can be categorized by two main design choices: the search algorithm
and the privacy primitive. These two are closely intertwined: the search algorithm must be chosen
to be compatible with the privacy primitive, while also ensuring that information is not leaked to
the server and the search quality is not overly degraded. For example, Tiptoe makes two design
choices that limit its performance: (1) It uses a clustering-based approximate nearest neighbor
(ANN) algorithm that significantly limits the search quality. (2) Its privacy guarantees are based
on a preprocessed somewhat homomorphic encryption (SHE) scheme, which requires significant
computation linear in the dataset size.
In this work, we present PACMANN (Privately ACcess More Approximate Nearest Neighbors), a fully
private nearest neighbor search algorithm that addresses the search quality-efficiency tradeoff. Instead
of performing encrypted search on the server’s side, the client can run the search algorithm locally. To
achieve this without the client storing the whole index structure, the client in PACMANN dynamically
fetches necessary information from the server. Doing so allows us to use more sophisticated graph-
based ANN search algorithms that have been popularized in applications like retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) (Malkov & Yashunin, 2018; Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019; Iwasaki & Miyazaki,
2018), without designing complicated cryptographic protocols. PACMANN achieves strong privacy
with the help of a recently popularized cryptographic primitive called client-preprocessing private
information retrieval (PIR) (Zhou et al., 2024).

Contributions. In this work, we make two main contributions.

1. Algorithm Design. We present the design of PACMANN, which builds on a customized graph-
   based ANN search algorithms. In graph-based ANN search algorithms (Malkov & Yashunin,
   2018; Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019; Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018), each vertex in the graph
   represents a database vector and is connected to multiple other vertices based on proximity in a
   vector (embedding ) space. Given a query vector, the algorithms usually start from a given vertex
   and traverse the graph to find ANNs. In each step of the traversal, the algorithms examine all
   connected vertices to the current vertex and move to the next vertex that is closer to the query, until
   a stopping criterion is met. To implement graph traversal algorithm privately, PACMANN requires
   the client to locally run graph traversal over carefully-selected subgraphs. To efficiently retrieve


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    the appropriate subgraph, we modify an existing, practically-efficient PIR scheme (Zhou et al.,
    2024) to handle batched queries. Figure 1 gives a high-level system overview of PACMANN.
2. Empirical results. We empirically evaluate the performance of PACMANN in terms of search qual-
   ity, query latency, communication, and storage costs. Our results show that PACMANN achieves
   significantly better search quality than the clustering-based private ANN search algorithm used
   by state-of-the-art Tiptoe (Henzinger et al., 2023) and Wally (Asi et al., 2024). For example, our
   implementation finds the most relevant result in around 63% of the queries on the MSMARCO
   dataset, compared to 29% for clustering-based algorithms—a 2.1x improvement in search success
   rate. In the 100M SIFT dataset, our evaluation shows a 2.5x better recall@10 compared to Tiptoe.
   Figure 2 shows that PACMANN achieves 90% of the search quality of the leading non-private ANN
   algorithm (NGT (Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018)), measured in mean reciprocal ranking (MRR) and
   recall. PACMANN also has lower latency than linear computation cost algorithms, including Tip-
   toe (Henzinger et al., 2023) and Preco (Servan-Schreiber et al., 2022) when the database is larger
   than 5M records in the LAN setting (i.e., when the search engine and the database are co-located,
   so network round-trip latency is 5 ms), and 50M records in the WAN setting, respectively. For
   example, for a database with 100M records, Tiptoe requires at least 4s of search latency, whereas
   PACMANN achieves 1.6s in the LAN setting (a 60% reduction) and 3.1s in the WAN setting (a
   22% reduction). Experimental details can be found in Section 5.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Private Information Retrieval (PIR) (Chor et al., 1995; Chor & Gilboa, 1997; Cachin et al., 1999;
Chang, 2004; Gentry & Ramzan, 2005) is a cryptographic primitive that allows a user to retrieve
information from a public database without revealing the query to the service provider. Most recent
works that rely on Homomorphic Encryption (Melchor et al., 2016; Ahmad et al., 2021; Menon
& Wu, 2022; Henzinger et al., 2022) construct communication-efficient PIR schemes with linear
computation cost per query. The “client-preprocessing PIR” model (Corrigan-Gibbs & Kogan,
2020; Shi et al., 2021; Corrigan-Gibbs et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Lazzaretti & Papamanthou,
2023a) introduces a preprocessing phase that allows the client to store sketched information about the
database, which can be used to achieve sublinear (amortized) computation and communication cost
per query. Most PIR schemes are designed for basic array-type queries. Some PIR schemes consider
key-value access (Chor et al., 1997; Patel et al., 2023; Celi & Davidson, 2024) where the client can
make private queries based on keyword matching. However, ANN search usually requires a more
sophisticated search algorithm and thus requires a more complex access pattern.
Several existing works directly consider the private nearest neighbor search problem. In addition to
Tiptoe (Henzinger et al., 2023), Wally (Asi et al., 2024) improves the efficiency of Tiptoe by batching
multiple anonymous queries. Nonetheless, Tiptoe and Wally   √ are based on a simple clustering-based
searching strategy that partitions the vectors into roughly n clusters, and only performs exhaustive
search in one particular cluster during the search phase. This algorithm is not competitive with
the state-of-the-art non-private ANN search algorithms. For example, its top-1 search accuracy
is only around 40% of the non-private ANN search algorithms on the MS-MARCO dataset. On
the other hand, Preco (Servan-Schreiber et al., 2022) achieves a better search quality with Locality
Sensitive Hashing (LSH) techniques, but it requires a linear computation cost per query and a stronger
assumption that there are two non-colluding servers storing the same database.
In an independent and concurrent work, Zhu et al.(Zhu et al., 2024) also proposes a privacy-preserving
ANN search algorithm under a different setting such that the database is provided by the client and
outsourced to the server while being encrypted. In that case, the server not only stores the per-client
encrypted database, but can also store per-client state to facilitate the search. Their solution is based
on the HNSW graph-based ANN indexing algorithm (Malkov & Yashunin, 2018) and Path Oblivious
RAM (ORAM) (Stefanov et al., 2018). Our setting is different that we assume the database is public
and shared among all clients, while the server does not have any per-client storage.

2     F ORMAL D EFINITIONS

K-Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search (K-ANN). Assume a d-dimensional metric space with a
distance function ∆(·, ·). Given a database containing n vectors, denoted as DB = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } ∈


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rd×n , and a query vector q ∈ Rd such that a K-approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm takes
the database DB and the query vector q as input, and outputs an index set I = {i1 , . . . , iK } such that
the distances between q and vi1 , . . . , viK are minimized, i.e., I = {i1 , . . . , iK } is an approximation
to the true K-nearest neighbors of q in DB. Specifically, we use the recall or the mean reciprocal
rank (MRR) to evaluate the quality of the approximation, depending on the context.

Single Server (Preprocessing) Private K-ANN. A single-server preprocessing private ANN protocol
is run between a stateful client and a server. The protocol consists of two phases: preprocessing phase
and query phase.
      1. Preprocessing: The preprocessing phase is run before the query phase and could involve
         the communication between the client and the server. The server will receive the vector
         database DB ∈ Rd×n as input.
      2. Queries: The query phase can include multiple (adaptive) queries from the client. Each
         query is a vector q ∈ Rd . The client and the server can have multiple rounds of communica-
         tion for each query. At the end, the client will output K indices where the corresponding
         vectors are the K-approximate nearest neighbors of q in DB.
The privacy of a private ANN protocol requires that the server learns negligible information about the
query vector q. Formally, we use a simulation-based definition for the privacy of the protocol, being
consistent with prior work (Henzinger et al., 2023).
Definition 2.1. An ANN protocol is private if there exists a simulator Sim such that for any prob-
abilistic polynomial-time adversary A acting as the server, the views of A in the following two
experiments are computationally indistinguishable w.r.t the security parameter λ:
       • Real: the client interacts with A(1λ , DB) who acts as the server. In each query step, A may
         adaptively choose the next query q for the client. The client is invoked with q as input.
       • Ideal: the simulated client Sim(1λ , n) interacts with A(1λ , DB) who acts as the server and
         A still may adaptively choose the next query q for the client. However, the simulator is
         invoked with only the knowledge of the size of the database, and without the information of
         the chosen query q.
Throughout this paper, we assume the adversary is semi-honest. That is, the adversary follows the
server’s protocol specification but may try to learn additional information from the server’s view. We
leave the extension to malicious adversaries as future work.

3     O UR G RAPH - BASED ANN C ONSTRUCTION
As a starting point, we describe our ANN search algorithm construction without privacy considera-
tions. Our construction relies on a customized version of the graph-based ANN search algorithm.

3.1   P RELIMINARY: G ENERIC G RAPH - BASED ANN S EARCH B LUEPRINT

Many popular graph-based ANN search algorithms such as NSW (Malkov et al., 2012),
HNSW (Malkov & Yashunin, 2018), DiskANN (Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019), NGT (Iwasaki &
Miyazaki, 2018), and FINGER (Chen et al., 2023) follow the same technical blueprint: the algorithm
builds a graph based on the input vectors during the preprocessing phase, and then performs a graph
traversal algorithm to find the approximate nearest neighbors for a given query vector. We provide a
graphical illustration of this process in Figure 3 and a pseudocode description in Figure 4.

Preprocessing. The preprocessing phase takes in n vectors DB = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } ∈ Rd×n from a
metric space and builds an indexing graph G where the n vertices represent the vectors. Different
algorithms may have different ways of selecting graph edges. One common approach (e.g., seen
in (Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019)) is to connect each vertex vi to several nearest neighbors, i.e.
vectors that are close to vi in the metric space, as well as multiple distant neighbors to ensure the
diversity of the neighbor list (Wang et al., 2021). Most recent ANN algorithms use more advanced
structures on top of the indexing graph (e.g. hierarchical structure in HNSW (Malkov & Yashunin,
2018) or auxiliary tree-structure in NGT (Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018)) to improve the search efficiency.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query. Given a query vector q, the query algo-
rithm performs a graph traversal algorithm on
the index graph G and outputs a vertex u∗ as the
approximate nearest neighbor of q. The search
algorithm starts from an entry point ustart , often
picked as the closest vertex to the centroid of
DB. We denote the set of neighbors of a node
v as N (v). In each hop, the search algorithm
greedily moves from the current vertex v to its
neighbor in N (v) that is the closest to the query
vector q. The algorithm terminates when the
number of hops reaches a certain threshold or a
local minimum is met, i.e. none of the neighbors      Figure 3: An illustration of the graph-based ANN
is closer to q than the current iterate. This can     search algorithm on a 2D space. The starting vertex
be easily extended to outputting K approximate        is located around the upper left part of the graph,
nearest neighbors by keeping track of the vis-        and the query vector is shown as a blue star. We
ited vertices and outputting the top K nearest        highlight the path that the algorithm takes to reach
vertices in the visited set.                          the approximate nearest neighbor.

3.2   O UR G RAPH B UILDING A LGORITHM

To make graph-based ANN search private, PACMANN imposes two constraints: (1) We retain the
single graph structure, as opposed to adding auxiliary structures, as is done in the non-private setting.
This is done to facilitate the upgrade to the privacy-preserving version. (2) We enforce regularity on
the graph’s out-degree distribution. This prevents information leakage from the number of neighbors
accessed. These properties are not met by existing ANN algorithms, and we customize the graph-
building algorithm to meet them. We describe the high-level idea to build a regular C-out directed
indexing graph here and defer the formal description to Appendix A.

Start from an unbalanced graph. Our first observation is that we can take advantage of existing
ANN libraries to find nearby neighbors for all vectors in the database and treat them as the candidate
neighbors in the graph. Specifically, we find 2C approximate nearest neighbors as neighbor candidates
for each vertex using an existing ANN library (e.g., NGT (Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018)), then trim the
candidate list to C candidates with the sparse-neighborhood-graph (SNG) heuristic (Arya & Mount,
1993). Roughly, SNG sorts the candidates by their distance to the vertex and adds candidates to
the neighbor list one by one. It only adds a candidate if it is not too close to a neighbor already in
the list; this is done to ensure diversity (see Figure 7 for the details). We temporarily add directed
edges between each vertex and its C neighbor candidates in both directions to ensure the graph is
well-connected, i.e. so that each vertex has at least C inbound and C outbound directed edges.

Balancing the graph. We now have a graph that could be highly unbalanced in terms of the degrees.
We use a sampling technique to balance the graph. That is, for each directed edge (x → y), we keep
it with a probability of C/InboundDegree(y). This ensures that a vertex will have C inbound edges
in expectation after the sampling process. Then, we ensure that each vertex has exactly C outbound
edges. For those vertices with more than C outbound edges, we again use the SNG heuristic to
trim the outbounds to C. For those vertices with fewer than C outbound edges, we connect them to
vertices selected uniformly at random.

4     PACMANN : P RIVATE G RAPH - BASED ANN
We next describe how PACMANN protects query privacy over our customized graph-based ANN search
algorithm in Section 3. We start with a basic, inefficient construction, then show how PACMANN
optimizes it. Due to space constraints, we present the full construction of PACMANN in Appendix B.

4.1   I NEFFICIENT P RIVATE G RAPH - BASED ANN S EARCH WITH C LASSICAL PIR

As a strawman scheme, one could try to protect query privacy by implementing the search algorithm
with generic cryptographic primitives, such as fully homomorphic encryption (Gentry, 2009). and/or


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Description of the graph based ANN search algorithm including the optional optimizations.
The pseudocode can be read in the following two ways: 1) the non-highlighted part describes the
generic graph-based ANN search algorithm; 2) the full description, including the optimizations we
introduced in Section 4.3, describes our customized version of the algorithm. In the non-private
setting, the algorithm is run on the server. In the private setting, the client will run the query algorithm
locally, and use Batched Piano PIR to perform the information retrieval dynamically and privately.

                                   Graph-based ANN Search Algorithm
  Preprocessing.
  • Input: a set of n vectors DB = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } ∈ Rd×n .
  • Output: a directed graph G           √
                                            with n vertices corresponding to the n vectors in DB, and entry
                                            n
    point(s) ustart , u1start , . . . , ustart .
         1. G ← ANN.BuildGraph(DB);                                               // Description in Section 3.2
         2. Let the closest vector  P to the centroid be the starting vertex ustart =
            arg minu∈[n] ∆(vu , n1 j∈[n] vj ).
                                              √                                     √
                                                                                       n
         3. Let the extra starting vertices be n random vertices u1start , . . . , ustart sampled from [n].


  Query.
  • Parameters: H: max hop number; beam search width m: the number of parallel paths.
  • Input: a query vector q ∈ Rd .
  • Output: an index u∗ such that vu∗ is recognized as an approximate nearest neighbor of q.
   1. Let u = ustart .
                                                                     √
                                                                         n
   2. Let u1 , . . . , um be the top m vertices in u1start , . . . , ustart that are closest to q.
   3. For t = 1, 2, . . . , H:
       • Update u as follows:
          – Read the neighbor list N (u) from G and all vectors vj for j ∈ N (u) from DB.
          – Let u′ = arg minj∈N (u) ∆(vj , q).
          – If ∆(u′ , q) ≤ ∆(u, q), update u ← u′ .
       • Similarly, update u1 , . . . , um .
   4. Let u = arg minu′ ∈{u,u1 ,...,u√n } ∆(u′ , q).
   5. Output u∗ = u.


multi-party computation (Cramer et al., 2015). However, the search algorithm of graph-based ANN
is inherently iterative and adaptive in that during the graph traversal process, each hop’s vertex is
dynamically determined by both the previous hop’s vertex and also the query vector. Handling such
(adaptive) iteration is a common challenge in designing cryptographic protocols 2 as observed by
previous works (Barni et al., 2009; Delpech de Saint Guilhem et al., 2022; Choudhuri et al., 2024;
Goel et al., 2022; Heath et al., 2021)

Localized Searching. Our main idea is to perform the iterative graph traversal algorithm on the
client side, completely removing the privacy concern of performing iterative computation on the
server. Naively, this would require the client to store the whole indexing graph, which is impractical
in terms of storage cost. Instead, we let the client dynamically and privately retrieve subgraph
information from the server. Specifically, during search, the client can retrieve the neighbor list N (vi )
    2
      The standard FHE or MPC techniques are designed for the so-called circuit model, where the computation
flow is fixed and known in advance. Although the circuit model is indeed Turing-complete, it does not naturally
support a random-access memory and control flow operations like if-else conditions. In the context of graph-
based ANN search, we do need to (adaptively) read the graph from a random access memory, so the standard
techniques are not directly applicable.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of the current vertex vi and also all vectors in the neighbor list from the server for each hop. The
client then computes the distances between the query vector q and all the neighbor vectors in N (vi )
locally, and chooses the closest neighbor within that set. This process is repeated until the search
terminates.

Protecting Retrieval Privacy with PIR. Even without directly observing the query vector, the server
can infer non-trivial information from the vertex indices retrieved by the client. For example, if the
server learns that the client retrieves many vertices whose underlying records represent documents
about food topics, the server can infer that the client is searching for information about foods. Thus,
the final challenge is how the client can retrieve the graph information (including the neighbor lists
and the vectors) without revealing which vertex it is retrieving.
We use a Private Information Retrieval (PIR) scheme for this purpose. Standard PIR (Chor et al.,
1995) allows a client to retrieve one or multiple entries from a server-stored database of n entries
without revealing the indices of the entries to the server.
To integrate a PIR scheme into our private graph-based ANN search algorithm, we can run a standard
PIR protocol for a database storing all the vertex information in the graph, where each entry i stores
the vector vi and also the neighbor list N (i). Whenever the client needs to access the graph, it issues
a PIR query to retrieve the information privately. Notice that by merging the vector information
and also the neighbor information into a single database, we can finish each hop in one round of
communication.

Efficiency Issue. This construction runs into a major efficiency issue. It was formally proved by
Beimel, Ishai, and Malkin (Beimel et al., 2000) that any PIR scheme requires Ω(n) computation cost
if there is no preprocessing, and if the server stores the database naively without encoding. Hence, if
we have a non-private graph-based ANN algorithm that proceeds for H hops, and each hop requires
the client to retrieve the information of C neighbors, the online computation cost of the scheme
will be Ω(HCn), which is super-linear in n. This is worse than the prior linear-cost private ANN
schemes (Henzinger et al., 2023; Servan-Schreiber et al., 2022).

4.2      I MPROVING E FFICIENCY WITH P REPROCESSING PIR

To address this efficiency limitation, we utilize a new paradigm of PIR schemes: client-side prepro-
cessing PIR (Corrigan-Gibbs & Kogan, 2020). Client-side preprocessing PIR achieves sublinear
(amortized) query cost by allowing a one-time preprocessing phase before the query phase in which
the client will eventually store useful information about the database. Specifically, we use a PIR
scheme called Piano (Zhou et al., 2024) that achieves practical efficiency for the single-server setting,
                                                                                 √
matching our requirements. Given a database with n entries, Piano achieves Õ( n) computation and
                                   √
communication per query with Õ( n) client storage after a one-time preprocessing phase that incurs
linear computation and communication costs.3 Other alternatives of PIRs (Ghoshal et al., 2024; Ren
et al., 2024) could also be used in our construction for similar efficiency guarantees.
By applying the Piano PIR scheme to our private ANN construction, after a linear cost preprocessing
                                                                  e √n) computation and communi-
phase, each PIR query in the graph traversal algorithm will incur O(
cation cost. Again, if we assume the search algorithm takes H hops and each hop requires the client
                                                                                                √
                        √ of C neighbors, the overall running time of the scheme will be O(HC n).
to retrieve the information                                                              e
As long as H · C is o( n), the resulting scheme will have sublinear computation cost, being more
efficient than the prior private ANN schemes (Henzinger et al., 2023; Servan-Schreiber et al., 2022).

Tradeoff and Practicality of Preprocessing. Despite significant online efficiency improvements, the
Piano PIR client must download the whole database (i.e., the indexing graph) in a streaming fashion
during the preprocessing phase. Here, streaming means that the client only stores a small portion of
the database to preprocess at a time, but the total amount of data the client has to download is still the
whole database. Therefore, our scheme is more suitable for a client with a good network connection.
In our evaluation where we assume a good network connection (1 Gbps), the preprocessing phase
takes around 5 minutes and 3 GB of client storage space for a database with 100 million vectors,
and the total download communication is around 60GB. An alternative approach to reduce the
   3
       We use the notation O(·)
                           e to hide polylogarithmic factors.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


preprocessing cost is to have a second server to preprocess the database and directly provide the
client with the preprocessed results, as suggested in many existing PIR schemes (Zhou et al., 2024;
Lazzaretti & Papamanthou, 2023b; Ghoshal et al., 2024; Kogan & Corrigan-Gibbs, 2021).

4.3      N ECESSARY O PTIMIZATIONS

In practice, we observe that the total number of visited vertices in the graph-based search algorithm
(that is, the product between max hop number H and the graph out-degree C) tends to be around a few
hundreds or thousands. We describe the necessary optimizations here and conduct an ablation study
in the evaluation section to show the effectiveness of these optimizations in Section 5. Empirically,
we observe that our optimizations reduce the concrete computation cost by 76%, and the overall
latency by nearly 70% (including the communication time).

Beam Search. The basic description of the graph-based ANN search algorithm Figure 4 traverses
the graph in a single path. In practice, we can explore m multiple paths in parallel. This approach is
used in other graph-based ANN algorithms (Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019). Although doing so
increases the query cost per hop, we observe that beam search significantly reduces the total hops to
reach a given search quality, and is thus essential to reducing the overall latency.

Fast Starting. Intuitively, if the starting vertex is already very close to the query vector q, we can
reach the approximate
           √             nearest neighbors with fewer hops. With fast starting, we let the client store
around O( n) vertices’ information locally, and scan all these vertices to find those that are already
close to q to start the searching algorithm. We get this benefit for free, because Piano PIR already
                                √
requires the client to store Õ( n). vectors locally, which are selected uniformly at random.

Batched PIR Query. We observe that the PIR queries in each hop are parallel and can be handled in
a single batch. We can use a batching technique called partial batch retrieval (PBR) (Servan-Schreiber
et al., 2022) to further improve the efficiency. We provide the details in Appendix B.2.

5       E VALUATION
We evaluate PACMANN’s performance in terms of search quality and latency and compare it against
two baselines: a state-of-the-art private ANN search algorithm, Tiptoe (Henzinger et al., 2023), and
a non-private ANN search algorithm, NGT (Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018). Our evaluation results
show that PACMANN achieves better search quality with lower online query latency than Tiptoe
in two real datasets, SIFT and MS-MARCO. We provide more details in Appendix C, including a
detailed breakdown of the preprocessing, storage, and communication cost, and a discussion about
quantization and the alternative implementations.

5.1      E VALUATION S ETUP

Our open-source implementation4 uses Python for data preprocessing and Golang for the core
algorithm, including the graph ANN algorithm and the PIR scheme. Details of the implementation
are provided in Appendix C. The experiments are run on a single server with a 2.4GHz Intel Xeon
E5-2680 CPU and 256 GB of RAM. We evaluate the latency numbers on two simulated network
settings, the local area network (LAN) setting with 5ms round-trip-time (RTT) and the wide area
network (WAN) setting with 50ms RTT. Although our implementation supports multi-threading
optimization, we only use a single thread for all the experiments for a fair comparison.

Quality Metrics
Recall: Recall is the standard metric used in evaluating the quality of ANN algorithms (Aumüller
et al., 2020). For each query q, if the algorithm outputs a K-index set I, and the top K ground truth
                                                             ∗
indices are I ∗ , the recall@K is defined as: Recall@K = |I K∩I| .
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR): MRR is a standard quality metric for information retrieval sys-
tems (Nguyen et al., 2016). Given a query q, assume there is a ground truth index i∗ such that DB[i∗ ]
    4
        https://github.com/wuwuz/Pacmann


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is the most relevant entry. If the client outputs a list of indices that actually contains i∗ at the j-th
rank where j ≤ K, the reciprocal rank (denoted as RR@K) score is 1/j. Otherwise, RR@K is 0.
MRR is defined as the average of RR@K over multiple queries.

Datasets
SIFT Dataset (Jégou et al., 2011) We use the first 100 million 128-dimensional vectors from the SIFT
dataset for our evaluation. We vary the database size by picking the first 2 million to 100 million
vectors. We test 1,000 top-10 queries in the query set for each configuration, and measure the average
recall@10 (the top-10 ground truth nearest neighbors for each query are provided by the dataset).
MS-MARCO Dataset. (Nguyen et al., 2016) The dataset contains 3.2 million text documents with
more than 5000 test queries such that the top 1 relevant document is provided. We follow the
same procedure as in the Tiptoe paper (Henzinger et al., 2023) to process the dataset: 1) embed the
documents and the queries into a 768-dimensional vector space with sentence-BERT (Reimers &
Gurevych, 2019); 2) reduce the dimensions to 192 with PCA. We follow the same quality evaluation
metric as in the Tiptoe paper that we compute the average MRR@100 for the first 1000 queries.

Baselines
Tiptoe (Simulated). We aim to compare our scheme against the state-of-the-art private ANN search
algorithm, Tiptoe (Henzinger et al., 2023). Due to resource constraints, we were unable to run the
full Tiptoe system, in which the dominating cost comes from the clustering step that requires dozens
of servers running hundreds of core-hours as reported in the original paper. Hence, we simulated
Tiptoe by using two baselines as follows.

• Latency lower bound: Linear Algorithm. The Tiptoe algorithm computes n inner products per
  query with preprocessed homomorphic encryption. As a latency lower bound, 5 we implement a
  linear time algorithm that only computes the inner product between the query and each database
  vector in plaintext. We optimized the implementation using AVX-512 instructions. The throughput
  of this algorithm is approximately 11.9 GB/s, matching the memory bandwidth of the machine.
  Finally, we do not include network latency for this baseline.
• Quality upper bound: Cluster. We replicate the clustering-based
                                                              √      ranking algorithm used in Tiptoe
  with full precision (32-bit)6 . We cluster the vectors into n clusters offline. For each query, we
  find the closest cluster centroid, and search for the nearest neighbor within the cluster.

NGT. NGT is one of the state-of-the-art non-private ANN search algorithms. We use the GoNGT
library (Iwasaki & Miyazaki, 2018). We compare our scheme against NGT in terms of search quality.

5.2    E VALUATION R ESULTS

PACMANN provides a favorable tradeoff between privacy, search quality, and latency. We first
measure the tradeoff between search quality and query latency. Specifically, by increasing the number
of rounds and the number of parallel queries in each round, our algorithm can achieve higher search
qualities at the cost of higher latency. The results are shown in Figure 2. We consider a wide range of
search quality requirements, where the lower bound is set by the cluster search algorithm (replicating
the Tiptoe search algorithm), and the upper bound is set by the non-private ANN algorithm, NGT.
We observe that our scheme provides a wide range of tradeoffs between quality and latency, and can
indeed achieve approximately 90% of NGT’s search quality. In the SIFT-100M dataset, the advantage
of our scheme is more significant, and even with 91% recall@10, our scheme still has a lower latency
than the linear algorithm baseline.

Scalability: PACMANN outperforms Tiptoe in latency and accuracy on datasets of at least
2M-50M records. We next evaluate the scalability of our scheme by scaling the database size up
to 100 million vectors. We tune the parameters of our scheme to achieve 0.90 recall@10 for each
   5
      We compared the simulated online latency with the actual numbers reported in the original paper (Henzinger
et al., 2023), and the simulated latency is 8% less than the reported latency. See the detailed results in Appendix C.
    6
      Our reimplementation of the clustering-based algorithm reached 0.15 MRR@100 on the MS-MARCO
dataset, better than the 0.13 MRR@100 reported in the Tiptoe paper (Henzinger et al., 2023).


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Latency results on different database          Figure 6: Ablation study on the 10M subset of
sizes, sampled from the SIFT dataset. We tune            SIFT (WAN setting). Given a fixed configuration,
the parameters of our scheme to achieve 0.90 re-         we increase the max number of rounds until the
call@10 for each data point; For each data point,        quality reaches 0.90 recall@10. “No Opt” means
the total latency is the sum of the actual compu-        no optimizations are enabled. “Beam” means the
tation time and the round-trip time of the com-          beam search optimization. “FS” means the fast
munication, multiplied by the number of rounds.          starting strategy. “Batch” means we enable the
We plot both the LAN setting (5ms rtt) and the           batch-mode Piano PIR. Our full implementation
WAN setting results (50ms rtt) in this figure.           enables all the optimizations.


data point; that is, 9 out of 10 of the search results are indeed ground truth top-10 nearest neighbors
on average. The results are shown in Figure 5. We observe that in the LAN setting where the
computation time is dominant, our scheme beats the linear algorithm baseline when the database size
is larger than 5M. In the WAN setting where the communication time is more dominant, our scheme
beats the linear baseline when the database size is larger than 50M. We observe that the number of
rounds to achieve a certain recall@10 increases roughly logarithmically
                                                                      √      with the database size, and
we know from the theoretical analysis that PIR cost scales with n. This suggests that the total
latency of our scheme increases sublinearly with the database size.

Ablation study: Our optimizations give a 70% latency reduction. Finally, we conduct an ablation
study on the 10M subset of the SIFT dataset to evaluate the optimizations in Section 4.3: 1) Beam
Search: The number of parallel paths in the beam search algorithm is increased from 1 to 3. 2) Fast
                                                                              e √n) preprocessed
Starting: The client starts the search by choosing the starting vertices from O(
vertices. 3) Batched PIR: We enable the batch-mode PIR for each round of the search.
We compare four configurations in Figure 6, where we increase the number of rounds until the quality
reaches 0.90 recall@10. The beam search optimization significantly reduces the maximum number
of rounds needed to achieve the same quality by 3x. Adding the fast-start strategy furtuher reduces
the required rounds by 20%. When we enable the batch-mode PIR, we observe that the computation
time in each round is reduced by 4x, but, as we mentioned in Appendix B.1, we do introduce some
query failures, which we need to balance with the slight increase in the number of rounds.

6    C ONCLUSION
We present PACMANN, a new private ANN search scheme that allows clients to perform nearest
neighbor search queries over hundreds of millions of vectors while preserving the queries’ privacy.
PACMANN achieves significantly better search quality compared to the state-of-the-art private ANN
search schemes and has lower latency in large-scale datasets. PACMANN could be applied to a wide
range of applications including conventional search and retrieval-augmented generation.

Limitations. PACMANN inherits the drawbacks of the single-server preprocessing PIR schemes and
requires the client to download the whole indexing structure offline in a streaming manner. Therefore,
PACMANN will not be suitable for network-constrained scenarios. PACMANN also does not naturally
support dynamic updates to the database, which has been a challenging open problem in the field of
PIR. Finally, PACMANN is designed under the assumption that the database is public, so we do not
consider server-side privacy. We leave these questions as interesting future directions.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our open source implementation can be found at the anonymous repository on Github: https:
//github.com/wuwuz/pacmann. The repository contains the following components:

• Instructions to install the required dependencies;
• Our own implementation for PACMANN;
• All baseline implementations including NGT, clustering-based ANN and also the plaintext inner-
  product search (referred as “Linear algorithm” in Section 5);
• A script to download the SIFT dataset;
• Customizable scripts to run the baselines and our implementation with different parameter settings.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is in part supported by a grant from ONR, a grant from the DARPA SIEVE program under
a subcontract from SRI, a gift from Cisco, Samsung MSL, NSF awards under grant numbers 1705007,
2128519 and 2044679. In addition, this work is in part supported by NSF grant CCF-2338772, as well
as support from the Sloan Foundation, Intel, and Bosch. We thank Justin Zhang for his contribution
in the evaluations.

R EFERENCES
AOL search data release reveals a great deal. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/
 columnist/andrewkantor/2006-08-17-aol-data_x.htm, 2006.
Ishtiyaque Ahmad, Yuntian Yang, Divyakant Agrawal, Amr El Abbadi, and Trinabh Gupta. Addra:
   Metadata-private voice communication over fully untrusted infrastructure. In 15th USENIX
  Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI2021, July 14-16, 2021, 2021.
Sunil Arya and David M Mount. Approximate nearest neighbor queries in fixed dimensions. In
  SODA, volume 93, pp. 271–280. Citeseer, 1993.
Hilal Asi, Fabian Boemer, Nicholas Genise, Muhammad Haris Mughees, Tabitha Ogilvie, Rehan
  Rishi, Guy N Rothblum, Kunal Talwar, Karl Tarbe, Ruiyu Zhu, et al. Scalable private search with
  wally. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06761, 2024.
Martin Aumüller, Erik Bernhardsson, and Alexander Faithfull. Ann-benchmarks: A benchmarking
 tool for approximate nearest neighbor algorithms. Information Systems, 87:101374, 2020.
Mauro Barni, Pierluigi Failla, Vladimir Kolesnikov, Riccardo Lazzeretti, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi,
 and Thomas Schneider. Secure evaluation of private linear branching programs with medical
 applications. In Computer Security–ESORICS 2009: 14th European Symposium on Research in
 Computer Security, Saint-Malo, France, September 21-23, 2009. Proceedings 14, pp. 424–439.
 Springer, 2009.
Amos Beimel, Yuval Ishai, and Tal Malkin. Reducing the servers computation in private information
 retrieval: Pir with preprocessing. In CRYPTO, pp. 55–73, 2000.
Christian Cachin, Silvio Micali, and Markus Stadler. Computationally private information retrieval
  with polylogarithmic communication. In EUROCRYPT, pp. 402–414, 1999.
Sofı́a Celi and Alex Davidson. Call me by my name: Simple, practical private information retrieval
  for keyword queries. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2024.
Yan-Cheng Chang. Single database private information retrieval with logarithmic communication. In
  ACISP, 2004.
Patrick Chen, Wei-Cheng Chang, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Hsiang-Fu Yu, Inderjit Dhillon, and Cho-Jui Hsieh.
  Finger: Fast inference for graph-based approximate nearest neighbor search. In Proceedings of the
  ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 3225–3235, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Benny Chor and Niv Gilboa. Computationally private information retrieval. In STOC, 1997.
Benny Chor, Oded Goldreich, Eyal Kushilevitz, and Madhu Sudan. Private information retrieval. In
  FOCS, 1995.
Benny Chor, Niv Gilboa, and Moni Naor. Private information retrieval by keywords. 1997.
Arka Rai Choudhuri, Sanjam Garg, Aarushi Goel, Sruthi Sekar, and Rohit Sinha. Sublonk: Sublinear
  prover plonk. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2024.
Henry Corrigan-Gibbs and Dmitry Kogan. Private information retrieval with sublinear online time.
  In EUROCRYPT, 2020.
Henry Corrigan-Gibbs, Alexandra Henzinger, and Dmitry Kogan. Single-server private information
  retrieval with sublinear amortized time. In Eurocrypt, 2022.
Ronald Cramer, Ivan Bjerre Damgård, et al. Secure multiparty computation. Cambridge University
  Press, 2015.
Cyprien Delpech de Saint Guilhem, Emmanuela Orsini, Titouan Tanguy, and Michiel Verbauwhede.
  Efficient proof of ram programs from any public-coin zero-knowledge system. In International
  Conference on Security and Cryptography for Networks, pp. 615–638. Springer, 2022.
Haya Diwan, Jinrui Gou, Cameron Musco, Christopher Musco, and Torsten Suel. Navigable
  graphs for high-dimensional nearest neighbor search: Constructions and limits. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.18680, 2024.
Craig Gentry. Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices. In Proceedings of the forty-first
  annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 169–178, 2009.
Craig Gentry and Zulfikar Ramzan. Single-database private information retrieval with constant
  communication rate. In ICALP, 2005.
Ashrujit Ghoshal, Mingxun Zhou, and Elaine Shi. Efficient pre-processing pir without public-key
  cryptography. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
  Techniques, pp. 210–240. Springer, 2024.
Aarushi Goel, Mathias Hall-Andersen, Aditya Hegde, and Abhishek Jain. Secure multiparty compu-
  tation with free branching. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of
  Cryptographic Techniques, pp. 397–426. Springer, 2022.
David Heath, Vladimir Kolesnikov, and Stanislav Peceny. Masked triples: Amortizing multiplication
  triples across conditionals. In IACR International Conference on Public-Key Cryptography, pp.
  319–348. Springer, 2021.
Alexandra Henzinger, Matthew M. Hong, Henry Corrigan-Gibbs, Sarah Meiklejohn, and Vinod
  Vaikuntanathan. One server for the price of two: Simple and fast single-server private information
  retrieval. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/949, 2022. URL https://eprint.iacr.
  org/2022/949. https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/949.
Alexandra Henzinger, Emma Dauterman, Henry Corrigan-Gibbs, , and Nickolai Zeldovich. Private
  web search with Tiptoe. In 29th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP),
  Koblenz, Germany, October 2023.
Masajiro Iwasaki and Daisuke Miyazaki. Optimization of indexing based on k-nearest neighbor
 graph for proximity search in high-dimensional data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07355, 2018.
Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Fnu Devvrit, Harsha Vardhan Simhadri, Ravishankar Krishnawamy, and
  Rohan Kadekodi. Diskann: Fast accurate billion-point nearest neighbor search on a single node.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Hervé Jégou, Romain Tavenard, Matthijs Douze, and Laurent Amsaleg. Searching in one billion
  vectors: re-rank with source coding. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 861–864. IEEE, 2011.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dmitry Kogan and Henry Corrigan-Gibbs. Private blocklist lookups with checklist. In 30th
 USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp. 875–892. USENIX Association, Au-
 gust 2021. ISBN 978-1-939133-24-3. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/
 usenixsecurity21/presentation/kogan.
Thijs Laarhoven. Graph-based time-space trade-offs for approximate near neighbors. In 34th
  International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG 2018). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-
  Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.
Kasper Green Larsen, Tal Malkin, Omri Weinstein, and Kevin Yeo. Lower bounds for oblivious
  near-neighbor search. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
 Algorithms, pp. 1116–1134. SIAM, 2020.
Arthur Lazzaretti and Charalampos Papamanthou. Near-optimal private information retrieval with
  preprocessing. In Theory of Cryptography Conference, pp. 406–435. Springer, 2023a.
Arthur Lazzaretti and Charalampos Papamanthou. Treepir: Sublinear-time and polylog-bandwidth
  private information retrieval from ddh. In CRYPTO, 2023b.
Yu A Malkov and Dmitry A Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using
  hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 42(4):824–836, 2018.
Yury Malkov, Alexander Ponomarenko, Andrey Logvinov, and Vladimir Krylov. Scalable distributed
  algorithm for approximate nearest neighbor search problem in high dimensional general metric
  spaces. In Similarity Search and Applications: 5th International Conference, SISAP 2012, Toronto,
  ON, Canada, August 9-10, 2012. Proceedings 5, pp. 132–147. Springer, 2012.
Carlos Aguilar Melchor, Joris Barrier, Laurent Fousse, and Marc-Olivier Killijian. Xpir: Private
  information retrieval for everyone. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, pp. 155–174,
  2016.
Samir Jordan Menon and David J. Wu. S PIRAL: Fast, high-rate single-server PIR via FHE composi-
  tion. In IEEE S&P, 2022.
Hoang-Dung Nguyen, Jorge Guajardo, and Thang Hoang. Client-efficient online-offline private
  information retrieval. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/719, 2024. URL https://
  eprint.iacr.org/2024/719.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and
  Li Deng. Ms marco: A human-generated machine reading comprehension dataset. 2016.
Sarvar Patel, Joon Young Seo, and Kevin Yeo. {Don’t} be dense: Efficient keyword {PIR} for sparse
  databases. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 3853–3870, 2023.
Giuseppe Persiano and Kevin Yeo. Limits of preprocessing for single-server PIR. In SODA, pp.
  2522–2548. SIAM, 2022.
Liudmila Prokhorenkova and Aleksandr Shekhovtsov. Graph-based nearest neighbor search: From
  practice to theory. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7803–7813. PMLR,
  2020.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1410.
Ling Ren, Muhammad Haris Mughees, and I Sun. Simple and practical amortized sublinear pri-
  vate information retrieval using dummy subsets. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC
  Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2024.
Sacha Servan-Schreiber, Simon Langowski, and Srinivas Devadas. Private approximate nearest
  neighbor search with sublinear communication. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
  (SP), pp. 911–929. IEEE, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elaine Shi, Waqar Aqeel, Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, and Bruce Maggs. Puncturable pseudo-
  random sets and private information retrieval with near-optimal online bandwidth and time. In
  CRYPTO, 2021.
Emil Stefanov, Marten van Dijk, Elaine Shi, T.-H. Hubert Chan, Christopher W. Fletcher, Ling Ren,
 Xiangyao Yu, and Srinivas Devadas. Path ORAM: an extremely simple oblivious RAM protocol.
 J. ACM, 65(4):18:1–18:26, 2018.
Mengzhao Wang, Xiaoliang Xu, Qiang Yue, and Yuxiang Wang. A comprehensive survey and
 experimental comparison of graph-based approximate nearest neighbor search. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2101.12631, 2021.
Yinghao Wang, Xuanming Liu, Jiawen Zhang, Jian Liu, and Xiaohu Yang. Crust: Verifiable and
  efficient private information retrieval with sublinear online time. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2023.
Mingxun Zhou, Wei-Kai Lin, Yiannis Tselekounis, and Elaine Shi. Optimal single-server private
 information retrieval. In EUROCRYPT, 2023.
Mingxun Zhou, Andrew Park, Elaine Shi, and Wenting Zheng. Piano: Extremely simple, single-server
 pir with sublinear server computation. In IEEE S& P, 2024.
Jinhao Zhu, Liana Patel, Matei Zaharia, and Raluca Ada Popa. Compass: Encrypted semantic
   search with high accuracy. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1255, 2024. URL https:
   //eprint.iacr.org/2024/1255. https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1255.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ETAILS OF O UR G RAPH - BASED ANN C ONSTRUCTION
We now provide a detailed description of our customized graph building algorithm in Figure 7.

                        Our Graph Building Algorithm: ANN.BuildGraph.
    Input: a set of n vectors DB = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } ∈ Rd×n and a target degree C.
    Output: a directed regular C-out graph G with n vertices corresponding to the n vectors in DB.

    Subroutine: ANN.TrimNeighbors(u, L, C). // Given a vertex u and a list of neighbors L,
    return the picked C neighbors of u in L with the SNG heuristic.
    1. Let w be the number of vertices in L and let (i1 , . . . , iw ) be the sorted indices in L according
       to the distance to the vector vu (ascendingly).
    2. Let Kept ← ∅, Dscd ← ∅.
    3. For j = i1 , . . . , iw :
        (a) If ∃j ′ ∈ Kept such that ∆(vj , vj ′ ) < ∆(vj , vu ), label j as discarded. // SNG heuristic
        (b) If j is not discarded, insert j to Kept. Otherwise, insert j to Dscd.
        (c) Terminate if |Kept| = C.
    4. If |Kept| < C, insert the first C − |Kept| vertices in Dscd to Kept.
    5. Return Kept.


    Graph Building.
    1. For each u ∈ [n]:
      (a) Let Nu be the set of 2C approximate neighbor indices to vu obtained by an underlying
          ANN algorithm.
      (b) Trim Nu to C neighbors: let Nu ← ANN.TrimNeighbor(u, Nu , C).
      (c) For all u′ ∈ N (u), add directed edges (u → u′ ) and edge (u′ → u) to the graph G.
    2. Fix InDegree(u) to be the in-degree of vertex u in the current graph G.
                                                                         C
    3. For each edge (i, j) ∈ G: keep the edge in G with probability InDegree(j) .
    4. For each u ∈ [n]:
      (a) Denote NG (u) be the set of outbounds of u in G.
      (b) If |NG (u)| < C: add edges from u to random vertices in [n] until |NG (u)| = C.
      (c) If |NG (u)| > C: let NG (u) ← ANN.TrimNeighbor(u, NG (u), C).
    5. Output the graph G.

              Figure 7: Description of our graph building algorithm ANN.BuildGraph.


B     D ETAILED C ONSTRUCTION D ESCRIPTION
We include the full description of our algorithm in Figure 8. The algorithm further involves the local
caching optimization that the client will keep track of all queried vertices and avoid repetitive queries.

B.1    R EVIEW ON P IANO PIR

We review the main idea of Pian √ PIR (Zhou et al., 2024) below. During  √ the preprocessing phase,
the client will sample around n log n random sets, each containing n random indices in [n].
For each sampled set S, the client will store theP random seed to generate S, and also the sum of
the entires indexed by S, denoted as sum(S) = i∈S DB[i]. The number of sets ensure the every
entry in DB is included in at least one set. Then, for each query x, the client will first find a local
set S that contains x. Since the client knows sum(S), if it can learn learn sum(S/{x}), it can


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


recover DB[x] √ by a simple subtraction. However, the client cannot query sum(S/{x}) by directly
sending those n − 1 indices to the server, because the server will notice that all the indices it
received from the client are not x, which is a privacy issue. Piano fixes this issue by having the
                              √
client remember roughly Õ( n) random entries during the preprocessing phase, which are called
the “replcaments”. Then, instead of deleting x from S, the client will  √ replace x with a replacement
entry y and query the server of √ sum(S/{x} ∪ {y}) by sending all n indices in this “edited” set
to the server. The server takes n computation to compute the sum and returns the result to the
client. Since the client already knows the value of DB[y] in preprocessing, it can recover DB[x] by
calculating DB[x] = sum(S) − sum (S/{x} ∪ {y}) + DB[y].   √      It is not hard to see this single-query
version of Piano is indeed private – the server only sees n random indices that are independent of
the actual query index x. We omit the details of the multiple, adaptive-query version of Piano here
and refer the interested readers to the original paper (Zhou et al., 2024).

Batched Piano PIR. We can use a technique called Partial Batched Retrieval to support multiple
queries in a single round of communication. The idea is to use a pseudorandom permutation to
permute the database upfront, and then partition the permuted database into B sub-databases where
each sub-database has n/B entries. On average, each sub-database will have Q/B queries given
a batch of Q queries (if we are using beam search, Q = mC). By doing this, each PIR query will
be issued to a sub-database of size n/B instead of the full database, saving the computation and
communication cost. To ensure privacy, the client has to issue a fixed number of queries for each
sub-database, say choosing the number T = 1.5Q/B. If fewer than T queries are in the same
sub-database, the client submits dummy queries. If more than T queries are in the same sub-database,
the client only submits the first T queries and discards the rest. For example, if we have a batch
size Q = 32 and set partition number B = 16 and T = 3, around 90% of the queries in the batch
will be successfully submitted in expectation. 7 Intuitively, if each vertex has 32 neighbors, our
retrieval process can retrieve nearly 30 neighbors’ information with a single batched query. Since the
graph tends to be highly-connected, we observe that even with a mild query failure probability, the
algorithm still finds good results with more hops.
In the algorithm description, we use the following syntax of to capture the Piano PIR functionality
with the batch-mode interface:

       • hint ← PIR.Prep(1λ , DB): given the security parameter 1λ and the database DB, generate
         the preprocessed PIR hint hint.
       • msg ← PIR.BatchQuery(hint, batch): given the PIR hint and a batch of query indices
         batch ⊆ [n], the client generates the PIR query message msg.
       • ans ← PIR.BatchAnswer(DB, msg): upon receiving the batched PIR query message msg,
         the server generates the batched answer ans.
       • (β, hint′ ) ← PIR.BatchRecover(hint, ans, batch): given the batched answer ans and the
         PIR hint hint, recover the answers β and update the hint to hint′ . Here, β is a set that includes
         all the successful query indices and their corresponding answers. That is, β includes the
         tuples (i, DB[i]) for all i ∈ batch that are successfully queried.

B.2    F ULL A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

Preprocessing. We use the same graph building algorithm as in Figure 7 to build a graph G from the
vectors DB. We then combine the neighbor list of each vertex with its vector to build a new √
                                                                                                  database
                                                        √                                      n
DB′ = {(vi , N (i))}i∈[n] . Then, we randomly sample n starting vertices u1start , . . . , ustart from [n].
We then run the client-side preprocessing algorithm of Piano and let the client store the hint hint.
Further, we let the client download those starting vertices and their vectors and neighbor lists from
the server.
   7
     We can approximate this process with randomly throwing Q balls into B bins, each with a maximum
load of T , and calculate how many balls are discarded due to overflow in expectation. Given some fixed
order of throwing the balls, the probability that the i-th thrown ball is thrown into a fully-loaded bin is always
Pr[Bin(i − 1, 1/B) ≥ T ]. Here, Bin(t, p) denotes the Binomial distribution – that is, the number of successful
trials in t repeated, independent trials where each trial has success probability of p. Then, the expected number
of discarded balls (i.e., failed queries) in total is Q
                                                     P
                                                      i=1 Pr[Bin(i − 1, 1/B) ≥ T ].



                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query for K-approximate nearest neighbors of vector q ∈ Rd . We generalize the search algorithm
to the following exploration process. The client can maintain two sets of vertices locally: 1) visited
including all vertices that the client has already visited and stored their vectors and neighbor lists, and
2) developed including all vertices that the client has already visited and retrieved all their neighbors’
information. The client can maintain visited as a priority queue where the closer vertices to q are
at the front. Each time the client can pick multiple vertices from visited and fetch their neighbors’
information in parallel. The client will move those picked vertices from visited to developed, and
add their neighbors to visited. We collect all those neighbors’ indices as batch and issue a batched
PIR query to the server. After receiving the batched answer, the client will recover all the successful
queries and push them to visited. The client also needs to update the local hint hint after each query.
We can repeat this process until the max hop number is reached. Finally, the client can output the top
K nearest vertices in visited and developed to the query vector q.
We summarize the main result in the following theorem.
Theorem B.1. Assume there exists one-way functions. Consider a database with n vectors in Rd .
Assuming a non-private graph-based ANN algorithm that preprocesses the database into a C-degree
graph, and searches for the approximate nearest neighbors with H hops in the graph. Then, by
applying the Piano PIR scheme, we can build a private ANN scheme with the following efficiency,
while achieving the same search quality as the non-private graph ANN:

       • Preprocessing: Õ(n(d + C)) client and server time and O(n(d + C)) communication;
                      √                                           √
       • Query: Õ(H· Cn·(d+C)) client and server time and O(H· Cn·(d+C)) communication.
                     √
       • Storage: Õ( n · (d + C)) client storage and no additional server storage except the
         database.

Proof. The proof follows directly from the efficiency of the Piano PIR scheme when we consider a
database with n entries and each entry stores a vector in Rd and a neighbor list of size C. Moreover,
by applying the batched optimization we described√ in Section 4.3, we further reduce the computation
and communication cost of each PIR query by C. The privacy proof is fairly straightforward, as
the server only sees multiple Piano PIR queries from the client. We can construct a simulator for the
Ideal experiment that simulates the server’s view by invoking the simulator of the Piano PIR scheme
for each query issued from the client. It follows from the privacy of the Piano PIR scheme that the
two views (the Real and the Ideal experiments) are computationally indistinguishable.


C     D ETAILED E VALUATION
C.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We describe our implementation of the two components below.

Graph-based ANN. The graph-based ANN algorithm can be divided into two parts: the graph
building part and the query part. The graph building part follows our description in Figure 7 and sets
the outbound number C = 32. The query part strictly follows our description in Figure 8.

Batched PIR. We implement a batch-mode version of the Piano PIR scheme (Zhou et al., 2024) by
first implementing the single-query version of the Piano PIR scheme with 128-bit security parameter,
then wrapping it with a batch-mode interface. The interface simply splits the whole database into B
partitions, and then runs a single-query Piano PIR scheme on each partition parallelly. Given a batch
of Q queries, we simply identify which partition each query belongs to, and then make Q/B queries
at each partition to ensure privacy. We choose B = 16 and Q = 32 in our evaluation. Moreover, we
implement the automatic maintenance for the client state. We keep track of the consumed hints in the
client’s space and automatically run another preprocessing phase when the hints are exhausted.

C.2    D ETAILED B REAKDOWN

Finally, we provide a detailed breakdown of the costs of our scheme in Table 1. We pick two
representative parameter settings for the MS-MARCO dataset and the SIFT dataset, all achieving


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       PACMANN: Private Graph ANN with Preprocessing
  Preprocessing.
  • Server Side Preprocessing:            Input: a set of n vectors DB = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } ∈ Rd×n .
    – Runs G ← BuildGraph(DB).
                        √                                    √
                                                                n
    – Randomly sample n starting vertices u1start , . . . , ustart from [n].
    – Let DB′ = {(vi , N (i))}i∈[n] where N (i) is the neighbor list of i in G.
         • Client Side Preprocessing:
           – Stores hint ← PIR.Prep(1λ , DB′ ).          // Involving communication with the server.
                                                                       √
                                                                          n
           –   Downloads the representative indices u1start , . . . , ustart from the server.
                             i                           ′
           –   For all u ∈ {ustart }i∈[√n] , downloads DB [u] = (vu , N (u)) from the server.


  Query for K-approximate nearest neighbors of vector q ∈ Rd .
         • Parameters: max hop number H and beam search width m.
  • Client Side Algorithm.
    – Let visited = {uistart }i∈[√n] be a priority queue where the closest vertices to q are at the
      front.
    – Let developed = ∅.
    – For t = 1, 2, . . . , H:
      * Let u1 , . . . , um be the top m indices in visited and move them from visited to developed.
      * Let batch = ∪i∈[m] N (ui ) be the union of the neighbor lists of u1 , . . . , um .
      * Remove those indices in batch that are already in visited ∪ developed.
      * Send msg ← PIR.BatchQuery(hint, batch) to the server.
                                                              ′
      * Upon receiving ans from the server, run (β, hint ) ← PIR.Recover(ans, hint). where β
         is a set that includes all the successful query indices and their corresponding answers.
      * For each successful query tuple (u, (vu , N (u))) ∈ β, add u to visited and store the
         vector vu and neighbor list N (u) locally.
                                                   ′
      * Update the local PIR hint hint ← hint .
    – Finally, for all u ∈ visited∪developed, compute the distance ∆(vu , q). Output the k indices
      with the smallest distances.
  • Server Side Algorithm.
    – Upon receiving a PIR batch query message msg from the client, run ans ←
      PIR.BatchAnswer(DB′ , msg) and return ans.

                       Figure 8: Our private ANN scheme with preprocessing.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 MS-MARCO (3M)             SIFT (100M)
                                              Preprocessing
                     Graph Buliding Time             8.5 min                 343.5 min
                      PIR Preprocessing               9.1 s                   271.6 s
                       Communication                 2.7 GB                   59.6 GB
                                      Online per query
                          Latency               1.1 s                           3.0 s
                    Computation Time            0.10 s                         1.48 s
                   Online Communication        1.5 MB                         14.4 MB
                          Rounds                  20                             32
                                    Maintenance per query
                          Time                  0.19 s                         1.99 s
                       Communication          60.1 MB                        399.4 MB
                        Client Storage                    0.6 GB              2.9 GB

Table 1: Detailed breakdown of our results on different datasets in the WAN setting. We list the
preprocessing, online query, and maintenance costs. The graph-building cost happens only once. The
PIR preprocessing cost is incurred when each client joins the system. The online query cost is the cost
on the critical path of the search queries. Following each online query, there is a necessary one-round
maintenance to update the client state. We use 16 threads for the graph building and one thread for
other parts. The corresponding quality for the experiments is 0.266 MRR@100 for MS-MARCO and
0.90 recall@10 for SIFT.


90% of the quality of the state-of-the-art non-private ANN search algorithm. The graph building time
is significant for both datasets, taking 8.5 minutes for the MS-MARCO dataset and 343.5 minutes
for the SIFT dataset. However, the graph building only happens once on the server side. The PIR
preprocessing is per-client, but it is relatively cheap, taking 9.1 seconds for the MS-MARCO dataset
and 271.6 seconds for the SIFT dataset. The most expensive part is that during the preprocessing, the
client has to scan over the whole index structure in a streaming fashion, incurring large communication
cost. For each online query, the latency and computation time match our analysis in Section 5.2.
Notably, the communication cost on the critical path is relatively low, taking 1.5MB for the MS-
MARCO dataset and 14.4MB for the SIFT dataset. Notice that the client has to update its local
state after each query. We see that the maintenance time per query is relatively cheap, but the
communication cost is high, taking 60.1MB for the MS-MARCO dataset and 399.4MB for the SIFT
dataset. Theoretically, the client stores around O(n)
                                                    e     amount of local state. Empirically, we see that
the client stores 0.6GB of data for the MS-MARCO dataset and 2.9GB of data for the SIFT dataset,
and the scaling factor matches our theoretical analysis.

Discussion on quantization and comparing against Tiptoe. We noticed that the original Tiptoe
implementation uses 4-bit quantization for the vectors to further trade off the search quality for the
latency. In our evaluation, we use the full 32-bit precision for all the algorithms. Thus, the quality of
the clustering-based algorithm should be considered an upper bound for the actual Tiptoe algorithm.
For the latency, the “Linear Algorithm” baseline should be a good approximation of the actual Tiptoe
algorithm. As an example, if we extrapolate the reported numbers of Tiptoe’s algorithm based on the
Table 6 and Table 7 in the original paper (Henzinger et al., 2023) to the MS-MARCO dataset, the
latency will be around 0.27 seconds. 8

Alternative Implementations. As alternatives, one can indeed use other PIR schemes to implement
our graph-based ANN algorithm. As an example, using another recent single-server PIR scheme,
   8
     The authors of Tiptoe reported the total core-second is 145 seconds for their experiment on a dataset with
360 million 192 dimensional vectors. The full Tiptoe system contains three parts: “preprocessing”, “ranking”
and “URL” where the “ranking” part corresponds to our ANN search experiment. According to Table 7 in the
paper, it should take about (1.9/(6.5 + 1.9 + 0.6)) = 21% of the cost. Thus, an estimation of the time on a
                                                                           3.2×106
single-core for the 3.2M size MS-MARCO dataset will be 145 × 21% × 360×10          6 ≈ 0.27s, which is close to
our simulated “Linear Algorithm” latency (0.25 seconds).


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SimplePIR (Henzinger et al., 2022) (used also in Tiptoe (Henzinger et al., 2023)), comes with a
tradeoff. In the 10M SIFT dataset experiment, we can save the offline communication cost from
roughly 6GB to around 300MB, but this would increase the online latency from 1.5s to roughly 90s
according to our estimation as follows. We tested the throughput of the SimplePIR scheme on our
server, which is around 10 GB/s. Then, we are making in total 25 rounds of graph explorations where
each round having 96 parallel queries. The batching technique allows each individual query to be
made in a sub-database of 16 times smaller than the whole database (around 6GB). Therefore, the
                                            6GB
total estimated time would be 25 × 96 × 16×10GB/s  ≈ 90s.

D    T HEORETICAL I MPLICATIONS
We focused on the practical aspects of our scheme in the main body. Although graph-based ANN
search has been empirically shown to be successful in practice, the theoretical understanding of the
graph-based ANN search is still very limited. Here, we provide some theoretical insights into the
graph-based private ANN search given the existing theoretical results.
Definition D.1 ((c, r)-Approximate Nearest Neighbor). Given n vectors DB = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } ∈
Rd×n and a distance function ∆(·, ·), we say that an algorithm is a (c, r)-approximate nearest
neighbor search algorithm if for any vector q ∈ Rd such that the true minimal distance between q and
any vector in DB is at most r, the algorithm outputs an index i such that ∆(vi , q) ≤ c · r with at least
constant probability.

For the low-dimension case where d = Θ(log n), we refer the reader to Prokhorenkova and
Shekhovtsov (Prokhorenkova & Shekhovtsov, 2020) for the detailed discussion. Here, we will
focus on the high-dimensional regime (also known as the sparse data case) such that the dimension
d = ω(log n), which is the most common setting for ANN search (recall that most embedding spaces
are at least 100-dimensional).
Two notable theoretical results can be leveraged to analyze the graph-based ANN search.
Laarhoven (Laarhoven, 2018) proves the following theorem:
Theorem D.2 (Laarhoven (Laarhoven, 2018)). Consider a database contains n independently random
vectors in the unit sphere in Sd−1 and the distance is measured by Euclidean distance. For c > 1,
there exists a (c, r)-graph-based ANN search algorithm with the O(n1+ρ+o(1) ) space complexity and
O(nρ+o(1) ) query time complexity while taking only O(1) hops in the graph, where
                                                      c4
                                          ρ≥                   .
                                               2c4 − 2c2 + 1


We call this setting the average case setting. Intuitively, we can think about nρ in the above theorem
roughly denoting the average degree of the graph. For example, if we aim to have a 2-approximation
ANN, then ρ ≈ 0.64. We see that with the approximation factor c getting worse, limc→∞ ρ(c) = 21 .
On the other hand, Diwan et al. (Diwan et al., 2024) studied the problem of building a navigable
graph. On a high level, a navigable graph provides the guarantee for “in-distribution” queries for
ANN search, that is, when the query vector will be exactly some vector in the database. They showed
the following theorem:
                                                                d
Theorem D.3 ((Diwan et al., 2024)). For   √ any n vectors in R , it is possible to build a navigable
graph with average degree of at most 2 n ln n. Moreover, the “greedy-routing” strategy always
succeeds in finding the correct vector in the database with at most 2 hops.

The above two theorems provide the following theoretical insights: for the high-dimensional regime,
to achieve a strong guarantee on the ANN search, the average degree of the graph will be roughly
  1
n 2 +o(1) , and the query hop number will only be a constant. Therefore, if we use the same PIR
technique to make the graph-based ANN search private, the underlying graph-information database
              3
is of size n 2 +o(1) , where the total number of entries is n and each entry is of size n1/2+o(1) . It is
interesting to see that this is not a typical setting of the PIR literature, because the entry size is much
larger than a constant. If we plug in the best parameters of the client-preprocessing PIR (Zhou et al.,
2024; Nguyen et al., 2024) into the Laarhoven’s algorithm, we will get the following result:


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem D.4. Assume the existence of one-way functions. For c > 1, there exists a (c, r)-graph-
based private ANN search algorithm for Euclidean distance in the average case setting (random
vectors on the unit sphere Sd−1 ) with the following properties:

        • Preprocessing cost: Õ(n1+ρ+o(1) ) communication and computation cost;
        • Query cost:

            – Õ(n1/2+ρ+o(1) ) computation cost;
            – Õ(nρ+o(1) ) communication cost;
        • Storage cost:

            – Client: Õ(n1/2 );
            – Server: Õ(n1+ρ+o(1) ).

Here,
                                                   c4
                                         ρ≥                 .
                                              2c4 − 2c2 + 1

Specifically, we need to use the new result in Nguyen et al. (Nguyen et al., 2024) for optimizing
the client storage. Notice that based on the existing client-specific preprocessing PIR lower bounds
(Corrigan-Gibbs & Kogan, 2020; Persiano & Yeo, 2022; Larsen et al., 2020), to privately access a
data structure of size N , the product between the client storage S and the online time T satisfies
S × T = Ω(N ). In this sense, the above theoretical result is nearly tight in terms of the client storage
and online query time if we follow the graph-based ANN paradigm: the client storage is Õ(n1/2 )
and the online query time is Õ(n1/2+ρ+o(1) ), while the product matches the data structure size of
n1+ρ+o(1) .

Gap between Theory and Practice. Notably, the above theoretical results on graph-based ANN   √
algorithms are based on the analysis of “high-degree” graphs, where the average degree is Ω( n),
and the query hop number is a small constant. In practice, we see a different combination: popular
graph-based ANN algorithm implementations usually pick a much smaller average degree, e.g., 32
or 64, while making the query hop number larger (e.g. scaling with the logarithm of the database
size). It remains an interesting open question whether there exists a strong theoretical result for
small-degree graphs with a search process invoking a large number of hops.


                                                   21
