Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M AR S: A F INANCIAL M ARKET S IMULATION E NGINE
P OWERED BY G ENERATIVE F OUNDATION M ODEL
 Junjie Li∗, Yang Liu∗, Weiqing Liu†, Shikai Fang, Lewen Wang, Chang Xu & Jiang Bian
 Microsoft Research Asia
 {junli,yangliu2,weiqing.liu,fangshikai,lewen.wang,
 chanx,jiang.bian}@microsoft.com



                                                A BSTRACT

            Generative models aim to simulate realistic effects of various actions across dif-
            ferent contexts, from text generation to visual effects. Despite significant efforts to
            build real-world simulators, the application of generative models to virtual worlds,
            like financial markets, remains under-explored. In financial markets, generative
            models can simulate complex market effects of participants with various behav-
            iors, enabling interaction under different market conditions, and training strate-
            gies without financial risk. This simulation relies on the finest structured data in
            financial market like orders thus building the finest realistic simulation. We pro-
            pose Large Market Model (LMM), an order-level generative foundation model,
            for financial market simulation, akin to language modeling in the digital world.
            Our financial Market Simulation engine (MarS), powered by LMM, addresses the
            domain-specific need for realistic, interactive and controllable order generation.
            Key observations include LMM’s strong scalability across data size and model
            complexity, and MarS’s robust and practicable realism in controlled generation
            with market impact. We showcase MarS as a forecast tool, detection system,
            analysis platform, and agent training environment, thus demonstrating MarS’s
            “paradigm shift” potential for a variety of financial applications. We release the
            code of MarS at https://github.com/microsoft/MarS/.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The primary aim of generative models is to simulate realistic effects of various actions across differ-
ent contexts, such as text generation (Achiam et al., 2023) and visual effects (Brooks et al., 2024).
Real-world simulators enable human interaction with diverse scenes and objects (Mialon et al.,
2023), allow robots to learn from simulated experiences without physical risk (Du et al., 2023),
and generate vast amounts of realistic data for training other machine intelligence (Li et al., 2023).
While research on real-world simulators is extensive (Zhu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024), the ap-
plication of generative models for virtual world simulation remains under-explored. The financial
market exemplifies such a virtual world where each action, from trade execution to strategy deploy-
ment, can have ripple effects across a complex network of market participants. The ability to model
and predict these effects in real time is crucial for traders, analysts, and regulators alike. Yet, cur-
rent market simulation models – largely focused on statistical or agent-based approaches – lack the
resolution, interactivity, and realism needed to reflect the full complexity of order-level behaviors.
To address these gaps, it is crucial to integrate the vast amounts of structured financial data, such
as Limit Order Book (LOB) (Gould et al., 2013), that are essential for capturing market microstruc-
tures. We therefore propose the Large Market Model (LMM), a generative foundation model specif-
ically designed for order-level financial market simulation. LMM builds on the successes of genera-
tive models in other domains but uniquely adapts them to the financial context, where the generation
of orders, order batches, and LOBs plays a critical role in understanding market dynamics. By
leveraging structured market data, LMM scales effectively with increasing data and model size, as
we will demonstrate through scaling law evaluation, revealing its potential for handling large-scale
    ∗
        Equal Contribution
    †
        Corresponding Author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


financial markets. LMM’s design ensures that it can generate high-resolution market simulations,
capturing both fine-grained individual order actions and broader market trends.
Powered by LMM, we introduce MarS, a financial Market Simulation engine, unlocking new po-
tential in financial market forecasting, risk detection, strategy analysis. MarS is designed to ensure
realism, producing simulated market trajectories that are robust enough for practical financial tasks
such as predictive modeling, risk management, and agent training. It is capable of providing con-
trolled generation, blending users’ interactively injected orders into the generation of realistic market
behaviors, assessing the market impact of these actions. This feature ensures that MarS delivers not
only high-fidelity simulations but also controllable environments where financial strategies can be
safely tested and evaluated.
Among the broad adoption of AI techniques in finance (Zhang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023b; Kim
et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2021), MarS is the first to fully leverage the core elements of financial
markets, making it a powerful tool for a wide range of downstream applications. We posit that MarS
has the potential to bring paradigm shifts to a wide range of tasks related to the financial market. In
this work, we demonstrate its transformative potential in four specific use cases:

      1. Forecast Tool: MarS generates subsequent orders based on recent orders and LOB, sim-
         ulating future market trajectories. This enables precise forecasting by analyzing multiple
         simulated trajectories.
      2. Detection System: By generating multiple future market trajectories, MarS identifies po-
         tential risks not apparent from current observations. For example, a sudden drop in trajec-
         tory variance could indicate an impending significant event, providing early warnings and
         enhancing risk management.
      3. Analysis Platform: MarS answers a wide range of “what if” questions by providing a re-
         alistic simulation environment. For instance, it evaluates the market impact of large orders
         by comparing existing market impact formulas to simulated results, identifying potential
         improvements and gaining deeper insights into market dynamics.
      4. Agent Training Environment: The realistic and responsive nature of MarS makes it ideal
         for training reinforcement learning agents. This is demonstrated with an order execution
         scenario, showcasing MarS’s potential for developing and refining trading strategies with-
         out real-world financial risks.

The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

       • We introduce the Large Market Model (LMM), a generative foundation model designed
         specifically for financial market simulations, and demonstrate its scalability across data
         size and model complexity. This establishes a new direction for domain-specific foundation
         models in finance.
       • We develop MarS, a high-fidelity financial market simulation engine powered by LMM,
         capable of generating realistic market scenarios and modeling the intricate impacts of order-
         level dynamics. This unlocks new possibilities for applying generative models in financial
         markets.
       • We demonstrate the versatility of MarS through four key downstream applications: precise
         market forecasting, risk detection, market impact analysis, and agent training for trading
         strategies. These applications highlight the significant potential of MarS for transforming
         financial industry practices.

2   M AR S D ESIGN
To create a truly realistic simulation system, MarS must excel in three key dimensions: high-
resolution, controllability, and interactivity.
High-resolution refers to the ability of MarS to faithfully replicate the intricate dynamics of financial
markets. This is why we leverage trading orders and order batches as the foundational elements
of the simulation system, since they encapsulate the investment behaviors of market participants.
These fine-grained data points are essential for accurately reproducing historical market trajectories,
ensuring that the simulation reflects real market conditions and behaviors with precision.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      MarS                                                               Generated Order Sequences
                                                                               Representing               Simulated                User Injected
                                Current Market &                            Market Participants        Clearing House                 Orders
                                Environment Data


                                            Control                                                                     Interact
             Vague Description
             of Target Scenario



                                      Training

                                                                                                                 …
            Order-level
       Historical Market Data                       Large Market Model                                      Simulated
                                                                                                         Market Trajectories
                                      Market Data

                                                 Component Models                 Applications
      Prompt               Control


               Interface        Order-batch Model

                           Interact


                                                                                   Forecast          Detection   “What if” Analysis        RL Env
                                  Order Model          Ensemble Model



Figure 1: High-Level Overview of MarS. MarS is powered by a generative foundation model (LMM)
trained on order-level historical financial market data. During real-time simulation, LMM dynam-
ically generates order series in response to various conditions, including user-injected interactive
orders, vague target scenario descriptions, and current/recent market data. These generated order se-
ries, combined with user interactive orders, are matched in a simulated clearing house in real-time,
producing fine-grained simulated market trajectories. The flexibility of LMM’s order generation
enables MarS to support various downstream applications, such as forecasting, detection systems,
analysis platforms, and agent training environments.

Controllability offers users the flexibility to simulate a wide range of market scenarios and circum-
stances. Under the scenarios of assessing market trends, monitoring potential risks, or optimizing
trading strategies, MarS provides the tools needed to explore any possible market condition. This
capability is particularly valuable for stress testing and strategy optimization, where diverse and
even rare extreme cases must be modeled accurately.
Interactivity is crucial for enabling real-time user interaction with the simulated market. By allowing
users to inject their own orders into the system, it enable them to evaluate market impacts, includ-
ing both first-order and second-order effects. This feature is vital for analyzing trading strategies,
managing systemic risks, and developing regulatory policies in a controlled, risk-free environment.

2.1   L ARGE M ARKET M ODEL FOR F INANCIAL M ARKET S IMULATION
Problem Formulation. To address the need for high-resolution, controllable, and interactive simu-
lations, we propose the Large Market Model (LMM), a generative foundation model specifically de-
signed for order-level financial market simulation. The problem is formulated as a conditional gen-
eration task, where the generation of trading orders is conditioned on historical data, user-injected
orders, and market matching rules. LMM incorporates key features of the market microstructure
such as Limit Order Books (LOB), enabling it to capture both individual trading behaviors and
systemic market dynamics.
Tokenization of Order and Order-Batch. LMM models the generation of trading orders as a
conditional generation process, leveraging sequential modeling techniques to predict the evolution
of market states over time. This is achieved through a novel representation learning approach tai-
lored for the financial industry’s structured data, particularly the order flows at two distinct scales:
individual orders and aggregated order-batches. The Order Model, using a causal transformer, to-
kenizes historical order sequences and Limit Order Book (LOB) information to ensure the realistic
generation of individual trading orders. The tokenization procedure for the ith order is as follows:

                 Embi = emb(orderi ) + linear proj(LOBivolumes ) + emb(LOBimid price ),                                                             (1)


                                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where orderi denotes an index indicating its position in the tuple (type, price, volume, interval),
with type being one of [“Ask”, “Bid”, “Cancel”], LOBivolumes represents the 10-level volumes for
asks and bids in the LOB, and LOBimid price is the mid-price of the LOB, expressed as the number of
price tick changes since market opening.
In parallel, the Order-Batch Model converts the order batches into an image-like format, and em-
ploys VQ-VAE to represent and generate aggregated trading behaviors over discrete time intervals.
In practice, we convert one order-batch into an RGB image format. We refer to such images as
“order images”, demonstrated in Fig. 2.

                       Order Batch                             Bid       #
                                                                               Ask        #   Cancel       #
                                                                                                               Max


                                              Volume Slot
              ID        ID           ID
              Type      Type         Type
              Price     Price    …   Price
                                                                                                               Mid
              Volume    Volume       Volume
                                                                                                               Min
                       𝐦𝐢𝐧𝐮𝐭𝐞𝐭                              Price Slot       Price Slot       Price Slot

Figure 2: The order image converter transforms order data into a visual representation. Each order
has three attributes: type (Bid, Ask, Cancel), price slot (relative to the mid-price), and volume
slot (binned volume). The pixel values in the image represent the number of orders with the same
attributes, with higher pixel values indicating more orders. More details can be found in C.3.

These components combine in an ensemble framework, where LMM uses auto-regressive mod-
eling to build a foundational generative model. This framework integrates micro-level behaviors
with macro-level market trends. LMM captures complex dependencies within historical data and
temporal patterns through high-dimensional embeddings, providing robust market dynamics repre-
sentation. For further details on the tokenization strategy and the architectural design of Order and
Order-Batch Models, we refer the reader to Appendix B and C.

2.1.1   C ONDITIONAL T RADING O RDER G ENERATION
In LMM, the generation of trading orders is modeled as a conditional generation process that adapts
to real-time market dynamics. An order clip is a sequence of trading orders x = (x0 , . . . , xn ),
generated based on the following four key conditions: DES TEXT: A general description of the
desired market scenario (e.g., “price bump” or “volatility crush”), ensuring controllability. Inter-
active Orders: (ẋi+1 , . . . , ẋi+j ) are user-injected orders after the i-th generated order. If j = 0,
there are no interactive orders between xi and xi+1 . Starting Sequence: (x0 , . . . , xm−1 ) are the
initial m orders, often using recent real orders to forecast subsequent ones, enabling realistic simu-
lations. MTCH R: Matching rules for trading orders, defining the feasible space for each order and
reflecting the specific financial market’s characteristics.
The conditional generation process: p(xi+j+1 |{DES TEXT, (ẋi+1 , . . . , ẋi+j ), (x0 , . . . , xm ), MTCH R})
ensures that generated orders are realistic and aligned with both the user-defined scenario and
the underlying market structure. They can be adjusted for various MarS scenarios, with different
applications showcased in Sec. 4. We provide a summary of the input conditions and configurations
for various applications, along with the detailed introduction of MTCH R and DES TEXT in
Appendix F.

2.1.2   F RAMEWORK D ESIGN OF L ARGE M ARKET M ODEL
The LMM integrates two complementary approaches: Order Sequence Modeling and Order-Batch
Sequence Modeling, combined into an ensemble model to address financial market complexities.
Order Sequence Modeling. We use a causal transformer to encode each order and its preceding
Limit Order Book (LOB) information as a single token. This method captures the sequential nature
of orders, ensuring realistic order sequences that reflect market dynamics. Order-Batch Sequence
Modeling. To model structured patterns of dynamic market behavior over time intervals, we apply
an auto-regressive transformer to order-batch sequences. Orders within a time step are grouped into
batches, converted into a structured representation of market behavior for this time step, and modeled
to maintain coherence and continuity. Ensemble Model. Combining order sequence and order-
batch modeling, the ensemble model balances fine-grained control of individual orders with broader


                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


market dynamics. This integration ensures detailed and contextually accurate market simulations.
Fine-grained Signal Generation Interface. We introduce an interface that maps vague descriptions
to fine-grained control signals using LLM-based historical market record retrieval. This guides the
ensemble model, ensuring simulations follow realistic market patterns and user-defined scenarios.
The bottom-left of Fig. 1 shows the framework of the Large Market Model. The detailed design of
its four parts can be found in Appendix B, C, D, E.

2.1.3    S CALING L AW IN L ARGE M ARKET M ODEL
LMM’s scalability is a key perspective to assess its effectiveness in handling increasingly large-scale
financial markets. In our four-part foundation model design, we employ an auto-regressive trans-
former for order-batch sequences and a causal transformer for order sequences. These components
utilize standard pre-training techniques commonly applied in foundation models, including those
used in language modeling (Kaplan et al., 2020) and vision modeling (Zhai et al., 2022).
To assess the scalability of the LMM, we evaluated its performance across varying data scales and
model sizes. The scaling curves are shown in Fig. 3. Our findings indicate that as the size of the data
and the model increases, LMM’s performance improves significantly, consistent with the scaling
laws observed in other foundation models. This suggests that the potential of LMM can be further
unlocked by leveraging larger datasets and more extensive computational resources.
While the current implementation only taps into a fraction of the available order-level financial
market data due to resource constraints, the vast amount of data accessible within financial markets
holds tremendous promise for future enhancements. MarS, in this context, serves as the tool to
unearth this “gold mine” of data, indicating substantial opportunities for more comprehensive and
powerful market simulations.

                           8.0
                                                                                                5.75
                           7.8                                                                  5.50
                                                                              Validation Loss
         Validation Loss


                                 Model Size                                                     5.25
                           7.6       2M
                                     5M                                                         5.00
                           7.4       10M                                                        4.75   Model Size
                                     19M                                                                   150M
                                     44M                                                        4.50       300M
                           7.2       107M                                                                  600M
                                     221M                                                       4.25       1B
                                     1.02B                                                                 3B
                           7.0
                                               109                1010                                              109                    1010
                                              Number of Training Tokens                                        Number of Training Tokens
                                              (a) Order Model                                             (b) Order-Batch Model
Figure 3: Scaling curves of Order Model and Order-Batch Model. (a) Order Model: Trained on 32 billion
tokens, with model sizes ranging from 2 million to 1.02 billion parameters. (b) Order-Batch Model: Trained on
10 billion tokens, with model sizes ranging from 150 million to 3 billion parameters. The results demonstrate
enhanced performance with increased data and model sizes.

2.2     M AR S — O RDER G ENERATION C OMBINED WITH S IMULATED C LEARING H OUSE

Powered by LMM, the MarS engine is designed to generate highly realistic market trajectories that
are robust enough for practical financial tasks such as predictive modeling, risk management, and
agent training.
At the core of MarS is the simulated clearing house, which matches both generated and interactive
orders in real-time, providing extensive information (e.g., LOB) for subsequent order generation.
For each generated order xi , the clearing house processes it against any j interactive orders (j ≥ 0)
injected by the user. The results of this matching process, including the recent LOB, are then used
to generate the next order xi+j+1 , creating a continuous and dynamic simulation.
MarS excels at providing controlled generation, blending users’ interactively injected orders into
the generation of realistic market behaviors. Users can inject their own orders into the system and
observe how these actions impact market dynamics in real-time. This capability allows users to
simulate various trading strategies, assess market impacts, and evaluate the performance of their
strategies under different conditions. The blending process is carefully managed in MarS by adher-
ing to two guiding principles.


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • “Shaping the Future Based on Realized Realities.” At each time step, the order-batch
         model generates the next order-batch based on recent orders and corresponding matching
         results from the simulated clearing house. These information conclude the immediate mar-
         ket impact of users’ injected orders and determines the generated market behaviors in the
         next order-batch.
       • “Electing the Best from Every Possible Future.” Multiple predicted order-batches are
         generated at each time step and the best match to the fine-grained control signal is selected,
         ensuring the simulation remains realistic while allowing for user control.

The order-level transformer, trained on historical orders, naturally learns immediate market impact
for subsequent order generation. Concurrently, the ensemble model influences order generation,
aligning with the generated next order-batch. Fig. 4 illustrates the generation process, balancing
injected orders’ market impact and control signals to form a realistic simulation.


                                                                       Existing Orders                                                   Generated Orders
              MarS                                             including User Submitted Orders                                   including User Submitted Orders
            Generation



                                                                             minutet                                                                               minutet+1
                           Cancel                              Cancel                  Cancel
                     Bid                                 Bid                     Bid
               Ask                                 Ask                     Ask                                Order Model                            O
                                                                                                                                                                     OB
                 t-2                                 t-1                         t                                                            t+1
                                                                                                                   Vocab
                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                 Order-Batch Model                                                                                     t+2
                                                                                                                   Logits
             Predicted                                                                  Cancel
                                                                                                                                                    Vocab
                                                Cancel
             Channels                     Bid                                     Bid

                                                                  Filter    Ask                  Condition
                                                                                                             Ensemble Model
                                    Ask


                       𝐍×                                                                                                                      Refined Logits

                                                                                                                   Vocab
                                                                           minutet+1
                              Control
                              Signals
                                                                                                                Refined Logits



Figure 4: The process of MarS generation employs a two-level order generation mechanism. At the
order-batch level, following the two guiding principles in Sec. 2.2, the Order-Batch Model processes
existing orders from minutet and generates N possible distributions for minutet+1 . Through a filter
process based on control signals, the target distribution (⋆) is selected and serves as a condition for
the Ensemble Model (E). At the order level, the Order Model (O) generates immediate responses for
recent and user-submitted orders, while the Ensemble Model refines these generations conditioned
on the target distribution. The generated orders in minutet+1 are fed back to the Order-Batch Model
(OB) for minutet+2 prediction, creating a dynamic feedback loop that balances market impact and
controlled generation.


3   E XPERIMENTS
This section evaluates the capabilities of MarS in providing realistic, interactive, and controllable
simulations. Note that throughout our experiments, the term “replay” refers to replaying real his-
torical market data within MarS to validate the simulation against real-world events.
3.1 R EALISTIC S IMULATIONS
To assess the realism of MarS’s market simulations, we compare simulated data against key stylized
facts derived from historical market data (Sherkar & Sen, 2023). These stylized facts serve as robust
benchmarks, ensuring market simulations accurately reflect real-world market behaviors (Vyetrenko
et al., 2020; Coletta et al., 2022; Stillman et al., 2023). Fig. 5 presents several prevalent stylized
facts. MarS successfully replicates these stylized facts, demonstrating its capability to produce
highly realistic market simulations suitable for practical applications. Besides these three stylized
facts, we provide a detailed evaluation of other eleven stylized facts in Appendix I and a quantitative
analysis in Appendix J.


                                                                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Log Return of Simulation                                      Auto-Correlation of Log Return                                 Auto-Correlation of Volatility
                    0.20                     Source                                                          Source                                                       Source
                                                                              0.3                                                                   0.25
                                                  1 Min                                                           Replay                                                   Replay


                                                                                                                                 Auto-Correlation
                                                           Auto-Correlation
                    0.15                          5 Min                                                           Simulation                                                                  Simulation
      Probability
                                                                              0.2                                                                   0.20
                    0.10
                                                                              0.1                                                                   0.15
                    0.05
                                                                              0.0                                                                   0.10
                    0.00
                           0.004 0.002 0.000 0.002 0.004                                   1          2       3     4        5                                          1      2          3     4      5
                                    Log Return                                                         Lag (Minutes)                                                            Lag (Minutes)
             (a) Aggregational Gaussianity                   (b) Absence of Autocorrelations                                                         (c) Volatility Clustering
Figure 5: Illustration of Stylized Facts in MarS. (a) Aggregational Gaussianity: as the interval increases from
1 to 5 minutes, the distribution of log returns becomes more similar to a normal distribution. (b) Absence of
Autocorrelations: the auto-correlation of log returns rapidly decreases with increasing intervals. (c) Volatility
Clustering: high volatility auto-correlation is observed over periods.
3.2                 I NTERACTIVE S IMULATIONS

Understanding market impacts, i.e., changes in financial markets caused by trading activity, is cru-
cial. MarS simulates these impacts by generating orders from detailed order-level data. Fig. 6a
illustrates MarS interacting with a trading agent executing a TWAP (Time-Weighted Average Price)
strategy, which caused observable changes in the subsequent price trajectory. The gap between
the two curves represents the synthetic market impact generated by the agents trading actions. A
detailed exploration of market impact can be found in Sec.4.3.
We validated these simulations by collecting market impacts from agents with various configura-
tions, confirming that the synthetic
                            p        data adheres to the Square-Root-Law, as depicted in Fig. 6b. The
Square-Root-Law, ∆ ∝ σ Q/V , is a widely used model for market impact (Moro et al., 2009;
Lillo et al., 2003; Almgren et al., 2005), where ∆ is the price change, σ is the volatility, Q is the
trading volume, and V is the total market volume. These results illustrate that MarS can effectively
model the impact of trading strategies on market prices, providing valuable insights for market par-
ticipants and aiding in the development of more robust trading strategies. Additional details and
results about the TWAP agent and market impact can be found in Appendix H and K.
                                                                                                                                                      w/ Interaction


                            Simulation                                                          0.012        L1-P0.1
                            Replay
             45.2           Buy                                                                 0.010        L5-P0.1                                                          0.15              0.33
                                                                                                             L1-P0.9
                                                                                Market Impact


                            Cancel
             45.0                                                                               0.008        L5-P0.9
 Mid Price


                                                                                                0.006
             44.8
                                                                                                                                                      w/o Interaction


                                                                                                0.004
             44.6                                                                               0.002                                                                         0.23              0.47
                                                                                                0.000
                      09:35 09:40 09:45 09:50 09:55 10:00                                            0.00000.00050.00100.00150.0020
                                         Time                                                                          Q/V                                                  w/o Control       w/ Control

              (a) Synthetic market interaction      (b) Square-Root-Law Validation (c) Effects of control signals
                             Figure 6: Results of interactive and controllable simulations in MarS.
3.3 C ONTROLLABLE S IMULATIONS
We demonstrate the controllability of MarS by replicating historical events. Specifically, MarS
allows two types of control signals: {replay curve, prompt}. For control with replay curve, we
simulate a price change between 0.3% and 0.5% over 5 minutes. With control enabled, an order
batch is generated using minute-level guiding signals from the replay curve, integrated with the order
model within an ensemble model to produce trading orders. Fig. 6c depicts the correlation between
simulated and replay price trajectories. The introduction of control signals significantly enhances
the correlation scores (0.23 → 0.47), showcasing MarS’s effectiveness in generating controllable
market simulations. Fig. 6c shows the balance between control and interaction. Configurations
with control but no interaction achieve the highest correlation scores, while introducing interaction
reduces control precision (0.47 → 0.33). This inherent balance allows for more realistic interactions
in diverse applications. For control with prompt, MarS allows users to use natural language to
describe specific historical scenarios, then utilizes Large Language Models(LLMs) to guide the
generation through the fine-grained signal generation interface. The detailed results are provided
in Appendix E.


                                                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4       A PPLICATIONS
In Sec.2 and 3, we demonstrated the formulation of diverse financial tasks as a conditional trad-
ing order generation problem. Our experiments showed that MarS is Realistic, Controllable, and
Interactive, establishing it as a robust financial market simulator. This section explores potential
downstream applications of MarS, further validating its foundational role in financial market sim-
ulation. We present practical financial tasks to illustrate: a) MarS’s capability to solve financial
problems independently, and b) its utility as a simulation platform for other tasks. For a), we show-
case Forecast and Detection tasks, and for b), we provide examples of “What if” Analysis, and
Reinforcement Learning Environment.
Here, we highlight that, analogous to text generation vs. language modeling (Achiam et al., 2023;
Abdin et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024), and video generation vs. physical world decision making
(Liu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; 2023a), we have constructed a unified task interface through
conditional trading order generation for diverse financial downstream tasks with MarS. This inter-
face can transfer complex and diverse financial information into specific tasks. We compare current
methodologies with the new paradigm introduced by MarS to illustrate the “paradigm shift” across
various types of financial tasks, as shown in Table 1. Detailed introductions are provided in the
subsequent sections.

   Applications                    Current Methods                                 MarS
    Forecasting                  sequence extrapolation                  conditional generation
     Detection               Diff(marketnow , marketpast )         Diff(marketnow , simu-marketnow )
 “What if” Analysis     online experiments, empirical formula          offline data-driven pipeline
  RL Environment            finite data, fake P (st+1 |st , at )    infinite data, real P (st+1 |st , at )

Table 1: Summary of how MarS reshapes mainstream financial applications. Diff(·, ·) represents
the difference between two market states for anomaly detection. P (st+1 |st , at ) denotes the state
transition given the current state and action. Without an interactive environment, most existing
financial RL works cannot model the realistic impact of market state caused by agent actions. Further
details of the RL-Environment are in Sec.4.4.
4.1 F ORECASTING
Forecasting is crucial in many financial applications, with market trend forecasting being a prime
example. This task demands models that accurately capture and reflect market dynamics. Tradition-
ally, direct forecasting models are used. In this section, we assess the effectiveness of our market
simulation in predicting trends.
Following
     Pn Ntakaris      et  al. (2018), we define the price change from t to t + k minute as: l =
   1

   n    i=1 mi − m0 /m0 , where m0 is the mid-price at time t, n is the number of orders be-
tween t and t + k minutes, and mi is the mid-price after the ith order event. The price change is
categorized into three classesup, down, and flatbased on the value of l, ensuring similar probabili-
ties for each class over the training period. We compare our model with DeepLOB by Zhang et al.
(2019), a well-known baseline. Fig. 7a illustrates that LMM-based simulations significantly outper-
form DeepLOB, highlighting its superior market dynamics understanding. Additionally, the 1.02
billion-parameter model outperforms the 0.22 billion-parameter model, indicating that improved
validation loss in scaling curve (Fig. 3) correlates with enhanced forecasting performance.
It is noteworthy that all forecasting targets can be calculated using simulated trajectories from MarS,
whereas traditional direct forecasting models require separate training for each target. This under-
scores the significant advantage of simulation-based forecasting by MarS. For more discussion about
the comparison between DeepLOB and MarS/LMM, please refer to Appendix L.

4.2 D ETECTION
Detecting the changing state of market is crucial in financial tasks, especially in the regulation of
market abuse, e.g., insider trading (Meulbroek, 1992) and market manipulation (Putniņš, 2012). We
demonstrate how MarS could bring a new simulation-based paradigm to detection tasks by moni-
toring the similarity between simulated and real market patterns. Using real market manipulation
cases from CSRC1 , we evaluate the similarity of spread distributions through Distribution Similar-
    1
        http://www.csrc.gov.cn


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            DeepLOB                                                    6                          Fulfillment Rate: 0.983
                                               0.65                         Order Model (0.22B)


                         Prediction Accuracy
                                                                            Order Model (1.02B)                                        4


                                                                                                                     Price Advantage
                                               0.60                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                       0                           Fulfillment Rate: 0.991
                                               0.55                                                                                    2
                                               0.50                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                       6
                                                      1       2         3           4                   5                                  0   2000              4000      6000       8000
                                                              Number of Minutes                                                                                  Step
                 (a) Trend Prediction Accuracy                (b) Performance of the trading agent
Figure 7: Results of forecasting and RL-agent training tasks. For forecasting task, MarS executes 128 simula-
tions at each initial time point, and aggregate outcomes to determine the final predicted class. The ground truth
is obtained from historical replay. For RL-agent training, the x-axis represents the number of update batches,
and the y-axis is the price advantage over our best-configured TWAP agent (L1-P0.9), in basis points (BP).

ity2 , which serves as a key indicator of market liquidity. While MarS maintains high distribution
similarity (> 0.87) in normal periods, its simulation realism drops significantly during manipulation
periods, particularly showing a heavier tail and a peak around δ = 1000 (Fig. 8). These anomalies
can be viewed as signals likely corresponding to market manipulation, where manipulators sig-
nificantly impact liquidity. This suggests a promising direction for automated anomaly detection,
though comprehensive evaluation combining multiple metrics is necessary for robust conclusions.
Detailed analysis and experimental settings are provided in Appendix G.
                    Distribution Similarity: 0.870                                                 Distribution Similarity: 0.835                                 Distribution Similarity: 0.873
                  0.25
                                                          Source                                 0.20             Source                                        0.25                    Source
                  0.20                                     Replay                                                  Replay                                                                Replay
                                                           Simulation                            0.15              Simulation                                   0.20                     Simulation
    Probability


                                                                                   Probability


                                                                                                                                                  Probability
                  0.15
                                                                                                                                                                0.15
                  0.10                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                                0.10
                  0.05                                                                           0.05                                                           0.05
                  0.00                                                                           0.00                                                           0.00
                                     250              500 750 1000                                          500     1000                                                 200       400 600        800
                                                      Value                                                   Value                                                                Value
                    (a) Pre-manipulation                                                         (b) Manipulation period                                         (c) Post-manipulation
Figure 8: Spread distribution in different periods of market manipulation. The distribution similarity between
replay and simulation drops during the manipulation period (b), where a heavier tail and a noticeable peak
around δ = 1000 emerge, in contrast to the pre-manipulation (a) and post-manipulation (c) periods.

4.3 “W HAT I F ” A NALYSIS ON M ARKET I MPACT
One of the most important “What if” topics in finance is to analyze market impact, the change in
asset prices caused by trading activity. Due to complex mechanisms, most existing research in this
area relies heavily on strong assumptions and empirical formulas (Zarinelli et al., 2015; Almgren
et al., 2005; Gatheral, 2010; Gatheral et al., 2012; 2011), and is limited to costly and risky online
experiments. In this section, we take market impact as an example, showing how MarS can act as
a reliable and powerful platform and contribute to “what if” analysis. As we have validated the
reliability of synthetic market impact in Sec.3.2, we step to a more ambitious goal: leverage the
synthetic data to build data-driven pipeline to discover new laws to explain market impact and its
long-term dynamics. Due to the limited space, details of experiment settings, clarification, and more
results in this section are provided in Appendix K.
New factors beyond Square-Root-Law: To uncover new factors beyond Square-Root-Law influ-
encing market impact, we first employed symbolic regression (de Silva et al., 2020), using classic
volume and price factors before trading as the base dictionary. By applying genetic algorithms, we
sought to identify the most informative factors on synthetic market impact. The preliminary results
were reviewed and refined by domain experts, leading to the discovery of three new factors that
partially explain market impact: {resiliency, LOB pressure, LOB depth}. We show the relationship
between market impact and factor resiliency in Fig. 9a.
Dynamics of Long-Term Market Impact: The long-term market impact, also known as price im-
pact trajectory, typically manifests as a gradually decaying sequence of price fluctuations after a
trade. Traditional research relies on empirical formulas to model this dynamics (Gatheral et al.,
   2
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overlap_coefficient


                                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            0.010
                                        agent_type
                                               L1-P0.1
                            0.008              L5-P0.1                    -0.05 0.02 0.04 -0.02 -0.78 0.42 1.65    1


                                                              1/t
            market_impact
                                               L1-P0.9
                            0.006              L5-P0.9                                                             0


                                                              1/sqrt(t)
                                                                          -0.94 -0.07 0.02 -0.24 0.09 1.67 -0.95
                            0.004


                                                                               res ure
                                                                           ag eplay

                                                                              LO lout
                                                                                        pth



                                                                                           y
                                                                       )

                                                                            ag rice
                                                                   Q/V


                                                                                        nc
                                                                                     ss
                                                                                    de



                                                                                   ilie
                            0.002


                                                                                  d_p


                                                                                     ol
                                                               rt(


                                                                                 pre
                                                                                 t_r

                                                                                 t_r
                                                                                 B_
                                                              sq

                                                                          mi

                                                                              en

                                                                              en



                                                                              B_
                                                                           LO
                                    6      8
                       (a) New factor: Resiliency             (b) Interaction weights of learned ODE
                     Figure 9: Analysis of new market impact factor and long-term market impact.
2011; Donier et al., 2015a; Bacry et al., 2015), but could struggle to capture the full complexity of
real-world scenarios. To address this, we leverage generated market impact to develop a more accu-
rate, data-driven approach. Our method models the decay dynamics using an ordinary differential
equation (ODE), which integrates both potential influencing factors and decay functions:
                                                            m X n
                  dY (t)                                   X
                         = sum(W ◦ (X ⊗ F decay (t))) =            Wi,j Xi Fjdecay (t)            (2)
                    dt                                     i=1 j=1

where Y (t) is the long-term market impact, X ∈ Rm is the factor group, such √   as volume, price, etc.,
      decay             n
and F       (t) : t → R includes possible decay functions, e.g., [1/t, . . . , 1/ t]. X and F decay (t)
can be customized based on domain knowledge. ⊗ is the outer product, ◦ is the Hadamard product,
X T ⊗ F decay (t) is a matrix with size Rn×m , representing interactions among factors and decay
patterns, and W ∈ Rn×m is the learnable interaction weight. Fig. 9b shows the learned weights W ,
demonstrating the importance of interaction pairs of two decay functions and seven factors, which
can help to deepen our understanding of the long-term market impact.
4.4 R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING E NVIRONMENT
The MarS environment, being both realistic and interactive, is ideal for training reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) agents. This environment accurately reflects an agent’s impact, provides realistic rewards,
and facilitates training robust agents for the financial market. In this experiment, we aim to train a
trading agent from scratch using MarS. The trading agent’s goal is to purchase a large volume within
5 minutes, optimizing both fulfillment rate and price advantage.
The trading agent’s state includes features such as remaining time, remaining volume, LOB imbal-
ance, and the period’s stage (passive or aggressive). The agent’s actions are based on a configurable
TWAP strategy and the reward function is defined as follows:
                         Reward = α × FulfillmentRate + PriceAdvantage,                           (3)
where α = 1 when FulfillmentRate ≤ 0.95 and decreases to 0 as FulfillmentRate approaches 1.
Detailed settings of agent training can be found in Appendix H.
Fig. 7b shows the training performance of the trading agent. The agent’s performance improves
from -6 BP to 2˜6 BP during training. The observed fluctuations between 2˜6 BP are attributed to the
agent exploring various strategies between high and low fulfillment rates, resulting in corresponding
variations in price advantage based on the current reward setting. This demonstration highlights that
MarS is capable of training trading agents from scratch by leveraging its realistic and interactive
simulation capabilities.

5   R ELATED W ORK
We give a detailed and comprehensive discussion of related work on financial market simulation and
generative foundation models in Appendix A.

6   C ONCLUSION
We introduce MarS, an order-level, fine-grained realistic financial market simulation engine, pow-
ered by the generative foundation model, LMM. Our evaluation of LMM’s scaling law demonstrates
the potential for continuous improvement in future financial world models. We identify three essen-
tial characteristics of impactful market simulation: realism, controllability, and interactivity. We
present four representative tasks developed using MarS, underscoring its potential to catalyze a
paradigm shift across various financial applications.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues Xiao Yang and Xu Yang for contributing to our early proto-
type and their invaluable feedback and suggestions during our regular discussions. We also express
our sincere gratitude to Chengqi Dong for his meticulous analysis and exploration on market impact
data, which have significantly enhanced our understanding of market impact studies.

D ISCLAIMER
Users of the market simulation engine and the code should prepare their own agents which may be
included trained models built with users own data, independently assess and test the risks of the
model in a specify use scenario, ensure the responsible use of AI technology, including but limited
to developing and integrating risk mitigation measures, and comply with all applicable laws and
regulations. The market simulation engine does not provide financial opinions, nor is it designed to
replace the role of qualified financial professionals in formulating, assessing, and approving finance
products. The outputs of the market simulation engine do not reflect the opinions of Microsoft.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical re-
 port: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219,
 2024.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
John Affleck-Graves, Carolyn M Callahan, and Ramachandran Ramanan. Detecting abnormal bid-
  ask spread: a comparison of event study methods. Review of Quantitative Finance and Account-
  ing, 14:45–65, 2000.
Robert Almgren, Chee Thum, Emmanuel Hauptmann, and Hong Li. Direct estimation of equity
  market impact. risk, 2005.
Selim Amrouni, Aymeric Moulin, Jared Vann, Svitlana Vyetrenko, Tucker Balch, and Manuela
  Veloso. Abides-gym: gym environments for multi-agent discrete event simulation and applica-
  tion to financial markets. In Proceedings of the Second ACM International Conference on AI in
  Finance, pp. 1–9, 2021.
Emmanuel Bacry, Adrian Iuga, Matthieu Lasnier, and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Market impacts and
  the life cycle of investors orders, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.0217.
Emmanuel Bacry, Adrian Iuga, Matthieu Lasnier, and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Market impacts and
  the life cycle of investors orders. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550009, 2015.
Yutong Bai, Xinyang Geng, Karttikeya Mangalam, Amir Bar, Alan L Yuille, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra
  Malik, and Alexei A Efros. Sequential modeling enables scalable learning for large vision models.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22861–22872, 2024.
Gagan Bhatia, El Moatez Billah Nagoudi, Hasan Cavusoglu, and Muhammad Abdul-Mageed.
  Fintral: A family of gpt-4 level multimodal financial large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.10986, 2024.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
  Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
  generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.
Tom B Brown. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
David Byrd, Maria Hybinette, and Tucker Hybinette Balch. Abides: Towards high-fidelity multi-
  agent market simulation. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of
  Advanced Discrete Simulation, pp. 11–22, 2020.
Ricky T. Q. Chen.          torchdiffeq, 2018.       URL https://github.com/rtqichen/
  torchdiffeq.
Carl Chiarella, Giulia Iori, and Josep Perelló. The impact of heterogeneous trading rules on the limit
  order book and order flows. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33(3):525–537, 2009.
Andrea Coletta, Matteo Prata, Michele Conti, Emanuele Mercanti, Novella Bartolini, Aymeric
  Moulin, Svitlana Vyetrenko, and Tucker Balch. Towards realistic market simulations: a genera-
  tive adversarial networks approach. In Proceedings of the Second ACM International Conference
  on AI in Finance, pp. 1–9, 2021.

                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrea Coletta, Aymeric Moulin, Svitlana Vyetrenko, and Tucker Balch. Learning to simulate
  realistic limit order book markets from data as a world agent. In Proceedings of the third acm
  international conference on ai in finance, pp. 428–436, 2022.
Andrea Coletta, Joseph Jerome, Rahul Savani, and Svitlana Vyetrenko. Conditional generators for
  limit order book environments: Explainability, challenges, and robustness. In Proceedings of the
  Fourth ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 27–35, 2023.
Rama Cont. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative
  finance, 1(2):223, 2001.
Gianbiagio Curato, Jim Gatheral, and Fabrizio Lillo. Optimal execution with non-linear transient
  market impact. Quantitative Finance, 17(1):41–54, 2017.
Brian M de Silva, Kathleen Champion, Markus Quade, Jean-Christophe Loiseau, J Nathan Kutz, and
  Steven L Brunton. Pysindy: a python package for the sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics
  from data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08424, 2020.
Jonathan Donier, Julius Bonart, Iacopo Mastromatteo, and J-P Bouchaud. A fully consistent, mini-
  mal model for non-linear market impact. Quantitative finance, 15(7):1109–1121, 2015a.
Jonathan Donier, Julius Bonart, Iacopo Mastromatteo, and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. A fully consis-
  tent, minimal model for non-linear market impact, 2015b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1412.0141.
Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuur-
  mans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. In
  A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 9156–9172. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/1d5b9233ad716a43be5c0d3023cb82d0-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.
Jim Gatheral. No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact. Quantitative finance, 10(7):749–759, 2010.
Jim Gatheral, Alexander Schied, and Alla Slynko. Exponential resilience and decay of market
  impact. Econophysics of Order-driven Markets: Proceedings of Econophys-Kolkata V, pp. 225–
  236, 2011.
Jim Gatheral, Alexander Schied, and Alla Slynko. Transient linear price impact and fredholm inte-
  gral equations. Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and
  Financial Economics, 22(3):445–474, 2012.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Martin D Gould, Mason A Porter, Stacy Williams, Mark McDonald, Daniel J Fenn, and Sam D
 Howison. Limit order books. Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1709–1742, 2013.
Min Hou, Chang Xu, Yang Liu, Weiqing Liu, Jiang Bian, Le Wu, Zhi Li, Enhong Chen, and Tie-
 Yan Liu. Stock trend prediction with multi-granularity data: A contrastive learning approach with
 adaptive fusion. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information &
 Knowledge Management, pp. 700–709, 2021.
Quzhe Huang, Mingxu Tao, Chen Zhang, Zhenwei An, Cong Jiang, Zhibin Chen, Zirui Wu, and
  Yansong Feng. Lawyer llama technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15062, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hanna Hultin, Henrik Hult, Alexandre Proutiere, Samuel Samama, and Ala Tarighati. A generative
  model of a limit order book using recurrent neural networks. Quantitative Finance, 23(6):931–
  958, 2023.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Raehyun Kim, Chan Ho So, Minbyul Jeong, Sanghoon Lee, Jinkyu Kim, and Jaewoo Kang.
  Hats: A hierarchical graph attention network for stock movement prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1908.07999, 2019.
Junyi Li, Xintong Wang, Yaoyang Lin, Arunesh Sinha, and Michael Wellman. Generating realistic
  stock market order streams. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 727–734, 2020.
Zhuoyan Li, Hangxiao Zhu, Zhuoran Lu, and Ming Yin. Synthetic data generation with large lan-
  guage models for text classification: Potential and limitations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07849,
  2023.
Fabrizio Lillo, J. Doyne Farmer, and Rosario N. Mantegna. Master curve for price-impact function.
  Nature, 421(6919):129–130, 2003. doi: 10.1038/421129a. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1038/421129a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning, 2023a.
Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, Hongyang Yang, and Daochen Zha. Fingpt: Democratizing
  internet-scale data for financial large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10485, 2023b.
Yixin Liu, Kai Zhang, Yuan Li, Zhiling Yan, Chujie Gao, Ruoxi Chen, Zhengqing Yuan, Yue Huang,
  Hanchi Sun, Jianfeng Gao, et al. Sora: A review on background, technology, limitations, and
  opportunities of large vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17177, 2024.
I Loshchilov. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Lisa K Meulbroek. An empirical analysis of illegal insider trading. The Journal of Finance, 47(5):
  1661–1699, 1992.
Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessı̀, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
Michael Moor, Oishi Banerjee, Zahra Shakeri Hossein Abad, Harlan M Krumholz, Jure Leskovec,
 Eric J Topol, and Pranav Rajpurkar. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial intelli-
 gence. Nature, 616(7956):259–265, 2023.
Esteban Moro, Javier Vicente, Luis G. Moyano, Austin Gerig, J. Doyne Farmer, Gabriella Vaglica,
  Fabrizio Lillo, and Rosario N. Mantegna. Market impact and trading profile of hidden orders
  in stock markets. Physical Review E, 80(6), December 2009. ISSN 1550-2376. doi: 10.1103/
  physreve.80.066102. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.066102.
Ulrich A. Mller, Michel M. Dacorogna, Rakhal D. Dav, Richard B. Olsen, Olivier V. Pictet, and
  Jacob E. von Weizscker. Volatilities of different time resolutions analyzing the dynamics of mar-
  ket components. Journal of Empirical Finance, 4(2):213–239, 1997. ISSN 0927-5398. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-5398(97)00007-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0927539897000078. High Frequency Data in Finance,
  Part 1.
Peer Nagy, Sascha Frey, Silvia Sapora, Kang Li, Anisoara Calinescu, Stefan Zohren, and Jakob
  Foerster. Generative ai for end-to-end limit order book modelling: A token-level autoregressive
  generative model of message flow using a deep state space network. In Proceedings of the Fourth
  ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 91–99, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adamantios Ntakaris, Martin Magris, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, and Alexandros Iosi-
  fidis. Benchmark dataset for midprice forecasting of limit order book data with machine learn-
  ing methods. Journal of Forecasting, 37(8):852866, August 2018. ISSN 1099-131X. doi:
  10.1002/for.2543. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/for.2543.
Tālis J Putniņš. Market manipulation: A survey. Journal of economic surveys, 26(5):952–967, 2012.
Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Zero: Memory optimizations
  toward training trillion parameter models. In SC20: International Conference for High Perfor-
  mance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–16. IEEE, 2020.
Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Matthias W Seeger, Jan Gasthaus, Lorenzo Stella, Yuyang Wang, and
  Tim Januschowski. Deep state space models for time series forecasting. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ethan Ratliff-Crain, Colin M. Van Oort, James Bagrow, Matthew T. K. Koehler, and Brian F. Tivnan.
  Revisiting stylized facts for modern stock markets. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on
  Big Data (BigData), pp. 1814–1823, 2023. doi: 10.1109/BigData59044.2023.10386957.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bjrn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Vaibhav Sherkar and Rituparna Sen. Study of stylized facts in stock market data, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00753.
Namid R. Stillman, Rory Baggott, Justin Lyon, Jianfei Zhang, Dingqiu Zhu, Tao Chen, and Perukr-
  ishnen Vytelingum. Deep calibration of market simulations using neural density estimators and
  embedding networks, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.11913.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018.
Shuntaro Takahashi, Yu Chen, and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. Modeling financial time-series with gen-
  erative adversarial networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 527:121261,
  2019a. ISSN 0378-4371. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.121261. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437119307277.
Shuntaro Takahashi, Yu Chen, and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. Modeling financial time-series with gen-
  erative adversarial networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 527:121261,
  2019b.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Svitlana Vyetrenko, David Byrd, Nick Petosa, Mahmoud Mahfouz, Danial Dervovic, Manuela
  Veloso, and Tucker Balch. Get real: Realism metrics for robust limit order book market sim-
  ulations. In Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 1–8,
  2020.
Pedram Babaei William Todt, Ramtin Babaei. Fin-llama: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms for
  finance. https://github.com/Bavest/fin-llama, 2023.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-
  hanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. Bloomberggpt: A large language model
  for finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Xiao Zhang, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Alejandro Lopez-Lira, and
  Jimin Huang. Pixiu: A comprehensive benchmark, instruction dataset and large language model
  for finance. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Qianqian Xie, Dong Li, Mengxi Xiao, Zihao Jiang, Ruoyu Xiang, Xiao Zhang, Zhengyu Chen,
  Yueru He, Weiguang Han, Yuzhe Yang, et al. Open-finllms: Open multimodal large language
  models for financial applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11878, 2024b.
Mengjiao Yang, Yilun Du, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter
 Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06114, 2023a.
Sherry Yang, Jacob Walker, Jack Parker-Holder, Yilun Du, Jake Bruce, Andre Barreto, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Dale Schuurmans. Video as the new language for real-world decision making. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.17139, 2024.
Yi Yang, Yixuan Tang, and Kar Yan Tam. Investlm: A large language model for investment using
  financial domain instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13064, 2023b.
Elia Zarinelli, Michele Treccani, J Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo. Beyond the square root:
  Evidence for logarithmic dependence of market impact on size and participation rate. Market
  Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550004, 2015.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022.
Boyu Zhang, Hongyang Yang, and Xiao-Yang Liu. Instruct-fingpt: Financial sentiment analysis by
  instruction tuning of general-purpose large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12659,
  2023.
Wentao Zhang, Yilei Zhao, Shuo Sun, Jie Ying, Yonggang Xie, Zitao Song, Xinrun Wang, and
 Bo An. Reinforcement learning with maskable stock representation for portfolio management in
 customizable stock pools. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024, pp. 187–198,
 2024.
Xuanyu Zhang and Qing Yang. Xuanyuan 2.0: A large chinese financial chat model with hundreds
  of billions parameters. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM international conference on information
  and knowledge management, pp. 4435–4439, 2023.
Zihao Zhang, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen Roberts. Deeplob: Deep convolutional neural networks
  for limit order books. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(11):30013012, June 2019.
  ISSN 1941-0476. doi: 10.1109/tsp.2019.2907260. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
  TSP.2019.2907260.
Zheng Zhu, Xiaofeng Wang, Wangbo Zhao, Chen Min, Nianchen Deng, Min Dou, Yuqi Wang,
  Botian Shi, Kai Wang, Chi Zhang, et al. Is sora a world simulator? a comprehensive survey on
  general world models and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03520, 2024.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORKS


Financial Market Simulation. Before the recent surge in generative foundation models, researchers
in the finance domain had already recognized the immense potential of powerful market simulations.
Early approaches often utilized agent-based modeling, particularly multi-agent systems, to simulate
order-driven markets (Chiarella et al., 2009; Byrd et al., 2020; Amrouni et al., 2021).
With the advancements in deep learning technologies, several works have emerged that adopt the
world model paradigm to simulate Limit Order Book (LOB) markets (Takahashi et al., 2019b; Li
et al., 2020; Coletta et al., 2021; 2022; 2023). These studies primarily leveraged Generative Adver-
sarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020) to model the distribution of LOB time series.
Recently, some generators have begun incorporating market micro-structure data, such as those
presented in (Hultin et al., 2023; Nagy et al., 2023). Among these, Nagy et al. (2023) is most related
to our work, particularly regarding the order model. They employ an auto-regressive model based
on a Deep State Space Network (Rangapuram et al., 2018) to generate LOB and message flows.
However, their focus is primarily on LOB modeling. While they demonstrate some realistic stylized
facts of the generated sequences, they do not evaluate the model’s capability to address downstream
financial tasks.
Our work aims to push the boundaries of financial market simulation by introducing an innovative
approach that goes beyond generating realistic order flows. We introduce MarS, a pioneering fi-
nancial market simulation engine driven by the Large Market Model (LMM). Designed to meet the
specific demands of the financial sector, MarS excels in modeling the market impact of orders and
achieving high levels of controllability and realism. By framing various financial market tasks as
conditional trading order generation problems, we demonstrate MarS’s transformative potential and
practical applications in real-world financial markets.
Foundation Models. Foundation models are trained on broad datasets and can be adapted to a wide
range of downstream tasks. The term was popularized by the Stanford Institute (Bommasani et al.,
2021). The release of GPT-3 (Brown, 2020) showcased the powerful benefits of training large auto-
regressive language models (LLMs) on extensive corpora (Abdin et al., 2024; Achiam et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024).
In addition, numerous foundation models have emerged in the fields of computer vision (CV) and
multimodal areas (Rombach et al., 2021; Brooks et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023a). Recently, real-
world simulators and industry-specific large models have become popular research topics in this
field. Real-world simulators aim to achieve real-world simulation through the unified goal of video
generation, addressing various tasks in fields such as autonomous driving, robotics, and gaming
(Liu et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; 2023a). However, they primarily focus on
simulating the physical world. The order-driven financial market is an exemplary virtual world with
different operating principles. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to build a financial
world simulator.
Industry-specific large models primarily focus on fields such as biomedicine (Moor et al., 2023), law
(Huang et al., 2023), and finance. In the financial domain, most large models are Financial LLMs,
which either pre-train LLMs on financial corpora (Wu et al., 2023; Zhang & Yang, 2023) or fine-
tune them (Xie et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2023; William Todt, 2023; Yang et al., 2023b) to tackle
financial NLP tasks or multimodal tasks (Bhatia et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024b), including sentiment
analysis, text classification, and question answering.
Beyond text, there is an even larger and more information-rich corpus in the financial world: trading
orders. We propose a Large Market Model (LMM), which, for the first time, reveals the scaling law
on trading orders. We take the first step toward building a generative foundation model as a world
model for the financial market. We believe that, with MarS as the shovel, the extensive order-level
data undoubtedly represent a significant gold mine.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     O RDER S EQUENCE M ODELING .
B.1     I NTRODUCTION

The order model for financial markets shares similarities with the Language Model (LM) for text
in several respects. Both models strive to predict the subsequent event, whether it be a token in a
text corpus or a trade order in financial markets. Additionally, the datasets for both are typically
extensive, facilitating the training of robust models. Furthermore, data in both domains can be
generated autoregressively.
Nevertheless, substantial differences also exist between the two fields. Each order in the financial
market is associated with a complex set of market dynamics, including the Limit Order Book (LOB),
transactions, and potentially market news in natural language. Consequently, each order may be
influenced by a broader array of information beyond the order stream itself. It is therefore imperative
to encode this rich information compactly while preserving the autoregressive generation paradigm.
Moreover, the financial market operates on a rule-based order matching system, which processes
orders and generates new states, such as transactions and the updated LOB. This necessitates an
additional order matching step to obtain accurate market states.

                                                              Order Model

                                                        Ask                                 Ask                              Ask
                                                        Bid                                 Bid
                                      Volume


                                                                                                                             Bid
                                                                          Volume


                                                                                                           Volume
                                               54321 12345                         54321 12345                      54321 12345


                                                              Order Match Engine



                                                                Order Decoder


                                     𝐎𝐈𝐃𝐭+𝟏                        𝐎𝐈𝐃𝐭+𝟐                         𝐎𝐈𝐃𝐭+𝟑


                                                      Causal Transformer

                                               𝐭𝐤 𝐭                 𝐭𝐤 𝐭+𝟏                        𝐭𝐤 𝐭+𝟐


                                                              Order/LOB Tokenizer


                  Type
                                                        Ask                                 Ask                              Ask
                  Price                                 Bid                                 Bid
                                      Volume


                                                                                                                             Bid
                                                                          Volume


                                                                                                           Volume


                  Volume
                  Interval
                                               54321 12345                         54321 12345                      54321 12345



                                 𝐭𝐢𝐜𝐤 𝐭                             𝐭𝐢𝐜𝐤 𝐭+𝟏                           𝐭𝐢𝐜𝐤 𝐭+𝟐



Figure 10: The framework of the order model. The model is trained on the order stream and the cor-
responding LOB information. It is autoregressive, generating the next order based on the preceding
order and LOB information. The order matching step is employed to produce the new LOB state.


B.2     A PPROACH

B.2.1    T OKENIZATION
The objective of tokenization is to make it compact and efficient for encoding and decoding while
retaining the majority of useful information. To this end, we opt to encode each order and its
antecedent LOB as a single token. The LOB information functions analogously to an image in a
text, offering additional context for the order. The tokenization procedure for the ith order is as
follows:
               Embi = emb(orderi ) + linear proj(LOBivolumes ) + emb(LOBimid price )            (4)


                                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, orderi denotes an index indicating its position in the tuple (type, price, volume, interval), with
type being one of [“Ask”, “Bid”, “Cancel”]. Both price and volume are discretized into the range [0,
32), and interval into [0, 16). An index within the range [0, 49152) can uniquely identify a position
for the (type, price, volume, interval) tuple. LOBivolumes represents the 10-level volumes for asks
and bids in the LOB, also discretized into [0, 32). The LOBimid price is the mid-price of the LOB,
expressed as the number of price tick changes since market opening.
This formula computes the embedding for the ith token, which is a composite of the order, the linear
projection of the LOB volumes, and the embedding of the LOB mid-price.
While the input token includes LOB information, it is impractical and unnecessary to predict the
resultant LOB during the decoding process. Instead, the new LOB information can be derived using
a standard order matching algorithm, based on the preceding LOB and the newly generated order.
Given this consideration, we only output the order index and conduct an order matching during
simulation to obtain the subsequent accurate LOB state, as depicted in Fig. 10.

B.3   DATA AND M ODEL T RAINING

Our dataset encompasses the top 500 liquidity stocks in the Chinese stock market, covering the
period from 2017 to 2023 and comprising 16 billion order tokens. Our model architecture is based
on LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023), and AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov, 2017) is employed in all
experiments. We utilize fp16 precision with DeepSpeed ZERO stage 2 (Rajbhandari et al., 2020) to
optimize memory usage. The sequence length is set at 1024, with a batch size of 4096, equating to
4 million tokens per optimization step.
The inclusion of LOB information in the tokenization process is compared to determine its impact
on training performance. The evidence suggests that integrating the LOB information contributes to
an enhanced training curve, as shown in Fig. 11.


                                           7.8                             Tokenization Method
                                                                                 Order
                         Validation Loss


                                           7.6                                   Order + LOB

                                           7.4
                                           7.2
                                           7.0
                                                 0.0   0.5     1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5     3.0     3.5
                                                             Number of Training Tokens         1e10

Figure 11: Tokenization of the Order Model. A comparative analysis of the tokenization process
with and without the Limit Order Book (LOB) information. Incorporating precise LOB information
leads to an improved training curve.

Furthermore, we examine the effects of varying data and model sizes on training performance. The
data suggest that augmenting both data and model sizes correlates with improved outcomes, as
shown in Fig. 3a.


C     O RDER -BATCH S EQUENCE M ODELING

C.1   I NTRODUCTION

In this section, we introduce the order-batch model. Different from the order model, which focuses
on individual orders, the order-batch model concentrates on batches of orders to model structured
patterns of dynamic market behavior over time intervals. We innovatively organize batches of orders
into an RGB image format, which are then discretized into tokens for autoregressive training, aimed
at generating order-batch sequences.


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Figure 12: The intraday distribution of the average number of orders per minute.


As we know, financial markets are comprised of diverse participants, each with a unique set of
information and trading frequency. Even in the domain of high-frequency trading, there are nuances:
some traders pay close attention to each order, while others may focus on signals in fixed time
intervals to guide their trading decisions. Through data analysis, we can easily discern the traces
by the latter type of high-frequency traders. We counted the number of orders per minute for each
stock in our dataset introduced in Sec. B.3 to create a chart shown in Fig. 12. From this chart,
we can observe the following patterns: 1. The intraday order distribution is U-shaped. 2. There
is a significant increase in order number at the market open in the morning and after the lunch
break. 3. There are spikes in order numbers nearly every 10 minutes, suggesting a periodic pattern.
With the above observations, we find that the distribution of orders within fixed intervals adheres to
consistent patterns, and such patterns can also be captured by the model. So we attempt to model
these structured patterns of dynamic market behavior.
Besides, modeling batches of orders facilitates the generation of specific financial scenarios. If
generating a specified market scenario through prompts, there will be significant information asym-
metry between the brief text of prompts and the thousands of orders in an order flow. Imposing
such a signal directly onto each order through an order model is clearly intractable. Therefore, we
need an order-batch model to act as a bridge between the prompt and the order model to facilitate
this transition. The order-batch model corresponds to prompts by first generating minute-level order
batches, and then decoding them into an order flow in conjunction with the order model.


C.2   A PPROACH

As observed in Fig. 12, orders within fixed time intervals vary in numbers, and these variations are
significant at different time throughout the day. In light of this, learning representations from the
sequences after padding is clearly not a sensible approach. To better represent orders of variable
numbers, we creatively convert the orders into an RGB image format. This approach allows us not
only to “visualize” the changes in orders over a period of time but also to draw on the experience
of the image generation field, transforming the problem of order-batch generation into one of image
generation. We present the framework of the order-batch model in Fig. 13.


C.3   O RDER I MAGE C ONVERTER

Learning representations directly from order sequences at fixed time intervals is not an effective
and practical approach. On the one hand, stocks with different levels of liquidity have significantly
different order numbers. On the other hand, for the same stock, the distribution of order numbers
throughout the day can be extremely uneven (with a higher concentration during the opening and
closing periods, and sparser distribution during the mid-day). Within fixed time intervals (e.g.,
minute-level), we care more about the aggregate characteristics of the order sequence rather than the
details of individual orders. Under the assumption that the distribution of orders remains relatively
stable over short periods, we can disregard the precise arrival times of individual orders and structure
the order sequences in a cross-sectional view.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Order-batch Model
                                          Cancel                                        Cancel

                                    Bid                                           Bid
                              Ask                                           Ask


                                  Fine-tuned                                   Fine-tuned
                                Image Decoder                                Image Decoder

                              𝐭𝐤 𝟐𝐭           𝐭𝐤 𝟑𝐭     𝐭𝐤 𝟏𝐭$𝟏   𝐭𝐤 𝟐𝐭$𝟏         𝐭𝐤 𝟑𝐭$𝟏        𝐭𝐤 𝟏𝐭$𝟐


                                            Autoregressive Transformer

                               𝐭𝐤 𝟏𝐭          𝐭𝐤 𝟐𝐭      𝐭𝐤 𝐊𝐭    𝐭𝐤 𝟏𝐭$𝟏         𝐭𝐤 𝟐𝐭$𝟏        𝐭𝐤 𝐊𝐭$𝟏


                                  Fine-tuned                                   Fine-tuned
                                Image Encoder                                Image Encoder

                                          Cancel                                        Cancel

                                    Bid                                           Bid
                              Ask                                           Ask


                                                       Order Image
                                                        Converter



                                             𝐦𝐢𝐧𝐮𝐭𝐞𝐭                                    𝐦𝐢𝐧𝐮𝐭𝐞𝐭$𝟏


Figure 13: The framework of order-batch model. We employ a two-stage training approach: in
Stage 1, we leverage a fine-tuned image encoder to transform “order images” from minute-level
orders into tokens; in Stage 2, we train an autoregressive transformer model to learn the distribution
of the tokens. Order images are decoded from tokens via fine-tuned image decoder.


In practice, we convert one order-batch into an RGB image format. We refer to such images as “order
images” with shape [C, H, W ], as we demonstrated in Fig. 2. C denotes the categories of orders,
or the channels of an order image. W and H represent the width and height of the order image,
indicating the number of price and volume slots, respectively. The pixel value V of the order images
signifies the count of identical orders. In our work, we set C = 3, H = W = 32, V ∈ [0, 100].
The order image converter allows us not only to “depict” the changes in orders over a past period
but also to leverage experience from image generation. We can utilize a pre-trained visual encoder
to obtain an order-batch embedding.

C.3.1   S TAGE 1: O RDER I MAGE T OKENIZER

After converting the order-batch into an order image, we transform the problem of modelling order-
batches into an image generation problem. In this way, we can follow the successful path of Large
Vision Models (Bai et al., 2024), adopting a two-stage approach to generate intraday order-batch
sequences. The first stage of the image generation task typically involves using a pre-trained image
tokenizer to discretize individual images into a series of tokens.
Specifically, we leverage VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021) to accomplish the conversion of order im-
ages into discrete tokens, which learns a convolutional model consisting of an encoder and decoder,
allowing them to represent images using codes from a learned, discrete codebook. In particular, VQ-
GAN incorporates a discriminator and perceptual loss to ensure high quality during the compression


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


process. In our implementation, both the encoder and decoder utilized the original structure. Tech-
nical Details: We use a pre-trained VQGAN from LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), which was trained
on the LAION-400M database (Schuhmann et al., 2021). We adopt the configuration and weights
from one of the models in the LDM model zoo, with a down-sampling factor f = 4, vocabulary size
Z = 8192, and codebook dimension d = 3. This means that an RGB order image of size 32 × 32
with 3 channels is discretized into 8 × 8 = 64 tokens at this stage, each with a dimension of 3. In
practice, we find that the off-the-shelf model parameters did not represent order images well, so we
fine-tune it using order images to achieve a transition from natural images to order images.

C.3.2    S TAGE 2: O RDER - BATCH S EQUENCE M ODELLING
After the order image tokenizer converts individual order images into a sequence of discrete tokens,
we concatenate these tokens to form an order-batch sequence. In Stage 2, we train an autoregressive
transformer to learn the distribution of these tokens. It learns not only the distribution of tokens that
make up an order image but also the distribution of tokens between order images. Consequently, we
can generate intraday order-batch sequences.
Specifically, we employ a language model for next token prediction training. Technical Details: We
use LLaMA2(Touvron et al., 2023) as the implementation framework for our autoregressive trans-
former. We calculate the cross-entropy loss between prediction logits and labels. Implementation
Details: The token length for LLaMA2 is 4096, and we concatenate 16 order-batches to form an
order-batch sequence, with a total length of 16 × 64 = 1024, which is well below the length limit.

D     E NSEMBLE M ODEL
D.1     I NTRODUCTION

In sections above, we introduced the order model and order batch model, each with its advantages:

        • Order model: This model generates orders individually and is designed to reflect short-
          term market impacts rapidly. However, it lacks the ability to generate target scenarios over
          the long run.
        • Order-batch model: This model generates order channels (We do not distinguish ’order
          channels’ and ’order images’ in this paper), representing the macro behavior of the market,
          and can be used to follow control signals. However, it lacks the ability for interactive
          market simulation.

In this section, we introduce the ensemble model, which aims to balance interaction and controlla-
bility in market simulation.

D.2     A PPROACH

The order channels output by the order-batch model contain rich information about macro trends in
the financial market. It would be advantageous if the order model could utilize this information to
generate orders.
We propose using an ensemble model that takes the order logits and order channels as input and
generates the next order, as illustrated in Fig. 4
In our experiment, we found it challenging to train the ensemble model directly from order channels
predicted by the order-batch model. The reason is that the order channels predicted by the order-
batch model still exhibit high variance and may not accurately reflect replay order data. Realizing
this, during training, we use the order channels directly from replay data, which provides an accurate
description of the market trend. In this way, our ensemble model learns how to condition on the
order channels to generate the next order. During simulation, we use order channels predicted by
the order-batch model to generate orders, which provide more flexibility for controllable simulation.
The ensemble model is a simple cross-attention model that takes the order logits and real order
channels as input and generates the next order. The loss advantage over the order model is used as
the training metric. Fig. 14 shows the training process of the ensemble model. We can see that with


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this design, the ensemble model can improve its performance on order generation, demonstrating its
conditioning on order batch data.

                                                         Ensemble Model Training
                                          0.0


                         Loss Advantage
                                          0.2

                                          0.4

                                          0.6

                                          0.8
                                                0    1        2       3         4      5
                                                            # Training States              1e7

Figure 14: Training process of the ensemble model. The x-axis represents the number of training
samples, and the y-axis represents the loss advantage over the order model.


E    F INE -G RAINED S IGNAL G ENERATION I NTERFACE

We introduce an interface that maps vague descriptions to fine-grained control signals using LLM-
based historical market record retrieval. This guides our order batch model, ensuring simulations
reflect realistic market patterns and user-defined scenarios. The process involves three main steps:

       • Example Provision and Code Generation: Provide a sample of minute-level return his-
         tory to GPT-4o mini and prompt it to generate code that retrieves historical periods match-
         ing specified scenarios.
       • Scenario Filtering: Apply the generated code on the entire dataset to identify more minute-
         level trajectories for each scenario.
       • Scenario Generation: Use the identified minute-level trajectories to guide the generation
         of order batches according to principles outlined in Sec. 2.2, alongside the ensemble model
         for scenario generation.

The minute-level return history is stored in a CSV file, formatted as shown in Table 2:

           date          minute                 SZ000001       SZ000002         ...   SZ003043    SZ003816
        2023-01-03      09:31:00                -0.001520       0.001664        ...   -0.005541   0.000000
        2023-01-03      09:32:00                 0.000761       0.000000        ...   -0.004261   0.000000
            ...            ...                      ...            ...          ...       ...        ...
        2023-03-31      14:55:00                 0.000797       0.000657        ...    0.000164   0.000000
        2023-03-31      14:56:00                 0.000000      -0.000656        ...    0.000164   0.000000

                                   Table 2: Format of minute-level return history

We demonstrate market simulations for scenarios including “Sharp Drop”, “Sharp Rise”, and “Trend
Reversal”. Below, we detail the process when TEXT DES is “Sharp Drop”. First, a prompt is
provided to GPT-4o mini, which generates code to filter typical cases for the “Sharp Drop” scenario.
The prompt is shown in Table 3.
The code generated by GPT-4o mini, shown in Fig. 15, is then used to filter the “Sharp Drop”
scenario and applied to the entire dataset to identify additional cases.
Once the minute-level return trajectory is retrieved, it is used to guide the generation of order batches
along with the ensemble model for scenario generation. Detailed descriptions and visualizations of
the three scenarios are provided:


                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


import pandas as pd
import datetime

file_path = ’minute_return_data_all.csv’
data = pd.read_csv(file_path)

data[’datetime’] = pd.to_datetime(data[’date’] + ’ ’ + data[’minute’])
data.set_index(’datetime’, inplace=True)
data.drop(columns=[’date’, ’minute’], inplace=True)

# Apply groupby on each stock code to calculate rolling 25-minute sum
rolling_returns = data.groupby(data.index.date).rolling(25).sum().
                                     reset_index(level=0, drop=True)

# Filter based on sharp drops within the 25-minute windows (arbitrary
                                     threshold for "sharp drop")
threshold = -0.05 # Example threshold for a sharp drop over 25 minutes
sample_nums = 30
sharp_drops = rolling_returns[rolling_returns <= threshold].dropna(how=’
                                     all’)

# Reset the index to retain datetime information
sharp_drops = sharp_drops.reset_index()

# Extract 30 samples ensuring unique stock codes and trading dates, with
                                     varied start times
result = []
seen_dates = set()
seen_stocks = set()
seen_start_times = set()

for _, row in sharp_drops.iterrows():
    date = row[’datetime’].date()
    start_time = (row[’datetime’] - pd.Timedelta(minutes=24)).time()
    if start_time <= datetime.time(9, 30) or start_time <= datetime.time(
                                         13, 00) and start_time >
                                         datetime.time(11, 30):
        continue
    stock_drops = row.drop(labels=[’datetime’])

     if start_time not in seen_start_times:
         for stock_code, value in stock_drops.items():
             if not pd.isna(value) and date not in seen_dates and
                                                  stock_code not in
                                                  seen_stocks:
                 result.append({
                         ’Date’: date,
                         ’Start Time’: start_time,
                         ’End Time’: row[’datetime’].time(),
                         ’Stock Code’: stock_code,
                         ’25-Minute Return’: value
                     })
             seen_dates.add(date)
             seen_stocks.add(stock_code)
             seen_start_times.add(start_time)
             if len(result) >= sample_nums:
                 break
     if len(result) >= sample_nums:
         break

result_df = pd.DataFrame(result)


                 Figure 15: Generated code to filter out the “Sharp Drop” case


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Scenario: Sharp Drop
       Data Description: The input data is in CSV format with the following information.
              • The first column “date” represents the trading date.
              • The second column “minute” represents the time.
              • Each subsequent column corresponds to an instrument, with the value in each
                cell representing the return of the instrument for the given minute compared
                to the previous minute.

       Output Description: Please identify and provide 30 samples where a stock drops
       sharply within a 25-minute window. For each sample, include the following details:
             1. Date.
             2. Start and end minute of the 25-minute window.
             3. Stock code.
             4. The return of the 25-minute interval.

       Constraints on Output:
             1. Ensure that the 25-minute cases do not contain duplicate stock codes and
                datetimes. Each sample should be selected from different trading days.
             2. Ensure that each 25-minute interval is within the same trading day.
             3. You can use groupby(’datetime’).rolling(25).sum() to con-
                vert 1-minute-level returns to 25-minute-level returns.
             4. The begin and end times of the 25-minute interval should be within trading
                hours, e.g., 9:30 AM - 11:30 AM and 1 PM - 3 PM.


              Table 3: Prompt used for generating code in the “Sharp Drop” scenario


       • Sharp Drops: Simulating sharp declines to understand market reactions to negative events,
         assess risk management strategies, and evaluate market liquidity.
       • Sharp Rises: Simulating sharp increases to capture market behavior during positive events,
         allowing traders to test profit-taking strategies and analyze upward trends.
       • Trend Reversals: Simulating trend reversals to identify signals for entry or exit points and
         understand market reactions to trend shifts.

Fig. 16 displays real stock trends over the first 15 minutes and the stock trends generated by MarS
for the last 10 minutes of a 25-minute period for these scenarios. Each row represents a scenario
with three cases. The x-axis denotes time, and the y-axis indicates price. The blue line shows
the replay price trajectory, and the orange line depicts the simulated price trajectory with confidence
intervals. The results demonstrate MarS’s capability to effectively generate diverse market scenarios,
providing valuable insights for market participants.


F    C ONFIGURATIONS OF INPUT OVER DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS

As we abstract the mechanism of MarS as a conditional generation process in Sec.2, we summarize
their input conditions over different applications in Table 4, and provide more detailed clarification.
DES TEXT is a key component in the Conditional Trading Order Generation task, acting as a
control mechanism for the “Conditional” aspect. It is designed to describe different market states
under which we aim to generate trading orders. Examples of such market states include “sharp
price decline” or “high market volatility”. By incorporating DES TEXT, we enable the generation
process to adapt to varying market conditions, making the generated trading orders contextually
relevant. More details on DES TEXT are provided in Sec E.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  2023-02-28-002861-scenario1                   2023-06-05-002843-scenario1                  2023-05-09-002116-scenario1
          1.00                                                                                        1.00
                                     replay             1.000
                                     control
                                                        0.975                                         0.98
  Price


                                                Price


                                                                                              Price
          0.95
                                                        0.950                                         0.96

               5 0 5 0 5 0                                    5 0 5 0 5 0                                    5 0 5 0 5 0
           09:4 09:5 09:5 10:0 10:0 10:1                  13:5 14:0 14:0 14:1 14:1 14:2                  13:2 13:3 13:3 13:4 13:4 13:5
                2023-03-09-003039-scenario2                    2023-04-18-002719-scenario2                 2023-04-28-000620-scenario2
          1.10                                           1.15
                                                                                                      1.10
                                                         1.10
  Price


                                                 Price


                                                                                              Price
          1.05                                                                                        1.05
                                                         1.05
          1.00                                           1.00                                         1.00
                     0 5 0 5 0                                0 5 0 5 0 5                                        5 0 5 0 5
                 10:5 10:5 11:0 11:0 11:1                 10:1 10:1 10:2 10:2 10:3 10:3                      09:4 09:5 09:5 10:0 10:0
                 2023-02-06-000056-scenario3                   2023-01-30-000548-scenario3                    2023-01-10-000532-scenario3
                                                         1.10                                         1.10

          1.05
  Price


                                                 Price


                                                                                              Price
                                                         1.05                                         1.05

          1.00                                           1.00                                         1.00
                     5 0 5 0 5                                 5 0 5 0 5 0                                 0 5 0 5 0 5
                 10:0 10:1 10:1 10:2 10:2                  09:4 09:5 09:5 10:0 10:0 10:1               09:5 09:5 10:0 10:0 10:1 10:1

                                Figure 16: Case study for different scenario generation.


As for MTCH R, it represents a comprehensive set of order-matching rules, for example, the widely
used double auction mechanism. In real-world financial markets, the rules are specified and period-
ically adjusted by exchanges. In our simulation, these rules are governed by the Simulated Clearing
House. We formulated MTCH R as a hyperparameter to make the MarS framework adaptable to
different markets and conditions. In the proposed paper, we set it as a series of standard settings
of the default double auction. Expanding MTCH R would reveal the full extent of an exchanges
trading rules, encompassing many details that we have implemented in our code for the Simulated
Clearing House.
Moreover, while the double auction mechanism is a common paradigm for the majority of global
financial markets, there are variations in trading rules that differ across markets and periods. These
include aspects such as price fluctuation limits, circuit breakers, and the distinction between call and
continuous auction sessions. Our goal was to encapsulate these variations within the conditional
trading order generation framework, ensuring the approach remains broadly applicable and flexible
for different market scenarios.

                     Applications                                Input Conditions
                        Forecasting                        (x0 , . . . , xm ) , MTCH R
                          Detection                        (x0 , . . . , xm ) , MTCH R
                                                                          ∗
                 “What if” Analysis         [DES TEXT], (x0 , . . . , xm ) , [(ẋi+1 , . . . , ẋi+j )], MTCH R
                                                     ∗                    ∗
                   RL Environment            DES TEXT , (x0 , . . . , xm ) , (ẋi+1 , . . . , ẋi+j ) , MTCH R

Table 4: The summary of input conditions for order generation of different applications. ∗ means
the condition is optional and [ ] indicates that either of the specified conditions should be chosen.


G         DATA AND T ECHNICAL D ETAILS OF D ETECTION
Traditional methods for detecting market abuse are time-consuming and challenging, and abnormal
market states are often defined and detected based on the differences between current and historical


                                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table 5: Market manipulation samples collected from CSRC.

                    Instrument      Start time      End time      Case Number
                      300475        2017-03-07     2017-04-25      [2020]No.92
                      002321        2017-04-17     2018-01-30      [2024]No.44
                      300263        2017-05-17     2017-09-25      [2023]No.36
                      300658        2019-02-13     2019-05-10      [2023]No.25
                      300378        2019-03-14     2019-04-15     [2021]No.116
                      300119        2019-04-01     2019-05-22     [2021]No.116
                      002718        2020-06-04     2020-07-15      [2022]No.64
                      300313        2020-08-19     2020-08-24      [2021]No.76
                      002730        2020-12-15     2021-11-17      [2024]No.23
                      002713        2022-05-05     2022-05-18      [2024]No.47


market patterns. In this section, we take market manipulation as an example, and demonstrate how
MarS could bring a new simulation-based paradigm to detection task.
Table 5 shows the market manipulation samples collected from China Securities Regulatory Com-
mission (CSRC). The data encompass a total of 10 stocks, which have never been included in
datasets used for our model training. For each stock, we gathered samples from an equal number
of trading days before and after the manipulation occurred for comparison. There are 522 trading
days for each period. For each trading day, we conducted simulations every 25 minutes and then
calculated a series of stylized facts of the simulated and replay trajectories.
The spread is a key indicator of market liquidity, with a larger spread indicating poorer market
liquidity. At time t, the spread δ is defined as: δt = at − bt , where at is the best ask price and bt
is the best bid price. The spread distribution is widely used in detection tasks in finance (Affleck-
Graves et al., 2000; Vyetrenko et al., 2020).
As we evaluated MarS’s realism in a normal market in Sec. 3, a straightforward principle for
anomaly detection is that a quick drop in simulation realism metrics can serve as an initial indi-
cator of potential anomalies. To verify it, we collected several market manipulation cases from
CSRC3 . For each stock, we collected replay samples before, during and after the manipulation, and
conducted simulations by MarS simultaneously. Through calculating Distribution Similarity4 , we
evaluate the similarity of spread distributions, which serves as a key indicator of market liquidity.
This metric is used for comparison between replay and simulation.
Fig. 8 shows the varying spread distributions in different periods around manipulation. While MarS
generally performs well to simulate the normal market, its performance drops during the manipula-
tion, showing a heavier tail and a peak around δ = 1000. These anomalies can be viewed as sig-
nals likely corresponding to market manipulation, where manipulators significantly impact liquidity,
widening the spread. These anomalies, less frequent in normal markets, lead to a performance drop
in MarS, suggesting a new detection approach by monitoring such similarity drops. Consequently,
MarS can help investors avoid anomalies and assist financial institutions in maintaining market sta-
bility.
It is important to note that a single anomaly does not conclusively indicate market manipulation.
Instead, it serves as an initial signal that requires further holistic assessment, combining multiple
metrics to ensure robust conclusions. The example provided serves as a representative illustration of
our approach. Our primary objective in this experiment was to demonstrate the paradigm shift MarS
offers in market manipulation detection.


   3
       http://www.csrc.gov.cn
   4
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overlap_coefficient


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     C ONFIGURABLE TWAP S TRATEGY AND T RADING AGENT
H.1    I NTRODUCTION OF TWAP S TRATEGY

The Time-Weighted Average Price (TWAP) algorithm executes large trade volumes while minimiz-
ing market impact over a specified time frame. The TWAP strategy divides the total volume to
be traded into equal parts that are executed at regular intervals. This strategy consists of two dis-
tinct phases within each interval: the passive period and the aggressive period. Key configurations
include:
       • Maximum Passive Volume Ratio (PVR): During the passive period, the strategy places
         orders at the current bid price (bid1) with a volume determined by the PVR, aiming to fill
         orders without significantly altering the market price. A PVR of 0 indicates no passive
         volume during the passive period.
       • Aggressive Price (AP): If passive trading does not achieve the expected volume, the strat-
         egy enters an aggressive phase, placing additional orders at a more aggressive price (AP)
         to ensure the desired volume is executed. An AP of 0 means no aggressive order during the
         aggressive period.
By balancing passive and aggressive trading, the TWAP strategy aims to execute large orders effi-
ciently while controlling market impact.
Taking the buying task as an example, our configurable TWAP strategy is shown as below:

Algorithm 1 Configurable Time-Weighted Average Price (TWAP) Strategy for Buying.
Input: Total Volume V , Execution Time T = 5 minutes, Split Interval ∆t = 30 seconds, Maximum
       Passive Volume Ratio P V R, Aggressive Price AP (ask1, ask2, ..., ask5)
Output: Executed Orders
Initialization:
      1. Split the total volume V into 10 equal parts. Each part K = V /10 is expected to be
          executed in ∆t = 30 seconds.
For each interval i from 1 to 10:
      1. Passive Period: (First 25 seconds of each interval)
         (a) Cancel all non-bid1 volumes.
         (b) Submit a passive order with max volume P V R × V and price bid1.
         (c) Wait for 25 seconds.
      2. Aggressive Period: (Last 5 seconds of each interval)
         (a) If the current executed volume lags behind the expected volume:
               • Calculate the extra volume E to be executed.
               • If the available volume is insufficient, cancel existing passive orders as needed.
               • Submit an aggressive order with volume E and price AP .
         (b) Wait for 5 seconds.


H.2    T RAINING OF TWAP T RADING AGENT WITH RL

For the trading agent training with RL, we can adjust the maximum passive volume ratio (PVR)
from {0, 0.1, . . . , 1} and aggressive price (AP) in {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} for TWAP Strategy. We used a
batch size of 8192 and a learning rate of 4 × 10−5 . The trading model was updated using a simple
policy gradient algorithm (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The performance metric is the price advantage
over our best-configured TWAP agent (L1-P0.9), measured in basis points (BP, 1/10000).

I     E VALUATION OF C ONT ’ S 11 S TYLIZED FACTS
I.1   S UMMARY


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stylized facts are high-level summaries of empirical characteristics in financial markets, essential
for assessing the realism of market simulations. In this section, we evaluate the 11 stylized facts
identified by Cont (2001) using historical and simulated order sequences.
To rigorously test these facts, we simulated 11,591 trajectories for the top 500 liquid stocks in the
Chinese market, from March 9, 2023, to July 12, 2023. Table 6 compares the presence of these
facts in both historical and simulated data. The Historical column indicates observation in real data,
while the Simulated column assesses their presence in simulated data. Key findings include:
       • Nine out of the 11 stylized facts are observed in both historical and simulated data. How-
         ever, Gain/loss asymmetry and Leverage effect are not present, possibly reflecting modern
         market shifts. Studies such as Ratliff-Crain et al. (2023) note similar absences in the mod-
         ern U.S. Dow 30 stocks.
       • All 11 facts show similar patterns between simulated and historical sequences, showcasing
         the model’s strong capability in generating realistic order sequences.
Note that merely evaluating stylized facts does not fully assess financial market simulation quality.
Further evaluations for in-context generation, such as forecasting (Section 4.1) and quantitative
analysis of stylized facts (Section J), are crucial.

      Fact #    Fact Name                                             Historical    Simulated
        1       Absence of autocorrelations                               ×            ×
        2       Heavy tails                                               ×            ×
        3       Gain/loss asymmetry
        4       Aggregational Gaussianity                                  ×             ×
        5       Intermittency                                              ×             ×
        6       Volatility clustering                                      ×             ×
        7       Conditional heavy tails                                    ×             ×
        8       Slow decay of autocorrelation in absolute returns          ×             ×
        9       Leverage effect
       10       Volume/volatility correlation                              ×             ×
       11       Asymmetry in timescales                                    ×             ×

Table 6: Presence of Stylized Facts in Historical and Simulated Order Sequences. All facts are
present in both historical and simulated data, except for Gain/loss asymmetry and Leverage effect.


I.2   D EFINITIONS OF S TYLIZED FACTS

The 11 stylized facts from Cont (2001) are:

      1. Absence of autocorrelations: “(linear) autocorrelations of asset returns are often insignif-
         icant, except for very small intraday time scales (20 minutes) for which microstructure
         effects come into play.”
      2. Heavy tails: “the (unconditional) distribution of returns seems to display a power-law or
         Pareto-like tail, with a tail index which is finite, higher than two and less than five for
         most data sets studied. In particular this excludes stable laws with infinite variance and the
         normal distribution. However the precise form of the tails is difficult to determine.”
      3. Gain/loss asymmetry: “one observes large drawdowns in stock prices and stock index
         values but not equally large upward movements.”
      4. Aggregational Gaussianity: “as one increases the time scale t over which returns are
         calculated, their distribution looks more and more like a normal distribution. In particular,
         the shape of the distribution is not the same at different time scales.”
      5. Intermittency: “returns display, at any time scale, a high degree of variability. This is
         quantified by the presence of irregular bursts in time series of a wide variety of volatility
         estimators.”
      6. Volatility clustering: “different measures of volatility display a positive autocorrelation
         over several days, which quantifies the fact that high-volatility events tend to cluster in
         time.”


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       7. Conditional heavy tails: “even after correcting returns for volatility clustering (e.g. via
          GARCH-type models), the residual time series still exhibit heavy tails. However, the tails
          are less heavy than in the unconditional distribution of returns.”
       8. Slow decay of autocorrelation in absolute returns: “the autocorrelation function of ab-
          solute returns decays slowly as a function of the time lag, roughly as a power law with an
          exponent β ∈ [0.2, 0.4]. This is sometimes interpreted as a sign of long-range dependence.”
       9. Leverage effect: “most measures of volatility of an asset are negatively correlated with the
          returns of that asset.”
      10. Volume/volatility correlation: “trading volume is correlated with all measures of volatil-
          ity.”
      11. Asymmetry in time scales: “coarse-grained measures of volatility predict fine-scale
          volatility better than the other way round.”

I.3    E VALUATION OF S TYLIZED FACTS

This subsection summarizes the evaluation results for each stylized fact. Initially, each instrument is
assessed individually, and the results are then aggregated across all instruments to obtain an average.
A 95% confidence interval is shown for line plots, and quantiles are displayed for the box plot.
Absence of autocorrelations: We computed the autocorrelation of returns using both the last and
mean trade prices per minute. Fig. 17a and 17b illustrate that autocorrelations decay quickly after
one minute. Using the last trade price shows negative autocorrelation at lag 1 due to the “bid-ask
bounce”, as noted in Ratliff-Crain et al. (2023). Conversely, the mean trade price shows positive
autocorrelation, indicating short-term momentum. For consistency with Ratliff-Crain et al. (2023),
we use the last trade price for subsequent evaluations.

                 Auto-Correlation of Returns (Last)                  Auto-Correlation of Returns (Mean)
          0.00                                                0.20                            source
                                                                                              Replay
          0.05                                                0.15                            Simulation
                                                              0.10
   corr


                                                       corr


          0.10
                                        source                0.05
          0.15                           Replay
                                         Simulation           0.00
          0.20
                 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                lag                                                 lag

       (a) Absence of autocorrelations (Last Price)        (b) Absence of autocorrelations (Mean Price)
Figure 17: Absence of autocorrelations. (a) Using last trade price. (b) Using mean trade price. Both show
rapid decline after 1 minute.
Heavy tails and Aggregational Gaussianity: Kurtosis of returns for various intervals was calcu-
lated. Positive kurtosis indicates sharper peaks and heavier tails than normal distribution. Fig. 18a
shows that return distributions exhibit heavy tails. Distributions trend towards normality as intervals
extend from 1 to 20 minutes, aligning with Aggregational Gaussianity.
Conditional heavy tails: Volatility varies throughout the trading day, peaking at open and close.
After normalizing returns by minute-specific volatility and computing kurtosis, Fig. 18b shows that
normalized returns still exhibit heavy tails, though less pronounced than unconditional returns in
Fig. 18a, consistent with Conditional heavy tails.
Gain/loss asymmetry: Positive skewness of returns (Fig. 19a) suggests a deviation from Cont’s
original description.
Volatility clustering and Slow decay of autocorrelation in absolute returns: Autocorrelation of
absolute returns for different intervals shows slow decay in Fig. 19b. Considering absolute returns
as volatility Mller et al. (1997), this also illustrates volatility clustering.
Intermittency: Following Ratliff-Crain et al. (2023), extreme returns are defined as the 99% quan-
tile of absolute returns. The Fano factor, used to verify Poisson distribution adherence, exceeded


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Kurtosis of Returns                                          Kurtosis of Returns (Normalized)
              8                                 source                          8                                   source
                                                   Replay                                                                Replay
   kurtosis   6                                    Simulation                   6                                        Simulation


                                                                     kurtosis
              4                                                                 4

              2                                                                 2
                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20                                       0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                               Period (Minutes)                                                     Period (Minutes)

       (a) Heavy tails and Aggregational Gaussianity               (b) Conditional heavy tails
             Figure 18: (a) Heavy tails and Aggregational Gaussianity. (b) Conditional heavy tails.
                              Skewness of Returns                                    Auto-Correaltion of Absolute Returns
              0.5                              source                           0.15                          source
                                                   Replay                                                                Replay
              0.4                                  Simulation                                                            Simulation
                                                                                0.10
   skew


                                                                     corr
              0.3
              0.2                                                               0.05
              0.1
                    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20                                         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                Period (Minutes)                                                              lag

                         (a) Gain/loss asymmetry                                            (b) Volatility Clustering
Figure 19: (a) Gain/loss asymmetry: right-skewed distribution. (b) Volatility Clustering: slow decay of
absolute return autocorrelation.

1, indicating higher variability (Fig. 20a). This, along with heavy tails and volatility clustering,
confirms Intermittency.
Leverage effect: Return and lagged volatility correlation is slightly positive (Fig. 20b), contrary to
Cont’s description.

                     Fano Factor of "Burst" Returns                                    Correlation between Return and Lagged Volatility
                                               source                           0.04                                  source
                                                  Replay                                                               Replay
                                                  Simulation                                                           Simulation
                                                                                0.02
                                                                     corr


                                                                                0.00

      0              2         4        6          8           10                       0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                               fano_factor                                                                   lag

                            (a) Intermittency                                                  (b) Leverage effect
Figure 20: (a) Intermittency: Fano factor exceeds 1, indicating high variability. (b) Leverage effect: slightly
positive correlation between return and lagged volatility.
Volume/volatility correlation: Positive correlation between volume and lagged volatility is evident
(Fig. 21a).
Asymmetry in timescales: Following Takahashi et al. (2019a), we assessed correlation between
fine- and coarse-grained volatility across lags from -10 to 10 minutes. Fig. 21b shows significant
negative asymmetry, consistent with Takahashi et al. (2019a) and Mller et al. (1997).


                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                               Correlation between Coarse and Fine Grain Volatilities
                  Correlation between Volume and Lagged Volatility

           0.12
                                                            source                       0.4
                                                             Replay
           0.10                                              Simulation


                                                                                  Corr
                                                                                         0.2
    corr
           0.08
           0.06                                                                                         source
                                                                                         0.0            Replay
           0.04                                                                                         Simulation
                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20                                                    10 8 6 4 2 0 2 4 6 8 10
                                                 lag                                                                   lag

                  (a) Volume/volatility correlation                                              (b) Asymmetry in timescales
Figure 21: (a) Volume/volatility correlation: positive correlation. (b) Asymmetry in timescales: significant
negative asymmetry observed.

J    Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS OF S TYLIZED FACTS
To ensure experiments are comparable across runs, we quantify the stylized facts with two metrics:

           • Distribution Similarity: We calculate the overlap coefficient between the empirical distri-
             bution of the stylized fact and the simulated distribution. A higher score indicates a higher
             similarity in the overall distribution.
           • Accuracy (3-Class): We classify one stylized fact value into three classes based on re-
             play data: low, medium, and high, ensuring similar probabilities for each class over the
             simulation period. We then compare the stylized fact value between simulation and replay
             and calculate the accuracy of the classification. This metric measures our capability for
             in-context prediction.

                                                Distribution Similarity: 0.9331                 Accuracy(3-class): 0.5698
                                        0.025
                                                                                               20.3%       7.8%        4.9%
                                        0.020                                                  (1266)      (483)       (304)
                                                                                      0
                                                                                  Simulation
                          Probability


                                        0.015
                                                                                               9.8%       14.5%        9.7%
                                                                                               (612)      (901)        (605)
                                                                                      1


                                        0.010
                                                           Source
                                        0.005                Replay                            3.7%        7.1%        22.1%
                                                                                               (232)       (441)       (1378)
                                                                                      2


                                                             Simulation
                                        0.000
                                                   0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8                    0          1             2
                                                            Value                                         Replay

Figure 22: Stylized Fact Analysis: Buy Order Ratio. This metric assesses the proportion of buy to
buy+sell orders, capturing market dynamics that may influence the market trend.

We show an example for the Buy Order Ratio in Fig. 22: we calculate the buy order ratio for
each minute and then compare the distribution of the ratio between simulation and replay data. In
summary, we achieve a high score for the overall distribution similarity and an acceptable 3-class
classification considering the nuances of market dynamics. We list the full quantitative results in
Table 7.

K          M ARKET I MPACT
We give a detailed introduction and discussion on interactive simulation and market impact analysis.
Market Impact Generation: We generate market impact data using the TWAP strategy with four
different configurations: L1-P0.1, L1-P0.9, L5-P0.1, and L5-P0.9. The configuration name LX-PY
indicates that the aggressive price (AP) is askX and the maximum passive volume ratio (PVR) is


                                                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Name         Distribution Similarity                Accuracy (3-Class)
                                        Volatility               0.872                               0.516
                                          Spread                 0.970                               0.729
                             Mean Order Volume                   0.957                               0.776
                           Aggressive Order Ratio                0.920                               0.525
                                 Buy Order Ratio                 0.933                               0.570
                                    1-Min Return                 0.956                               0.684
                                    2-Min Return                 0.936                               0.625
                                    3-Min Return                 0.924                               0.583
                                    4-Min Return                 0.914                               0.548
                                    5-Min Return                 0.908                               0.531

Table 7: Summary of stylized facts. The prediction for 1 to 5-Min Return is aggregated from 128
rollouts for each initial time point.



Y. These agents are assigned to buy varying volumes over 5 minutes with different instructions
and starting times. We explored the market impact generated by these trading agents from 624k
simulated trading trajectories.
Further analysis of synthetic market impact: Beyond the verification of the Square-Root-Law,
we apply further analysis on synthetic market impact data. The key findings are summarized as
follows:

         • Agents with more aggressive configurations (L5-P0.1 and L5-P0.9) are expected to exhibit
           a larger market impact and achieve a higher fulfillment rate. Our simulations quantify their
           differences and confirm these assumptions, as illustrated in Fig. 23a.
         • The agents generate both short-term and long-term market impacts in MarS, as shown in
           Fig. 23b, similar to observations studied in previous empirical work (Bacry et al., 2014;
           Donier et al., 2015b). We also observe that agents with a larger passive volume ratio gen-
           erate less momentum after trading ends.


                        1.00
                                                                                     1.0
                        0.98
     Fulfillment Rate


                                                                                     0.8
                                                                     Market Impact


                        0.96   agent_type                                            0.6                    agent_type
                                    L1-P0.1                                          0.4                             L1-P0.1
                        0.94        L5-P0.1                                                                          L5-P0.1
                                    L1-P0.9                                          0.2                             L1-P0.9
                        0.92        L5-P0.9                                                                          L5-P0.9
                                                                                     0.0
                           0.0000 0.0005 0.0010 0.0015 0.0020                              0       5            10        15
                                              Q/V                                                      Minute
                 (a) Fulfillment rate of different agents         (b) Short-term and long-term market impact
                                 Figure 23: Further investigation of synthetic market impact
These findings confirm the reliability and convenience of using synthetic data from MarS, allowing
for in-depth exploration of market dynamics without the cost, risk, and time constraints associated
with real-world experiments.
New factors of Market Impact: The new three factors {resiliency, LOB pressure, LOB depth} are
defined as below:

     resiliency = 1 − log(|pre trading moment|)                                              (5)
  LOB pressure = (α ∗ agent trans ask + (1 − α) ∗ agent trans bid) ∗ LOB imblast-pre-min     (6)
    LOB depth = log(β ∗ LOB ask volumelast-pre-min + (1 − β) ∗ LOB bid volumelast-pre-min ), (7)


                                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where:
                                                  Plast-pre-min−1
                                                         t0            γt ∗ mid pricet
      pre trading moment =                                                                 −1                                                                         (8)
                                                               mid pricelast-pre-min
                                                                       Ptrade end
                                                                           t=trade start agent trans volumet
               agent trans ask = Ptrade end                                                                                                                           (9)
                                  t=trade start agent trans volumet + LOB ask volumelast-pre-min
                                                 Ptrade end
                                                    trade start agent trans volumet
               agent trans bid = Ptrade end                                                                                                                          (10)
                                  trade start agent trans volumet + LOB bid volumelast-pre-min
                                                  |LOB ask volumelast-pre-min − LOB bid volumelast-pre-min |
         LOB imblast-pre-min =                                                                               ,                                                       (11)
                                                   LOB ask volumelast-pre-min + LOB bid volumelast-pre-min
and α, β, {γt } are the hyper-parameters with constrain: α ∈ (0, 1), β ∈ (0, 1), γt ∈ (0, 1) for any
       Plast-pre-min−1
t, and t0              γt = 1. last-pre-min means the last minute before the agent starts to trade.
LOB ask volume and LOB bid volume are the ask and bid volumes of LOB. agent trans volumet is
the transaction volume of the agent at time t. mid pricet is the mid-price at time t.
The relationship between market impact and factors LOB pressure, and LOB depth is shown in
Fig. 24.


                          0.010     agent_type                                                                                                         agent_type
                                          L1-P0.1                                                                0.005                                     L1-P0.1
                          0.008           L5-P0.1                                                                                                          L5-P0.1
          market_impact


                                                                                                 market_impact


                                          L1-P0.9                                                                0.004                                     L1-P0.9
                          0.006           L5-P0.9                                                                                                          L5-P0.9
                          0.004                                                                                  0.003

                          0.002                                                                                  0.002

                                  0.0       0.2           0.4             0.6                                                               8   10        12
                                   (a) LOB pressure                                (b) LOB depth
                                           Figure 24: Effects of new factors on market impact.
We also investigate the correlation between three new factors and the Square-Root-Law factors:
sqrt(Q/V ) and volatility σ in Fig. 25. It is clear that the correlation scores of those factors are
relatively low.

                                                                                                                                                1.0
                                           sqrt(Q/V)           1.0         -0.0         -0.0                      0.1          0.4
                                                                                                                                                0.8
                                            volatility        -0.0          1.0         -0.0                      0.0          0.0              0.6

                                           resiliency         -0.0         -0.0          1.0                      0.1         -0.1              0.4

                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                          LOB_depth            0.1          0.0          0.1                      1.0         -0.2
                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                        LOB_pressure           0.4          0.0         -0.1                     -0.2          1.0
                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                             LOB_pressure
                                                                                        resiliency
                                                              sqrt(Q/V)


                                                                           volatility


                                                                                                                 LOB_depth


         Figure 25: Correlation matrix of Square-Root-Law factors and three new factors.
Dynamics of long-term Market Impact: For equation 14 used to model the long-term
market impact, we set two decay functions: F decay (t) = [ 1t , √1t ] and seven factors:
 q
{ VQ , mid-price, agent replay, agent rollout, LOB depth, LOB pressure, resiliency}. mid-price is


                                                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the mid-price before trading. agent rollout and agent replay are defined as below:
                                           Ptrade end
                                              trade start agent trans volumet
                        agent rollout =                                                                       (12)
                                         total transaction volume of rollout
                                           Ptrade end
                                              trade start agent trans volumet
                        agent replay =                                                                        (13)
                                         total transaction volume of replay

The training process is based on the synthetic long-term market impact generated by the TWAP
agent (L1 − P 0.1). We use torch-diff Chen (2018) to optimize W , where the objective is set as the
MSE reconstruction loss along with the L1 regularization.
After training, we illustrate the auto-correlation of the synthetic market impact decay, the trajectories
predicted by the learned ODE, and the base ODE from empirical formulas (Gatheral et al., 2011;
Curato et al., 2017) in Fig. 26.

                                               1.000
                                               0.975
                                               0.950
                            Auto-Correlation


                                               0.925
                                               0.900
                                               0.875
                                                           Learned ODE
                                               0.850       Base ODE
                                               0.825       Ground Truth
                                                       1     2        3       4     5
                                                                 Lag(minutes)

        Figure 26: Auto-correlation of long-term market impact with learned ODE and base-ODE.

For the base-ODE used as a baseline in Fig. 26, we use the basic form of the Square-Root Process
(Gatheral, 2010), which is defined as:
                                                 r
                                       dY (t)       Q 1
                                              =σ       √                                    (14)
                                        dt          V t
where σ is the volatility, Q is the trading volume, and V is the total market volume.

L    C OMPARISON OF D EEP LOB AND M AR S/LMM IN F ORECASTING TASKS

          Aspect                   DeepLOB                                                 MarS/LMM
 Applicable Tasks          Task specific forecasting.                         General forecasting through simulation.
  Input Features         Limit order book (LOB) data.                            High-frequency order-level data.
           Model       Small, handcrafted, and not scalable                       Large-scale foundation model.
       Prediction         Single-step or fixed-length.                           Multi-step, sequence generation.

              Table 8: Comparison of DeepLOB and MarS/LMM in forecasting tasks.

Table 8 compares DeepLOB and MarS/LMM in forecasting tasks, emphasizing their distinct ap-
proaches and capabilities. DeepLOB is designed for specific forecasting tasks, trained on fixed step
forecasting, and uses Limit Order Book (LOB) data as input. It features a relatively small, hand-
crafted model for LOB forecasting, which is hard to scale up, and provides single-step predictions
for fixed-length forecasting, such as price changes after 100 orders or 1 minute. In contrast, MarS is
designed for market simulation, capable of performing general forecasting through simulation, and
uses fine-grained order sequence data as input. It is powered by large foundation models trained on
large-scale order sequence data and offers simulation with multi-step generation.


                                                                 35
