Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK L ANGUAGE M ODELS
F OR PROTEIN DESIGN
 Aya Abdelsalam Ismail1,2 Tuomas Oikarinen3 Amy Wang1,2 Julius Adebayo4
 Samuel Stanton1,2 Héctor Corrada Bravo1 Kyunghyun Cho1,2,5,6 Nathan C. Frey1,2
 1
   Genentech 2 Prescient Design 3 University of California San Diego 4 Guide Labs
 5
   Department of Computer Science, New York University
 6
   Center for Data Science, New York University



                                           A BSTRACT
         We introduce Concept Bottleneck Protein Language Models (CB-pLM), a gen-
         erative masked language model with a layer where each neuron corresponds to
         an interpretable concept. Our architecture offers three key benefits: i) Control:
         We can intervene on concept values to precisely control the properties of gener-
         ated proteins, achieving a 3× larger change in desired concept values compared
         to baselines. ii) Interpretability: A linear mapping between concept values and
         predicted tokens allows transparent analysis of the model’s decision-making pro-
         cess. iii) Debugging: This transparency facilitates easy debugging of trained mod-
         els. Our models achieve pre-training perplexity and downstream task performance
         comparable to traditional masked protein language models, demonstrating that in-
         terpretability does not compromise performance. While adaptable to any language
         model, we focus on masked protein language models due to their importance in
         drug discovery and the ability to validate our model’s capabilities through real-
         world experiments and expert knowledge. We scale our CB-pLM from 24 mil-
         lion to 3 billion parameters, making them the largest Concept Bottleneck Models
         trained and the first capable of generative language modeling.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Protein Language Models (pLMs) have emerged as a prominent framework for protein repre-
sentation learning, encapsulating millions of years of protein evolution (Hayes et al., 2024).
These models have demonstrated exceptional performance on intricate tasks such as predicting
protein structure and function (Lin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Elnaggar et al., 2022; Xu et al.,
2023). Furthermore, they have opened new frontiers in diverse and critical applications, including
healthcare and drug discovery (Hie et al., 2024; Hayes et al., 2024). Despite their impressive
capabilities, controlling, interpreting, and debugging pLMs remains challenging due to the opaque
nature of transformers (Vaswani, 2017).
Recently, some pLMs have supported conditional generation by adding various protein input repre-
sentations, functions, and properties as tags (which can be viewed as concepts) and predicting them
during training (Madani et al., 2020; Hayes et al., 2024; Ruffolo et al., 2024). However, these mod-
els can selectively rely on or ignore different aspects of the input. Even if these models offer some
form of control, there is no effective way to interpret or debug them. Domain experts might want to
know which concept the model depends on the most to generate the amino acid “E”, which amino
acids are correlated with enzymatic activity, or answer counterfactuals like if we want to decrease
hydrophobicity, which amino acid should we replace “E” with, which is not possible with existing
models. Debugging language models is notoriously difficult, and it is often unclear what a model
has learned or when it will fail. These limitations lead to distrust among domain experts, as humans
tend to not trust what they do not understand.
Our work relies on the fact that neural networks do not have to be black boxes; since we construct
and train these networks, we can design and align them according to our needs. This is a unique
advantage of building models from scratch, with control, interpretability, and debugging in mind
from the outset (Frey et al., 2024; Adebayo et al., 2023). To achieve explainability and alignment, it


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 1: Changing protein structure using Concept Bottleneck Protein Language Model.

is essential to use intermediate representations based on well-understood concepts. To this end, we
present Concept Bottleneck Language Models, a novel architecture for large language models that
relies on human-understandable concepts via a concept bottleneck layer and auxiliary loss terms.
This architecture enables concept-controllable generation and explanations, compelling the model
to align with human-understandable concepts and providing the means to debug the model and
understand its limitations. Our approach builds on the foundation of concept bottleneck generative
models (CBGMs) (Ismail et al., 2023).
In this paper, we focus on protein design, a domain where control (Gruver et al., 2024) and in-
terpretability (Adebayo et al., 2023) are critically needed. Protein design benefits from a set of
well-defined biophysical and bioinformatics properties that domain experts understand and wish to
control. We introduce Concept Bottleneck Protein Language Model (CB-pLM). We summarize our
contributions as follows:

• We propose a novel architecture, training, and intervention schemes for large language models
  that incorporate human-understandable concepts. This results in a controllable, interpretable,
  and debuggable LLM by design. We focus on masked protein language models, given their
  critical role in high-stakes applications such as drug development, where the need for control and
  interpretability is paramount. We train masked protein language models with 24M, 150M, 650M,
  and 3B parameters using the proposed CB-pLM architecture with over 700 concepts. We do not
  observe a significant increase in perplexity compared to unconstrained models.
• We compare CB-pLM to various conditional pLMs of the same size, all trained on the same
  dataset, across more than 80 single and multi-property control in silico experiments. Our model
  demonstrates 3× better control in terms of change in concept magnitude and a 16% improvement
  in control accuracy compared to other architectures. Additionally, we benchmark CB-pLM
  against state-of-the-art (SOTA) protein design models explicitly trained to optimize a single
  concept. Remarkably, our general-purpose CB-pLM, trained to learn over 700 concepts, delivers
  results comparable to SOTA models, while maintaining the naturalness of the protein.
• We demonstrate how CB-pLM allows domain experts to assess what the model has learned, i.e.,
  interpretability, and identify and correct any unwanted behavior in the model, i.e., debuggability
  by simply visualizing the weights from the model’s decoder layer.

2   C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK L ANGUAGE M ODEL
We aim to create a language model that we can easily control, interpret, and debug. To achieve this,
we modify the standard masked language model architecture by adding a concept bottleneck layer to
explicitly incorporate human-understandable concepts into the language model—termed a concept-
bottleneck (masked) language model (CB-LM). The concept layer can then be used to control,
interpret, and debug the model. This section discusses the proposed language model architecture,
loss functions, training and intervention procedure.

Setup Each sequence x is represented with a set of tokens, i.e., x = [x0 , ..., xs ], where s is
the maximum sequence length. Each sequence starts with the CLS token i.e. x0 = [CLS]
followed by a sequence of amino acids ending with [EOS] as well as padding tokens for sequences
below maximum length. Additionally, each sequence is annotated with a set of global predefined
human-understandable concepts c = [c0 , ..., ck ] where k is the number of concepts. Taken together,
this results in a training dataset consisting of token-concept pairs {(x, c)i }ni=1 where n is the
number of samples.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   A RCHITECTURE

The overall architecture is shown in Figure
2. We start with a standard BERT-based
masked language model (MLM) (Devlin
et al., 2018), which is commonly used in
many protein language models (Rives et al.,
2019; Lin et al., 2022; Hayes et al., 2024;
Frey et al., 2024). A mask token [MASK]
is randomly applied to a subset of tokens in
the sequence x resulting in a masked version
of the sequence. After masking, x is passed
into a multi-head self-attention transformer
encoder, and the output of the encoder is         Figure 2: Concept Bottleneck Language Model
denoted as H = TransformerEncoder(x),
where H = [h0 , . . . , hs ]. We introduce three main architectural changes in CB-LM: (a) concept
bottleneck module (CB-module), (b) orthogonality network, and (c) linear decoder.
Concept bottleneck module After x passes through the encoder, the hidden representation of the
classification [CLS] token, h0 , which serves as an aggregate representation of the sequence, is
passed to the CB-module shown in Figure 2b. The concept network (Koh et al., 2020) learns a
function g that maps the input sequence into concept predictions ĉ = g(h0 ). Each concept is also
represented with a learnable embedding e. The final representation of concept i is zi = cˆi × ei . The
output of the CB-module, z = [z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ], is referred to as the known embedding, as we know
exactly which concept each neuron in the embedding corresponds to.
Orthogonality network This network aims to produce a token representation devoid of any concept
information, which we refer to as the unknown token embedding e     h. This is achieved by enforcing
an orthogonality loss, as described in Section 2.2, between its output and the known concepts.
Linear decoder The known and unknown embedding are concatenated and passed into a single lin-
ear layer followed by a softmax function, i.e., x̂M = softmax(W dec · [z, ehM ]), where xM represents
a masked token [MASK]. We use a linear layer as the decoder for interpretability and debugging
purposes. A linear layer allows us to calculate the contribution of each concept to the final prediction
by simply multiplying the concept activation value with its weights. This gives us an interpretable
answer to questions such as Which concept does the model depend on the most to generate the amino
acid“E”? or counterfactual questions like if we intervened on the concept strength of hydrophobic-
ity, which amino acid would the decoder output?. Debugging neural networks is notoriously diffi-
cult; however, our setup simplifies this process. Since we have prior knowledge of how challenging
a concept is to learn, we can identify and fix bugs by inspecting the concept weights.
Examining the weight matrix W dec can (a) help us understand the correlation between different
concepts, aiding in the detection of any spurious correlations learned by the model, (b) elucidate the
correlation between concepts and tokens, answering questions like which amino acids are correlated
with enzymatic activity?, and (c) identify concepts that we can control and those we cannot, i.e., if
the weight for a concept is small, then the model will not be able to control that particular concept.

2.2   L OSS F UNCTIONS AND T RAINING

Loss functions Following CBGMs (Ismail et al., 2023), concept bottleneck language models are
trained with three losses: a standard masked language modeling loss LMLM , concept loss LConcept
and an orthogonality loss Lorth . The final loss is given by Ltotal = LMLM + αLConcept + βLorth ,
where α and β are hyperparameters.
                                                                  1 P
• Generative masked language modeling loss: LMLM = −Ex,m m              i∈m log P (xi | x\m ) , where
   m is the set of positions of the randomly masked tokens, and the model is trained to predict the
   identity of the masked tokens.
• Concept loss: Given the general-purpose nature of large language models, they are expected to
   handle thousands of concepts with categorical or real values. Often, samples lack values for most
   concepts. To address this, we normalize all real-valued concepts to [0, 1] and apply mean square


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                             Pk
  error loss on the entire concept embedding: LConcept = k1 i=1 (ci − ĉi )2 . Missing values are
  replaced with default values, and their effect is removed from the loss function by considering
  only non-missing concepts, achieved by masking the errors before backpropagation.
• Orthogonality loss: Similar to Ismail et al. (2023), we encourage the known and unknown em-
  beddings to encode different information by applying an orthogonality constraint (Ranasinghe
  et al., 2021), minimizing the cosine similarity between them. This loss encourages, but does not
  guarantee, disentanglement.

Training CBM: We used independent training for the CB-layer (Koh et al., 2020) to reduce con-
cept leakage (Mahinpei et al., 2021). Token regularization: Feature attribution is needed for coordi-
nate selection during intervention, as discussed in section 2.3. To ensure attribution is reliable, we
followed Adebayo et al. (2023)’s recommendation and added Gaussian noise to the token embedding
during training. Additional details are available in Appendix A.2.

2.3   C OORDINATE SELECTION AND I NTERVENTIONS

CB-LM enables concept-level test-time interventions, allowing for global sequence control while
maintaining token-level predictions. During training, tokens are randomly masked and predicted,
which is not ideal for interventions. Instead, we wish to identify tokens that most significantly
affect a concept and intervene on those (Gruver et al., 2024; Adebayo et al., 2023). For example, to
increase the Aromaticity of a protein, we target amino acids that decrease Aromaticity. This process
is called coordinate selection.
A straightforward method to measure a token’s effect on a concept is occlusion, where each token
is replaced with a reference value (e.g., [MASK]) one at a time to observe changes in the predicted
concept. While effective, this method is slow for large-scale applications. Instead, we use a gradient-
based approximation of occlusion, requiring only a single forward pass. We propose using a single
step of integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), which can be seen as a first-order Taylor
approximation of occlusion. Since our inputs are discrete, we calculate gradients with respect to the
learned token embeddings and sum over the embedding dimension. Let T ∈ Rv×d be the learned
token embeddings, where v is the vocabulary size and d is the transformer hidden dimension. Then,
let fT (x) = [Tx0 , Tx1 , . . . , Txs ]. The attribution A for token t of input x on concept i is:
                           A(x, i, t) = (Txt − T[MASK] )⊤ ∇Txt ĉi (fT (x)),
where T[MASK] is the embedding for the mask token and ĉi (fT (x)) is the concept value predicted by
our CB-Layer for concept i.
Informally, A(x, i, t) can be seen as quantifying how the choice of token xt influences ci in context
of the other tokens x−t . If in the training dataset xt co-occurs with below average values of ci
when combined with x−t , then we expect A(x, i, t) to be negative. Similarly if xt co-occurs with
above average values of ci in the context x−t then we expect A(x, i, t) to be positive. Hence if
we want to intervene to increase the concept value we greedily choose the top-k coordinates sorted
by A in descending order, and if we want to decrease the concept value we greedily choose the
bottom-k coordinates. In Appendix D.1, we show that this attribution method closely matches the
performance of occlusion and improves control effectiveness by 2× over random masking.

3     P ROTEIN R EPRESENTATION L EARNING AND D ESIGN WITH C ONDITIONAL
      L ANGUAGE MODELS
One can view a concept bottleneck language model as a special type of conditional language model.
Current conditional large protein language models involve appending conditioning [Tags] to the
sequence along with the input (Madani et al., 2020; Shuai et al., 2021; Hayes et al., 2024) and
then using these tags to steer the output. To compare the effect of different architectures on protein
representation learning, and design, we train three types of conditional models on the same training
dataset (sequences and concepts) with comparable sizes.

• Conditional Protein Language Model (C-pLM): These are traditional conditional models, the
  input to the model is sequences and concepts (which can be viewed as [Tags]); the model is
  trained to minimize the generative masked language modeling loss, i.e., Ltotal = LMLM .


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Conditional Protein Language Model with Classifier (CC-pLM): This class of models has an
  extra regression head used to predict the concepts (Hayes et al., 2024). The input to the model
  are sequences and concepts; the model is trained to minimize the generative masked language
  modeling loss and concept loss, i.e., Ltotal = LMLM + αLConcept .
• Concept Bottleneck Protein Language Model (CB-pLM) (Ours): A family of protein language
  models with the architecture shown in Figure 2, Ltotal = LMLM + αLConcept + βLorth .

CB-pLM is designed to be controllable, interpretable, and debuggable. Other conditional language
models offer control through [Tags]; however, the model can ignore these tags during genera-
tion and fail to learn the underlying biophysical concepts for proteins. CB-pLM learns concepts as
an intermediate step and includes a loss to encourage disentanglement between concepts and un-
known embeddings. Since these concepts are inside the model, this forces the model to learn and
use these concepts for predictions, leading to better control (Section 4). Furthermore, CB-pLM
provides mechanisms for interpretation and debugging (Section 5), which are not available in other
conditional models.
Training Data We combined sequences from UniRef50 (Suzek et al., 2015) and SWISS-PROT
(Bairoch & Apweiler, 2000), removing duplicates. Annotations such as protein clusters, organ-
isms, taxons, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions were used as con-
cept annotations. Biopython (Cock et al., 2009) was used to extract biophysical and bioinformatics
sequence-level concepts. Overall, all models support 718 concepts; details are in Appendix B.1.
Architecture and Training Following Frey et al. (2024), we optimized the architecture and training
for efficiency. We removed biases in attention blocks and intermediate layers, increased the effective
batch size, used gradient accumulation, and set the masking rate to 25%. We employed the AdamW,
mixed precision training, and gradient clipping for stability. More details are in Appendix B.2.

3.1   M ODEL QUALITY

Model quality is evaluated using perplexity,
which measures how well the model predicts a        Models Tags Cond. 24M 150M 650M 3B
token based on its sequence. Perplexity ranges
                                                    LBSTER    No    No    8.20   2.97    -      -
from 1 (indicating a perfect model) to the vo-       ESM2     No    No      -    4.84  3.41   3.01
cabulary size (33 for the pLMs vocabulary (Lin       C-pLM    Yes   Yes   4.57   2.62    -      -
et al., 2022)), with higher values indicating       CC-pLM    Yes   Yes   4.07   2.74    -      -
more random predictions. To assess perfor-          CB-pLM    No    Yes   4.29   3.20  2.48   2.50
mance, we used 10,000 randomly sampled
antibodies from the publicly available Mason              Table 1: Mason dataset perplexity.
dataset Mason et al. (2021). Table 1 shows the
perplexity of different models on this dataset.
LBSTER (Frey et al., 2024) and ESM2 (Lin et al., 2022) are standard masked language models
that do not require additional tags during inference and do not support conditioning. Conditioning
baselines C-pLM and CC-pLM require ground-truth concepts as inputs during inference; they
were given Biopython concepts for sequences, while other concepts were set as missing values.
All models learned the training distribution well, with similar-sized models showing comparable
perplexity. CB-pLM has a perplexity comparable to conditional models, even though C-pLM
and CC-pLM received additional tags as input, while CB-pLM did not. Notably, CB-pLM often
achieves higher perplexity than state-of-the-art open-source protein-masked language models of
similar size. These results are promising, as CB-pLM, despite its constraints, shows no significant
performance drop compared to unconstrained models; in contrast, forcing the model to learn
bio-physical concepts might result in a better model overall.


4     C ONTROLLING AND S TEERING

In this Section, we show how the CB-pLM enables fine-grained control, which makes it useful for
a variety of protein design tasks. Sequence-based protein design requires the ability to modulate
the amount of certain bio-physical properties present in a model’s output—a controllable generation
problem. For example, we might be interested in controlling a single property, i.e., removing a


                                                  5
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 hydrophobic patch from a protein, or multiple properties, i.e., increasing the expression and binding
 affinity of an antibody (Gruver et al., 2024; Tagasovska et al., 2024).
 First, we demonstrate how to use CB-pLMs for single and multi-property control. As an example,
 we instantiate these property control abilities in a Siltuximab—a monoclonal antibody—case study,
 where we show Grand AVerage of Hydropathy (GRAVY) reduction via CB-pLMs, which alters the
 protein’s surface hydrophobicity.

 4.1          C OMPARING CONDITIONAL LANGUAGE MODEL ARCHITECTURES

 Here we assess the effectiveness of the CB-pLM, compared to the alternatives described in Section
 3, for both single and multi property concept control.

 Experimental Setup We examine 14 biophysical concepts computable from a protein’s sequence
 (e.g., molecular weight, Gravy, Helix fraction, Turn structure fraction; see Appendix B.1). These
 concepts allow us to measure the success of positive (increase) and negative (decrease) concept
 interventions for each conditional generation approach. Using a validation dataset, we selected
 10,000 sequences with the lowest and highest concept values for positive and negative interventions.
 To test generation control, we mask 5% of the input sequence (up to 25 amino acids) and intervene
 on the concept value. For the C-pLM model, masking is random. For CC-pLM and CB-pLM
 models, we use feature attribution to select tokens to mask (details in Appendix D.1).
 Each masked test sample results in a single generated sequence, and change in concept presence,
 between the original sequence and the generated sequence can be calculated used as estimate of
 the intervention effectiveness. We use likelihood from an auxiliary autoregressive causal language
 model to measure the “naturalness of” or feasibility of the sequence (Bachas et al., 2022).

 4.1.1           S INGLE C ONCEPT I NTERVENTIONS

             Average concept control accuracy when masking 5.0%                                     Average concept change when masking 5.0%
       100                            97.4                                98.1            0.05                          0.049                               0.047
        80     75.9       81.7                                80.4                        0.04
                                                  69.4
Accuracy


                                                                                    Change


        60                                                                                0.03
        40                                                                                0.02                                      0.016
                                                                                                 0.013      0.013                               0.013
        20                                                                                0.01
         0   C-pLM 24   CC-pLM 24   CB-pLM 24   C-pLM 150   CC-pLM 150 CB-pLM 150         0.00 C-pLM 24   CC-pLM 24   CB-pLM 24   C-pLM 150   CC-pLM 150 CB-pLM 150

                        (a) Intervention accuracy.                                      (b) Average change in concept value after intervention.

           Figure 3: Single concept intervention accuracy and effectiveness averaged over all concepts.

 Concept Control Accuracy After intervention, we calculate the concept control accuracy as the
 percentage of generated samples where the change in concept presence is in the direction of the
 intervention (positive or negative) averaged over a random set of examples (random accuracy would
 be around 50%). The aggregate average across all concepts is shown in Figure 3a . We find that
 CB-pLMs outperform other conditional models by over 15%, reaching near perfect accuracy. We
 also measure the effectiveness of the intervention as the average change in the desired concept value
 direction; CB-pLM is also 3× higher than other conditional models shown in Figure 3b.
 Change in Concept Distribution Beyond comparing average changes, we assess how much the
 distribution of values shifts upon intervention while maintaining protein naturalness. Ideally, the
 concept distribution should shift in the direction of the intervention while preserving the naturalness
 of the protein. Figure 4a illustrates the change in concept and naturalness distributions for a
 subset of concepts when we intervene on the sequence once. We observe that, for both positive
 and negative interventions, the CB-pLM effectively shifts the concept distributions in the desired
 direction for all concepts while preserving the naturalness of the proteins. This performance
 is superior to other variations of conditional language models. Additionally, we examine the
 models’ ability to iteratively shift a concept’s distribution, where the sequence output from the first
 intervention serves as the input for the second, and so on. Figure 4b shows concept distributions
 over three iterations for both positive and negative interventions. CB-pLM demonstrates the ability
 to iteratively shift the concept value with increasing effects, whereas other models fail to achieve
 this. We refer readers to the Appendix C.1.1 for additional results.


                                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) Shift in protein naturalness/concept value after interventions.


                       (b) Iterative shift in protein concept value after interventions.

 Figure 4: Distribution shifts after interventions for different 24M models for subset of concepts.

4.1.2    M ULTI C ONCEPT I NTERVENTIONS
Here, we take a step further by demonstrating how CB-pLMs can be used for multi-property
optimization—a challenging task in drug discovery (Stanton et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2024).

Experimental Setup Here, we compare the effectiveness of the CB-pLMs to other approaches at
enabling control of multiple properties. Specifically, we focus on the concept Grand AVerage of
Hydropathy (GRAVY) and the electric charge at pH 7, both standard protein sequence properties
correlated with functional properties, such as solubility, viscosity, and aggregation (Bhandari et al.,
2020; Cock et al., 2009; Obrezanova et al., 2015). We sequentially intervene on one concept at a
time. We test both positive and negative interventions after masking 5% of the sequence as described
previously. Similarly, we measure concept control accuracy as the percentage of generated samples
that successfully move toward the intervention direction for both concepts. We report the average
accuracy for both positive and negative interventions, with random accuracy expected around 25%.

Result In Figure 5, we observe that CB-pLM achieves a 94% control accuracy; outperforming the
second-best conditional model by 34%. Controlling via the CB-pLM effectively shifts the distribu-
tions towards the Pareto frontier, demonstrating its ability to control multiple properties, as shown
in Figure 5 (b). We refer readers to Appendix C.1.2 for additional discussion and results.


                                Figure 5: Multi-concept interventions.


4.2     C ASE S TUDY: S ILTUXIMAB P ROTEIN D ESIGN

Siltuximab is an FDA-approved monoclonal
antibody used to treat disease in the lymph
nodes (Van Rhee et al., 2010). Treatment
involves intravenous infusion, which can cause
patient discomfort and complications. Re-
designing Siltuximab to have more favorable         Figure 6: Siltuximab surface hydrophobicity.
biophysical properties is a promising research direction for exploring more effective delivery
systems. Structural analysis of Siltuximab reveals the presence of a large hydrophobic patch ( red
patch shown in Figure 6), which has been linked to antibody developability liabilities associated


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with solubility and aggregation (Bhandari et al., 2020; Obrezanova et al., 2015). Here we test
different the effectiveness of the CB-pLM, as well as other conditioning approaches, at redesigning
Siltuximab to lower its GRAVY index values, improving its hydrophobicity, so that variants will
likely be more soluble.

4.2.1     E XPERIMENTS
We train a set of state-of-the-art protein design models on the task of GRAVY reduction, apply the
models to Siltuximab, and compare the GRAVY distribution of the generated samples.
Baselines We consider a wide variety of representative approaches to guided and unguided sequence
generation: (a) Unguided Discrete Walk-Jump Sampling (WJS) (Frey et al., 2023) energy- and
score-based model with single-step denoising and ESM2 (Lin et al., 2022) a large one-source protein
language model. (c) Implicitly guided PropEn (Tagasovska et al., 2024) an encoder-decoder archi-
tecture that is implicitly trained to optimize a property of interest. (d) Explicitly guided LaMBO-2
(Gruver et al., 2024) a classifier-guided discrete diffusion model. (e) Hydrophilic Resample a non-
deep learning baseline, where residues are randomly resampled from a set of known hydrophilic
residues (N, C, Q, G, S, T, Y) (Aftabuddin & Kundu, 2007). Additional details about baselines and
training procedures are available in Appendix C.2.
Results We intervene on the GRAVY concept for generated samples for each candidate protein
design model, with the constraint that generated samples should be at most an edit distance of 5
away from the Siltuximab sequence. In Figure 7a, we show the distribution of designs from each
model type. The CB-pLM comes second to LaMBO-2 in terms of the degree of concept distribution
shift induced in the generated output, while preserving the naturalness of the protein (Figure 7b).
trained to learn over 700 concepts delivers comparable results to state-of-the-art conditioning
approaches while preserving the naturalness of the protein.


                  (a) GRAVY distributions.                       (b) Naturalness/GRAVY distributions.

                        Figure 7: Siltuximab redesigns by different models.

5     I NTERPRETABILITY AND D EBUGGING
Having established the effectiveness of the CB-pLM model for control and steering, demonstrate
different interpretability and debugging capabilities of our model. A key component of the CB-
pLM is its final linear layer—a deliberate choice to maintain simplicity. By inspecting the weights
of this linear layer, domain experts can understand the impact of specific concepts on the model’s
output. Moreover, if the model learns undesirable correlations or if the learning process results in
important features that deviate from a domain expert’s prior knowledge, a straightforward inspection
of the linear layer’s weights can help identify and address these issues.

5.1     I NTERPRETABILITY

CB-pLM offers two types of interpretability: Local and Global. Local Interpretability allows the
model to indicate which concepts it relies on for predictions and identify the input tokens that influ-
ence its output, achieved through our concept-bottleneck module and feature masking and regulation
scheme. Global Interpretability provides insights into the relationships between predefined concepts
and various tokens, facilitated by the linear decoder. This section explores CB-pLM’s global inter-
pretability and verifies its alignment with human knowledge.
In Figure 8, we show the final layer weights for different concepts and amino acids in our CB-pLM
(24M). We find that the model successfully learns several key biophysical relationships. We high-
light some key insights below (the full weight matrix and more details are available in Appendix D):


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• For both charge at pH 6 and pH 7, acidic amino acids (D, E) have negative weights, while basic
  amino acids (R, K) have positive weights. The difference in charge between pH 6 and pH 7
  reflects the biophysical properties of Histidine (H), as it contains an imidazole side chain with a
  pKa of 6.0 and contributes more towards positive charge at lower pH (Figures 8a, 8b).
• GRAVY, which defines hydropathy based on the Kyte-Doolittle scale (Kyte & Doolittle, 1982),
  is consistent with positive weights assigned to A, I, V, F, C, and M amino acids (Figure 8c ).
• Aromatic amino acids F, Y, and W have high weights for the aromaticity concept (Figure 8d).


               (a) Charge at pH6                                          (b) Charge at pH7


                  (c) GRAVY                                                (d) Aromaticity
      Figure 8: The weights for selected concepts to amino acids in the last layer CB-pLM 24M.


5.2    D EBUGGING

Model debugging involves detecting and fixing errors during training or testing. Identifying the root
cause of an error–such as issues with optimization, initialization, training data, or function class–can
be challenging and often relies on manual effort or retraining. CB-LM introduces mechanisms to
attribute errors to human-understandable concepts, enabling us to answer key questions: 1) Did the
model learn an important feature of interest? 2) Is the model relying on a spurious feature? 3) In
which situations is the model likely to fail? 4) How can we correct unwanted correlations? These
questions can be addressed by inspecting the validation loss of different concepts, the weights of
the linear layer, and using the CB layer for interventions.
To showcase the model debugging capability of a CB-pLM, we trained a Bad CB-pLM 24M, where
we change the normalization for the aromaticity, making it very difficult for the model to learn
and control it. We want to see if we can, in fact, identify where this model will fail without the
need for intervention experiments. To do this, we examine the weight for aromaticity-amino acid
combinations for the Bad CB-pLM (see Figure 9a). By inspection, we observe that weights are all
essentially zero; hence, the model will not be able to control aromaticity. To confirm the result, in
Figure 9b, we show that intervening on the aromaticity concept does not control the model’s output.


(a) Outgoing weights from aromaticity for model with (b) The effect of intervention on the aromaticity with
bad concept normalization.                           good vs bad model.

                   Figure 9: CB-pLM linear layer helps identify model’s failures.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION


Related Work Language models are increasingly used across various fields, demonstrating excep-
tional performance but lacking interpretability, which limits their use in high-stakes scenarios. While
recent work with sparse autoencoders (SAEs) Cunningham et al. (2023); Templeton et al. (2024)
shows promise in uncovering interpretable features, this approach requires training large SAEs and
interpreting millions of features. Concept bottleneck language models (CB-LMs) offer a simpler
solution by directly encoding concepts without additional interpretation steps.
Concept Bottleneck Models enhance neural network interpretability by incorporating a “concept
bottleneck” layer that maps inputs to human-understandable concepts for final predictions (Koh
et al., 2020). Recently, Ismail et al. (2023) extended this approach to generative models (CBGMs),
enabling controllable generation and concept-level explanations, particularly in image generation
tasks. In this paper, we adapt this approach to generative language models, achieving global control
over the entire input while retaining token-level generation. A few very recent works have proposed
CBMs for text classification tasks Tan et al. (2024); Sun et al. (2024), but this is a much easier and
less interesting setting than generative language modeling which we address.
Protein language models (pLMs) are extensively used in biological machine-learning research. De-
spite their critical applications in healthcare and drug discovery (Hie et al., 2024), pLMs currently
lack interpretability. Historically, pLM architectures, loss functions, and training setups have closely
mirrored the original masked language model setup (Devlin et al., 2018), differing mainly in vocab-
ulary and dataset. While some protein language models support conditional generation by concate-
nating different protein functions and properties to the inputs (Shuai et al., 2021; Madani et al., 2020;
Hayes et al., 2024), they do not provide mechanisms for interpretability, debuggability, or insights
into what the model has learned. See Appendix E.1 for extended related work.
Discussion and Future Work In this paper, we applied our proposed architecture to masked lan-
guage models for proteins. This architecture can be adapted to any domain, such as NLP, by chang-
ing the training dataset, vocabulary, and concepts while keeping the model unchanged. It can also be
extended to other language models, such as autoregressive models (Figure 29 in Appendix E.2). In
principle, CB-LM can be used to generate sequences with unseen concepts or novel combinations,
as long as they can be expressed as functions of existing ones. We demonstrate this capability in a
toy task detailed in Appendix C.3.2. Testing this capability empirically on proteins is beyond the
scope of the current paper and is left for future work. Our method is unlikely to enable the devel-
opment of weaponizable molecules due to limited biophysical understanding of biological functions
and physiochemical properties. However, we stress the importance of biosecurity and recommend
consulting regulatory agencies and ethical guidelines to mitigate potential risks.
Limitations One main limitation of CB-LM, like other concept bottleneck models (Ismail et al.,
2023; Koh et al., 2020), is the need for the training dataset to be annotated with predefined con-
cepts. Another drawback is the necessity for unknown embeddings. Generally, we believe this is
unavoidable, as it is impractical to encode all the information needed for a generative task into a
fixed number of predefined concepts; excluding unknown embedding will lead to unacceptable per-
formance losses. However, reliance on unknown parts can challenge control and interpretability,
potentially causing the model to ignore concept outputs. Our method mitigates this with orthogo-
nality loss to improve control, but some concept information can remain in the unknown part, and
better disentanglement methods are needed.
Conclusion We present Concept Bottleneck Language Models (CB-LM), a controllable-
interpretable-debuggable language model. We have demonstrated the effectiveness of our pro-
posed architecture by applying it to masked protein language models. Our results show that this
architecture can scale to large models, as evidenced by training Concept Bottleneck Protein Lan-
guage Models (CB-pLM) with 24M, 150M, 650M, and 3B parameters to encode over 700 human-
understandable concepts while maintaining pre-training perplexity comparable to traditional masked
protein language models. Our findings indicate that CB-pLM offers superior control compared to
conditional language models, along with interpretability and debugging capabilities. This work rep-
resents a significant step towards more interpretable, reliable, and debuggable neural networks.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Brennan Abanades, Wing Ki Wong, Fergus Boyles, Guy Georges, Alexander Bujotzek, and Char-
  lotte M Deane. Immunebuilder: Deep-learning models for predicting the structures of immune
  proteins. Communications Biology, 6(1):575, 2023.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity checks for saliency maps. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Julius Adebayo, Samuel Stanton, Simon Kelow, Michael Maser1 Richard Bonneau, Vladimir Glig-
  orijevic, Kyunghyun Cho, Stephen Ra, and Nathan Frey. Identifying regularization schemes that
  make feature attributions faithful. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on New Frontiers of AI for Drug
  Discovery and Development, 2023.
Md Aftabuddin and S Kundu. Hydrophobic, hydrophilic, and charged amino acid networks within
 protein. Biophysical journal, 93(1):225–231, 2007.
Sharrol Bachas, Goran Rakocevic, David Spencer, Anand V Sastry, Robel Haile, John M Sutton,
  George Kasun, Andrew Stachyra, Jahir M Gutierrez, Edriss Yassine, et al. Antibody optimization
  enabled by artificial intelligence predictions of binding affinity and naturalness. BioRxiv, 2022.
David Baehrens, Timon Schroeter, Stefan Harmeling, Motoaki Kawanabe, Katja Hansen, and Klaus-
  Robert MÃžller. How to explain individual classification decisions. In Journal of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, 2010.
Amos Bairoch and Rolf Apweiler. The swiss-prot protein sequence database and its supplement
 trembl in 2000. Nucleic acids research, 2000.
Bikash K Bhandari, Paul P Gardner, and Chun Shen Lim. Solubility-Weighted Index: fast and
  accurate prediction of protein solubility. Bioinformatics, 2020.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in language
  models, 2023.
Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D White, and Philippe
  Schwaller. Chemcrow: Augmenting large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.05376, 2023.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
  Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, et al. Towards monosemanticity: Decom-
  posing language models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33, 2020.
Bo Chen, Xingyi Cheng, Yangli-ao Geng, Shen Li, Xin Zeng, Boyan Wang, Jing Gong, Chiming
  Liu, Aohan Zeng, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and Le Song. xTrimoPGLM: Unified 100B-Scale
  Pre-trained Transformer for Deciphering the Language of Protein, 2023.
Peter JA Cock, Tiago Antao, Jeffrey T Chang, Brad A Chapman, Cymon J Cox, Andrew Dalke,
  Iddo Friedberg, Thomas Hamelryck, Frank Kauff, Bartek Wilczynski, et al. Biopython: freely
  available python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics. Bioinformatics,
  2009.
Haotian Cui, Chloe Wang, Hassaan Maan, Kuan Pang, Fengning Luo, Nan Duan, and Bo Wang.
  scgpt: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative ai. Nature
  Methods, 2024.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
  2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Ahmed Elnaggar, Michael Heinzinger, Christian Dallago, Ghalia Rehawi, Yu Wang, Llion Jones,
  Tom Gibbs, Tamas Feher, Christoph Angerer, Martin Steinegger, Debsindhu Bhowmik, and
  Burkhard Rost. ProtTrans: Toward Understanding the Language of Life Through Self-Supervised
  Learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Nathan C Frey, Daniel Berenberg, Karina Zadorozhny, Joseph Kleinhenz, Julien Lafrance-Vanasse,
  Isidro Hotzel, Yan Wu, Stephen Ra, Richard Bonneau, Kyunghyun Cho, et al. Protein discovery
  with discrete walk-jump sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12360, 2023.
Nathan C Frey, Taylor Joren, Aya Ismail, Allen Goodman, Richard Bonneau, Kyunghyun Cho, and
  Vladimir Gligorijevic. Cramming protein language model training in 24 gpu hours. bioRxiv,
  2024.
Iason Gabriel. Artificial intelligence, values, and alignment. Minds and machines, 2020.
Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making
  and a “right to explanation”. AI magazine, 2017.
Nate Gruver, Samuel Stanton, Nathan Frey, Tim GJ Rudner, Isidro Hotzel, Julien Lafrance-Vanasse,
  Arvind Rajpal, Kyunghyun Cho, and Andrew G Wilson. Protein design with guided discrete
  diffusion. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.
Kunchur Guruprasad, B.V.Bhasker Reddy, and Madhusudan W. Pandit. Correlation between stabil-
  ity of a protein and its dipeptide composition: a novel approach for predicting in vivo stability of
  a protein from its primary sequence. Protein Engineering, Design and Selection, 1990.
Marton Havasi, Sonali Parbhoo, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Addressing leakage in concept bottleneck
 models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Thomas Hayes, Roshan Rao, Halil Akin, Nicholas J. Sofroniew, Deniz Oktay, Zeming Lin, Robert
  Verkuil, Vincent Q. Tran, Jonathan Deaton, Marius Wiggert, Rohil Badkundri, Irhum Shafkat,
  Jun Gong, Alexander Derry, Raul S. Molina, Neil Thomas, Yousuf Khan, Chetan Mishra, Car-
  olyn Kim, Liam J. Bartie, Matthew Nemeth, Patrick D. Hsu, Tom Sercu, Salvatore Candido, and
  Alexander Rives. Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model. bioRxiv,
  2024.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, 2022.
Brian L Hie, Varun R Shanker, Duo Xu, Theodora UJ Bruun, Payton A Weidenbacher, Shaogeng
  Tang, Wesley Wu, John E Pak, and Peter S Kim. Efficient evolution of human antibodies from
  general protein language models. Nature Biotechnology, 2024.
Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and Been Kim. Evaluating feature importance
  estimates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10758, 2, 2018.
TP Hopp and KR Woods. Prediction of protein antigenic determinants from amino acid sequences.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 1981.
Aya Abdelsalam Ismail, Julius Adebayo, Hector Corrada Bravo, Stephen Ra, and Kyunghyun Cho.
  Concept bottleneck generative models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim,
  and Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  PMLR, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jack Kyte and Russell F. Doolittle. A simple method for displaying the hydropathic character of a
  protein. Journal of Molecular Biology, 1982.
V Leiro, PM Moreno, B Sarmento, J Durão, L Gales, AP Pêgo, and CC Barrias. Design and prepara-
  tion of biomimetic and bioinspired materials. In Bioinspired Materials for Medical Applications.
  Elsevier, 2017.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin, Allan
  dos Santos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom Sercu, Sal Candido, et al. Language models of
  protein sequences at the scale of evolution enable accurate structure prediction. bioRxiv, 2022.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, et al. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 2023.
Ali Madani, Bryan McCann, Nikhil Naik, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Namrata Anand, Raphael R Eguchi,
  Po-Ssu Huang, and Richard Socher. Progen: Language modeling for protein generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.03497, 2020.
Anita Mahinpei, Justin Clark, Isaac Lage, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Weiwei Pan. Promises and
  pitfalls of black-box concept learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13314, 2021.
Andrei Margeloiu, Matthew Ashman, Umang Bhatt, Yanzhi Chen, Mateja Jamnik, and Adrian
  Weller. Do concept bottleneck models learn as intended? arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04289,
  2021.
Derek M Mason, Simon Friedensohn, Cédric R Weber, Christian Jordi, Bastian Wagner, Simon M
  Meng, Roy A Ehling, Lucia Bonati, Jan Dahinden, Pablo Gainza, et al. Optimization of therapeu-
  tic antibodies by predicting antigen specificity from antibody sequence via deep learning. Nature
  Biomedical Engineering, 5(6):600–612, 2021.
Olga Obrezanova, Andreas Arnell, Ramón Gómez De La Cuesta, Maud E Berthelot, Thomas RA
  Gallagher, Jesús Zurdo, and Yvette Stallwood. Aggregation risk prediction for antibodies and its
  application to biotherapeutic development. In MAbs. Taylor & Francis, 2015.
Tuomas Oikarinen, Subhro Das, Lam M Nguyen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Label-free concept bottle-
  neck models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06129, 2023.
Tobias H Olsen, Fergus Boyles, and Charlotte M Deane. Observed antibody space: A diverse
  database of cleaned, annotated, and translated unpaired and paired antibody sequences. Protein
  Science, 2022.
Kanchana Ranasinghe, Muzammal Naseer, Munawar Hayat, Salman Khan, and Fahad Shahbaz
  Khan. Orthogonal projection loss. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, 2021.
Sukrut Sridhar Rao, Sweta Mahajan, Moritz Böhle, and Bernt Schiele. Discover-then-name: Task-
  agnostic concept bottlenecks via automated concept discovery. In 18th European Conference on
  Computer Vision. Springer, 2024.
Tilman Räuker, Anson Ho, Stephen Casper, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Toward transparent ai: A
   survey on interpreting the inner structures of deep neural networks. In 2023 ieee conference on
   secure and trustworthy machine learning (satml). IEEE, 2023.
Matthew IJ Raybould and Charlotte M Deane. The therapeutic antibody profiler for computational
 developability assessment. Therapeutic Antibodies: Methods and Protocols, pp. 115–125, 2022.
Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, and Rob Fergus. Biological structure and function
  emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. PNAS, 2019.
Jeffrey A Ruffolo, Aadyot Bhatnagar, Joel Beazer, Stephen Nayfach, Jordan Russ, Emily Hill, Riffat
   Hussain, Joseph Gallagher, and Ali Madani. Adapting protein language models for structure-
   conditioned design. bioRxiv, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yoshihide Sawada and Keigo Nakamura. Concept bottleneck model with additional unsupervised
  concepts. IEEE Access, 10, 2022.
Harshay Shah, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. Do input gradients highlight discriminative
  features? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, Anna Shcherbina, and Anshul Kundaje. Not just a black box:
  Learning important features through propagating activation differences, 2017.
Richard W Shuai, Jeffrey A Ruffolo, and Jeffrey J Gray. Generative language modeling for antibody
  design. BioRxiv, 2021.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. CoRR, 2013a.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: Vi-
  sualising image classification models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034, 2013b.
Samuel Stanton, Wesley Maddox, Nate Gruver, Phillip Maffettone, Emily Delaney, Peyton Green-
  side, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Accelerating bayesian optimization for biological sequence
  design with denoising autoencoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2022.
Chung-En Sun, Tuomas Oikarinen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Crafting large language models for en-
  hanced interpretability, 2024.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2017.
Baris E Suzek, Yuqi Wang, Hongzhan Huang, Peter B McGarvey, Cathy H Wu, and UniProt Consor-
  tium. Uniref clusters: a comprehensive and scalable alternative for improving sequence similarity
  searches. Bioinformatics, 2015.
Nataša Tagasovska, Vladimir Gligorijević, Kyunghyun Cho, and Andreas Loukas. Implicitly guided
  design with propen: Match your data to follow the gradient. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18075,
  2024.
Zhen Tan, Lu Cheng, Song Wang, Bo Yuan, Jundong Li, and Huan Liu. Interpreting pretrained
  language models via concept bottlenecks. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery
  and Data Mining. Springer, 2024.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam
  Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L Turner,
  Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers, Edward Rees,
  Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan. Scaling monoseman-
  ticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Frits Van Rhee, Luis Fayad, Peter Voorhees, Richard Furman, Sagar Lonial, Hossein Borghaei,
  Lubomir Sokol, Julie Crawford, Mark Cornfeld, Ming Qi, et al. Siltuximab, a novel anti–
  interleukin-6 monoclonal antibody, for castleman’s disease. Journal of clinical oncology, 2010.
Ashish Vaswani. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762, 2017.
Minghao Xu, Xinyu Yuan, Santiago Miret, and Jian Tang. ProtST: Multi-Modality Learning of
 Protein Sequences and Biomedical Texts, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Shenghao Zhou, Daniel Jin, Chris Callison-Burch, and Mark
  Yatskar. Language in a bottle: Language model guided concept bottlenecks for interpretable im-
  age classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2023.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2205.15480, 2022.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13. Springer, 2014.
Haiyan Zhao, Hanjie Chen, Fan Yang, Ninghao Liu, Huiqi Deng, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang,
  Dawei Yin, and Mengnan Du. Explainability for large language models: A survey. ACM Trans-
  actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2024.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
A     A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK L ANGUAGE M ODEL
A.1   L OSS F UNCTION

Following CBGMs (Ismail et al., 2023), concept bottleneck language models are trained with three
losses: a standard generative masked language modeling loss LMLM , concept loss LConcept and an
orthogonality loss Lorth . The final loss is given by
                               Ltotal = LMLM + αLConcept + βLorth ,
where α and β are hyperparameters.

      • Generative masked language modeling loss:
                                                  "                          #
                                                      1 X
                                   LMLM = −Ex,m             log P (xi | x\m ) ,
                                                      m i∈m

         where m is the set of positions of the randomly masked tokens, and the model is trained to
         predict the identity of the masked tokens.
      • Concept loss: Given the general-purpose nature of large language models, they are ex-
        pected to handle thousands of concepts with categorical or real values. Often, samples lack
        values for most concepts. To address this, we normalize all real-valued concepts to [0, 1]
        and apply mean square error loss on the entire concept embedding:
                                                           k
                                                       1X
                                         LConcept =          (ci − ĉi )2 .
                                                       k i=1

         Missing values are replaced with default values, and their effect is removed from the loss
         function by considering only non-missing concepts, achieved by masking the errors before
         backpropagation.
      • Orthogonality loss: Following Ismail et al. (2023), to ensure effective control over the
        model’s output, it is crucial to prevent unknown concepts from being mere transformations
        of known concepts. This is achieved by enforcing an orthogonality constraint (Ranasinghe
        et al., 2021), which minimizes the cosine similarity between the concept context embedding
        and the unknown context embedding. The orthogonality loss is defined as follows:
                                                        Pi=s
                                                  X
                                                           i=0        hi ⟩
                                                                 ⟨z , e
                                        Lorth =                Pi=s                               (1)
                                                  j∈B           i=0 1

         where ⟨· , ·⟩ is the cosine similarity applied to two embedding, | · | is the absolute
         value, and B denotes mini-batch size and j denotes each sample in the mini-batch. The
         cosine similarity in the above equation involves the normalization of features such that
                          x ·x
         ⟨xi , xj ⟩ = ∥xi ∥ i ·∥xj j ∥ , where ∥ · ∥2 is l2 norm.
                         2     2



A.2   T RAINING FOR INTEPRETABILITY

Reducing concept leakage through independent training: One known problem in CBMs is con-
cept leakage (Margeloiu et al., 2021; Mahinpei et al., 2021; Havasi et al., 2022); this happens when
soft concept representations encode more information than the concepts themselves. Concept leak-
age affects both model interpretability and control. Mahinpei et al. (2021) discussed that this leak-
age happens when CBMs are trained jointly or sequentially. However, leakage is not possible when
CBMs are trained independently (i.e., during training, the post-CB-layer part of the network takes
the ground-truth concepts themselves rather than the output of the CB-layer). For this reason, we
choose to use independent training for CB-LM.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Faithful token attribution through regularization: Apart from concept-level explanations, users
might be interested in token-level explanations to identify which tokens were most influential during
generation. Token-level explanations can also be used to identify which token to mask (i.e., the to-
ken that has the most effect on a particular concept) when intervening on different concepts (Gruver
et al., 2024). Gradient-based explanation methods Baehrens et al. (2010); Simonyan et al. (2013b);
Zeiler & Fergus (2014) are popular approaches for ‘explaining’ models, but many works (Adebayo
et al., 2018; Hooker et al., 2018) showed that such feature attribution methods are no better than
random ranking of the input features. The reliability of feature attributions seems to be correlated to
how the model is trained; Shah et al. (2021) showed that gradient-based feature attributions of ad-
versarially robust image classifiers are faithful, unlike their non-robust counterparts; Adebayo et al.
(2023), showed that the addition of Gaussian noise to the input has the same effect as adversarial
training for inducing attribution faithfulness. Following Adebayo et al. (2023)’s recommendation,
we add Gaussian noise to the token embedding during training for model regularization and faithful
token attribution.

B     A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK P ROTEIN L ANGUAGE
      M ODEL
B.1   T RAINING DATA

We combined sequences from UniRef50 (Suzek et al., 2015) and SWISS-PROT (Bairoch & Ap-
weiler, 2000), removing duplicates. Annotations such as protein clusters, organisms, taxons, bio-
logical processes, cellular components, and molecular functions from SWISS-PROT were used as
concept annotations. Biopython (Cock et al., 2009) was used to extract biophysical and bioinformat-
ics sequence-level concepts. We filtered out rare SWISS-PROT concepts; the final list of concepts
is shown in 2.

             Class                   Number of Concepts       Calculated from sequence
             Cluster name                     159                         ✗
             Biological process               140                         ✗
             Cellular component               162                         ✗
             Molecular function               106                         ✗
             Organism                          36                         ✗
             Taxon                            101                         ✗
             Biopython                         14                         ✓

                                     Table 2: Training concepts.


Biopython All concepts were computed from the Biopython ProtParam module.
       • Molecular weight is the mass of the protein.
       • Charge at pH 6 and pH 7 is the net charge of the protein at pH 6 and pH 7.
       • Isoelectric point is the pH at which the protein has no net charge.
       • Aromaticity is the relative frequency of aromatic amino acids (F, W, Y) in the sequence
       • Instability Index is the sum of the instability weights from sequence decomposition.
       • Secondary structure fraction is the relative frequency of amino acids in helix: V, I, Y, F,
         W, L. Amino acids in Turn: N, P, G, S. Amino acids in sheet: E, M, A, L.
       • Molar extinction coefficient considers the weighted sum of W, Y, and C for protein ab-
         sorption of 280 nm.
       • Gravy is the sum of hydropathy values associated with the amino acids in a sequence
         divided by the total number of amino acids, based on the Kyte and Doolittle hydrophobicity
         scale.
       • Protein Scale An amino acid scale is defined by a numerical value assigned to each type
         of amino acid. The most frequently used scales are the hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity
         scales, the secondary structure conformational parameters scales and surface accessibility.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2     M ODEL PARAMETERS AND CONFIGURATIONS AT DIFFERENT SCALE

                                         24M      150M      650M              3B
            Number of layers              10         27        33            26
            Embedding dim                 408       768      1280           2560
            Attention heads               12         12        20            40
            Concept embedding dim          2          2         2             2
            Learning rate                0.001    0.0001    0.0001         0.0001
            Clip norm                     0.5       0.5       0.5            0.5
            precision                     16         16        16           bf16
            Warmup steps                 3000     10000     30000          30000
            Effective batch size          512      1024      1024           1024
            Distributed backend           ddp       ddp       ddp     deepspeed stage 1

Training: During training we mask percentage is 25% of the sequence. We then truncate all
sequences to a maximum length of 512. Sequences of length less than 512 were padded, but no loss
was backpropagated through the network for padding tokens. We use Rotary Position Embedding.

C     C ONTROL E XPERIMENTS
C.1     C OMPARING CONDITIONAL LANGUAGE MODEL ARCHITECTURES in silico

Experimental Setup We evaluate control on 14 different concepts that can be calculated from
Biopython. We want to see if we can intervene in the models by increasing the concept values
(positive interventions) or decreasing the concept values (negative interventions). To accomplish
this, we utilized the held-out validation dataset; for each concept, we selected the 10,000 sequences
with the lowest concept values and the 10,000 sequences with the highest concept values. We use
the lowest value sequences for positive interventions (i.e., we intervene in the model to increase the
value of that given concept), and the highest value sequences are used for negative interventions
(i.e., we intervene to decrease the concept value). We mask a percentage of the test sequence and
intervene on the concept to set it to a minimum or maximum value based on the intervention type.
For the conditional model, C-pLM, masking is done randomly; for the conditional classifier CC-
pLM and our proposed CB-pLM model we select the tokens that contributed to the given concept
the most using feature attribution (Gruver et al., 2024; Adebayo et al., 2023) (additional details
on how feature attribution is done is available in Appendix D.1) and mask them. For each test
sample, we only consider a single generated sample (i.e this can be viewed as single shot generation).
After generation, we calculate the new concept values of the generated sequence. We measure
accuracy as the percentage of generated samples that successfully moved toward the direction of the
intervention. We use likelihoods from an auxiliary autoregressive causal language model to measure
the “naturalness of” or feasibility of the sequence (Bachas et al., 2022).

C.1.1    S INGLE CONCEPT INTERVENTION
In this section, we focus on single-concept intervention; the intervention procedure is as follows:

O NE TIME INTERVENTION
This sections shows results when setting n = 1 in Algorithm 1.

Accuracy After the intervention, we calculate the accuracy as the percentage of generated samples
that successfully moved toward the direction of the intervention for positive and negative interven-
tions, then average them (random accuracy would be around 50%). The average across per concept
is shown in Figure 10b). Our findings demonstrate that in terms of intervention direction accuracy,
CB-pLM outperforms other conditional models on every single concept. Figure 11b shows the aver-
age change in the desired direction of the concept value of different concepts after our interventions.
This is averaged over positive and negative interventions. The concept values are normalized such
that the maximum value in training data is 1 and the minimum value is 0. We can see our CB-pLM
models clearly outperform baselines for almost all concepts.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Single Concept intervention procedure
Require: sequence to intervene on x = [x0 , ..., xs ], where s is the maximum sequence length,
    model (i.e, CB-pLM) f , concept to intervene on k, concept value after intervention c, direction
    of intervention d and number of interventions n.
 1: i ← 1
 2: while i ≤ n do
 3:    Using feature attribution, identify the top 5% of the token that either negatively influences the
       concept for positive intervention or positively influences the concept of negative intervention.
       xmasked ← masking(x, k, f, d)
 4:    Pass the model the masked input, the concept index, and the value to get the new sequence.
       x̄ = f (xmasked , k, c)
 5:    x ← x̄
 6: end while
 7: return x

                                                                                                                 Average concept control accuracy when masking 5.0%
                                                              100                                                               97.4                                                                                     98.1               92.3                      97.2
                                                              80                 75.9                     81.7                                                                         80.4
                                                                                                                                                                69.4
                                                              60
                                                   Accuracy


                                                              40
                                                              20
                                                               0          C-pLM 24M               CC-pLM 24M            CB-pLM 24M                       C-pLM 150M                 CC-pLM 150M CB-pLM 150M CB-pLM 650M                                        CB-pLM 3B

                                                                                                                 (a) Average intervention accuracy.
                                                                                                                                                         Average Accuracy when masking 5.0%
                                          100
                                                                       Instability Index                   100
                                                                                                                                  Isoelectric Point                       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gravy                        100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Helix Fraction
                                          80                                                               80                                                              80                                                         80
                               Accuracy


                                          60                                                               60                                                              60                                                         60


                                          40                                                               40                                                              40                                                         40


                                          20                                                               20                                                              20                                                         20


                                           0                                                                0                                                               0                                                          0

                                          100
                                                                    Turn Structure Fraction                100
                                                                                                                              Sheet Structure Fraction                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Avg Hydrophilicity                 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Avg Surface Accessibility
                                          80                                                               80                                                              80                                                         80
                               Accuracy


                                          60                                                               60                                                              60                                                         60


                                          40                                                               40                                                              40                                                         40


                                          20                                                               20                                                              20                                                         20


                                           0                                                                0                                                               0                                                          0

                                          100
                                                                      Molecular Weight                     100
                                                                                                                                    Aromaticity                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Charge At Ph6                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Charge At Ph7
                                          80                                                               80                                                              80                                                         80
                               Accuracy


                                          60                                                               60                                                              60                                                         60


                                          40                                                               40                                                              40                                                         40


                                          20                                                               20                                                              20                                                         20


                                           0                                                                0                                                               0                                                          0

                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                                        Molar Extinction Coefficient Reduced              100
                                                                                                                                                                                          Molar Extinction Coefficient Oxidized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C-pLM 24M
                                                                                                           80                                                              80                                                                                                              CC-pLM 24M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CB-pLM 24M
                                                                                                           60                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C-pLM 150M
                                                                                                           40                                                              40                                                                                                              CC-pLM 150M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CB-pLM 150M
                                                                                                           20                                                              20                                                                                                              CB-pLM 650M
                                                                                                            0                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CB-pLM 3B


                                                                                                          (b) Per concept intervention accuracy .

                                                                             Figure 10: Intervention accuracy after masking 5%.

                                                                                                                  Average concept change when masking 5.0%
                                           0.05                                                                         0.049                                                                                                 0.047
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.043
                                           0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.032
                                           0.03
                            Change


                                           0.02                                                                                                                0.016
                                                               0.013                            0.013                                                                                    0.013
                                           0.01
                                           0.00          C-pLM 24M                            CC-pLM 24M           CB-pLM 24M                            C-pLM 150M                 CC-pLM 150M CB-pLM 150M CB-pLM 650M                                                         CB-pLM 3B

                                                                                                                 (a) Aggregate intervention effect.
                                                                                                                                                  Average Concept change when masking 5.0%
                                                     Instability Index                                                      Isoelectric Point                               0.030
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gravy                                                          Helix Fraction
                                                                                                   0.25
                    0.020                                                                                                                                                   0.025                                                               0.04

                                                                                                   0.20
                                                                                                                                                                            0.020
                    0.015                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.03
           Change


                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                            0.015
                    0.010                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.02
                                                                                                   0.10                                                                     0.010

                    0.005                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.01
                                                                                                   0.05                                                                     0.005


                    0.000                                                                          0.00                                                                     0.000                                                               0.00

                                                  Turn Structure Fraction                                               Sheet Structure Fraction                                                        Avg Hydrophilicity                                                Avg Surface Accessibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.025
                                                                                                                                                                            0.030
                     0.04                                                                          0.04
                                                                                                                                                                            0.025                                                              0.020

                     0.03                                                                          0.03                                                                     0.020
            Change


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.015

                                                                                                                                                                            0.015
                     0.02                                                                          0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.010
                                                                                                                                                                            0.010
                     0.01                                                                          0.01                                                                                                                                        0.005
                                                                                                                                                                            0.005

                     0.00                                                                          0.00                                                                     0.000                                                              0.000

                                                    Molecular Weight                                                           Aromaticity                                                                Charge At Ph6                                                         Charge At Ph7
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0200                                                             0.0200
                    0.004                                                                          0.04                                                                    0.0175                                                             0.0175

                    0.002                                                                                                                                                  0.0150                                                             0.0150
                                                                                                   0.03
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0125                                                             0.0125
          Change


                    0.000
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0100                                                             0.0100
                    0.002                                                                          0.02
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0075                                                             0.0075
                    0.004                                                                                                                                                  0.0050                                                             0.0050
                                                                                                   0.01

                    0.006                                                                                                                                                  0.0025                                                             0.0025

                                                                                                   0.00                                                                    0.0000                                                             0.0000

                                                                                                                  Molar Extinction Coefficient Reduced                                        Molar Extinction Coefficient Oxidized
                                                                                                  0.040                                                                     0.040                                                                                                                        C-pLM 24M
                                                                                                  0.035                                                                     0.035                                                                                                                        CC-pLM 24M
                                                                                                  0.030                                                                     0.030
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CB-pLM 24M
                                                                                                  0.025                                                                     0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C-pLM 150M
                                                                                                  0.020                                                                     0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CC-pLM 150M
                                                                                                  0.015                                                                     0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CB-pLM 150M
                                                                                                  0.010                                                                     0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CB-pLM 650M
                                                                                                  0.005

                                                                                                  0.000
                                                                                                                                                                            0.005

                                                                                                                                                                            0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CB-pLM 3B



                                                                                                  (b) Per concept average intervention effect.

                                                                                     Figure 11: Intervention effect after masking 5%.


                                                                                                                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Distribution shift We investigate how the concept distribution shifts along with the naturalness of
the protein after intervention. Ideally, we would want the concept distribution to shift in the direction
of the intervention while maintaining the naturalness of the protein; we plot ∆ Concept/Naturalness
distribution (the difference between the original sample and the generated sample for the concept
value on x-axis and naturalness on y-axis).
Figure 12 and Figure 13 shows distribution shifts between different types of 24M and 150M models
respectively, with both positive and negative interventions, CB-pLM effectively shifts the concept
distributions in the right direction for all concepts while preserving the naturalness of the proteins,
unlike other variations of conditional language models. Figure 14 shows distribution shifts between
CB-pLM with different sizes. Note that although increasing model size improved the model’s per-
plexity we did not observe any improvement in terms of control.


                                        (a) Positive interventions.


                                       (b) Negative interventions.

Figure 12: Shift in protein naturalness/concept value after interventions for different 24M models.


Iterative intervention In this experiment, we examine different models’ ability to shift a concept’s
distribution iteratively, i.e.; we vary n in Algorithm 1 from 1 → 3. Figures 15 and 16 shows concept
distributions for three iterations for both positive and negative interventions. CB-pLM can iteratively
shift the concept value with increasing effects while other models fail to do this.

Masking percentage In this experiment, we investigate the impact of varying the percentage of
masking on the performance ranking of different models. We repeat the experiment described in
Algorithm 1, but with 25% masking instead of 5%, using 24M parameter models. Our findings
show that the performance ranking of the models remains consistent, with CB-pLM significantly
outperforming both C-pLM and CC-pLM (Figures 17,18 and 19).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      (a) Positive interventions.


                                     (b) Negative interventions.

Figure 13: Shift in protein naturalness/concept value after interventions for different 150M models.


                                      (a) Positive interventions.


                                     (b) Negative interventions.

Figure 14: Shift in protein naturalness/concept value after interventions for CB-pLM models with
different sizes.


                                                  21
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     Figure 15: Iterative positive intervention.


                                                     Figure 16: Iterative negative intervention.
                  Average concept control accuracy when masking 25.0%                        Average concept change when masking 25.0%
       100                                                              98.9                                                        0.165
                                            81.6                                      0.16
        80        73.6                                                                0.14
                                                                                      0.12
Accuracy


                                                                                 Change


        60                                                                            0.10
        40                                                                            0.08                        0.062
                                                                                      0.06     0.050
        20                                                                            0.04
                                                                                      0.02
         0      C-pLM 24                 CC-pLM 24                  CB-pLM 24         0.00    C-pLM 24          CC-pLM 24         CB-pLM 24

                         (a) Intervention accuracy.                               (b) Average change in concept value after intervention.

             Figure 17: Average concept intervention accuracy and effectiveness when masking 25%.


 Figure 18: Shift in protein naturalness/concept value for positive interventions when masking 25%.


 Figure 19: Shift in protein naturalness/concept value for negative interventions when masking 25%.


                                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Concept intervention correlation In this experiment, we mask the most influential tokens for
each concept as previously described and intervene on the value of that concept. We then calcu-
late the value of all 14 concepts for the generated sequence, and see how intervening on one concept
effects all the other concepts. The results are reported in Figures 20b, 20c and 20d for different mod-
els. In this figure we report a version of accuracy, where the j-th element of the i-th row represents
the (fraction of times concept j changed in the same direction as the intervention when intervening
on the i-th concept) - (fraction of times concept j changed in the opposite direction of the interven-
tion when intervening on the i-th concept). This can be seen as a binary version of correlation. We
also compare this with the actual correlation between these concept values on existing proteins in
our dataset shown in Figure 20a. We can see the correlation matrix of interventions on our CBM
has many similarities to the correlations between the concept in the real world, especially on pairs
with high correlation, reflecting that our concept bottleneck model has picked up on these natural
correlations. In contrast, the other models have a quite different correlation pattern.


(a) Correlation between concept values in our dataset.    (b) Intervention correlation on CB-pLM.


        (c) Intervention correlation on C-pLM.            (d) Intervention correlation on CC-pLM.



C.1.2    M ULTI - CONCEPT I NTERVENTION

We show the effects of sequentially intervening on two concepts in Figure 21 with different 150M
parameter models below.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Figure 21: Multi-concept interventions.


C.2     P ROTEIN D ESIGN - S ILTUXIMAB

C.2.1    BASELINES
• LaMBO-2 (Gruver et al., 2024) is diffusion optimized sampling, a guidance method for discrete
  diffusion models that follows gradients in the hidden states of the denoising network. LaMBO-2
  was trained on SWISS-PROT (∼ 2.6M training samples training) using GRAVY as the optimiza-
  tion objective for explicit guidance.
• PropEn (Tagasovska et al., 2024) is an encoder-decoder architecture that is implicitly trained to
  optimize a property of interest. PropEn operates by matching training samples so that each training
  sample is paired with one that has better properties; due to this matching, it is best suited for a low
  data regime. We train PropEn on a curated antibody dataset of ∼ 1000 training samples that are
  close to Siltuximab.
• Discrete Walk-Jump Sampling (WJS) (Frey et al., 2023) is a discrete generative model that
  learns a smoothed energy function, then samples from the smoothed data manifold with Langevin
  Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and projects back to the true data manifold with one-step de-
  noising. WJS was trained on paired observed antibody space (OAS) dataset Olsen et al. (2022),
  which is ∼ 120K paired antibody sequences as done in the original paper.
• ESM2 (Lin et al., 2022) an open source 150M parameter protein language model, pretrained on
  UniRef50. Designs are sampled from the model’s logits.
• Hydrophilic Resample a non-deep learning baseline, where residues are randomly resampled
  from a set of known hydrophilic residues (N, C, Q, G, S, T, Y) (Aftabuddin & Kundu, 2007).

C.2.2    A SSESSING THE NATURALNESS OF THE DESIGNS

To evaluate the naturalness of designs generated by various models, we folded the designs us-
ing ABodyBuilder2 (Abanades et al., 2023) and analyzed different protein surface properties with
the Therapeutic Antibody Profiler (TAP) Raybould & Deane (2022), which utilizes physics-based
computations. Our objective is to achieve minimal deviations from the original antibody struc-
ture. Figure 22 presents the TAP scores of different designs, with the dotted line indicating the
original Siltuximab value. The results reveal that the designs produced by CB-pLM and WJS ex-
hibit the least disruption, whereas those from ESM2 and Hydrophilic Resample show the most
disruption. The TAP metrics validate that our CB-pLM designs effectively preserve naturalness.


                          Figure 22: TAP metrics for Siltuximab redesigns.



                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Filtering Designs Out of the designs produced by different
models, we have filtered designs with TAP values that are with
5% proximity to Siltuximab; the percentage of designs that
have passed this filter from each model is shown in Figure 23.

C.3      A DDITIONAL C ONTROL EXPERIMENTS
                                                                              Figure 23: Percentages of redesigns within
C.3.1       S PECIES I NTERPOLATION                                           the naturalness threshold.


Prior work in mechanistic interpretability (Bricken et al., 2023) demonstrated that sparse autoen-
coders (SAEs) could uncover interpretable monosemantic features. Recently, Templeton et al. (2024)
applied SAEs to Claude 3 Sonnet’s activations, retrieving ∼ 34M features. They used the autoint-
erpretability approach (Bills et al., 2023) to assign meanings to these features. One notable feature
identified was the Golden Gate Bridge. By clamping this feature to 10× its maximum activation,
they influenced the model’s behavior, causing Claude to behave in an out-of-distribution manner,
going as far as self-identifying as the Golden Gate Bridge. Here, we show how the concept bottle-
neck language model demonstrates the same capability, although for CB-LMs there is no need to
train an additional SAE and do a post-hoc search for the meaning of different concepts, since here
we know what each concept encodes by design.
To demonstrate, we test the CB-pLM’s ability to interpolate between species; we altered the behavior
of the CB-pLM by setting a single species concept in the original CB-pLM to 10 times its maximum
activation value. We then tested whether the model could generate a sequence similar to that species
cluster, regardless of the protein sequences inputted into the model. We conducted this test for two
species: (a) rice (species Oryza sativa - referred to as “Rice-CB-pLM”) and (b) human (species
Homo sapiens - referred to as “Human-CB-pLM”). We trained a species classifier by finetuning the
ESM2(Lin et al., 2022) model to classify different species (humans, yeast, rice, and bacteria). The
model accurately clustered different species together, with an overall accuracy of 98%, as shown in
Figure 24a. We then passed non-rice protein sequences into Rice-CB-pLM and classified the output;
most newly generated sequences were now identified as rice (Figure 24b). Similarly, passing non-
human sequences into Human-CB-pLM resulted in most newly generated sequences being classified
as human (Figure 24c); note that changing non-human protein sequences into human sequences is a
fundamental problem in protein engineering known as “humanization”.
This illustrative example showcases the ability of the concept bottleneck language model to
replicate the capabilities of SAEs and autointerpretability with a substantially simpler approach.


      (a) ESM2 specie clusters.           (b) Rice CB-pLM changing non-rice se-    (c) Human CB-pLM changing non-human
                                          quences to rice like sequences.          sequences to human like sequences.

                                  Figure 24: Manipulating Large Language Models.


C.3.2       G ENERALIZATION TO NEW CONCEPT COMBINATION

So far we have shown that our model can successfully control generation of in distribution se-
quences. However, for many real-world use cases, it is important to be able to generate previously
unseen concepts or combinations of concepts.


                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To test this, we train a model with our architecture on a simpler task based on color-MNIST. To
make this task similar to masked language modeling, we train our models by masking 75% of the
input, and then train them to reconstruct the remaining input using a masked autoenecoder vision
transformer (MAE-ViT) (He et al., 2022). Following MAE-ViT, we divide the input into a sequence
of 7x7 patches, making our task a masked sequence-to-sequence generative task, just like masked
language modeling. Note that unlike our main results, we use a nonlinear decoder to accommodate
for pixel-level outputs. For the concepts in this experiment, we use a one-hot encoding of the
number represented by the image, together with an RGB encoding of the color of the input digit.
It is important to use RGB embeddings instead of one-hot representation of color, as it allows to
encode any color in just 3 dimensions, which is useful for testing generalization capabilities. To test
the generalization ability of our CBM architecture, we trained a generative CBM as discussed above
on ColorMNIST with 7 discrete training colors: {magenta, grey, cyan, white, red, green, yellow}.
On test time, we then intervened on the CBM color outputs to make the model create an unseen
color. As shown in Figure 25, our method can accurately regenerate the the input for all 3 unseen
colors we tested. These examples were not cherry picked, and our color intervention reliably works
on all inputs.


Figure 25: Results of our generative CBM on color MNIST. We can accurately generate digits in
colors completely unseen during training. This highlights that CBMs are able to generate novel
outputs.


D     I NTERPRETABILITY AND D EBUGGING
D.1    F EATURE ATTRIBUTION AND COORDINATE SELECTION

The goal of our control experiments is to make small modifications to protein sequences that increase
or decrease the value of a certain concept. While during training we randomly select which tokens
to mask and predict, this is not an effective strategy for interventions. Instead we wish to identify
which amino acids are increasing/decreasing a certain concept the most, and only mask and predict
those tokens.
For example if we wish to increase Aromaticity of a protein, we wish to identify the amino acids
which contribute the most to decreasing the Aromaticity, and intervene on those tokens. The most
straightforward and principled method to measure this is occlusion, where we simply remove a each
input token and replace it with a reference value one at a time, and see how our predicted concept
changes for each. Since our model was trained with masking, the natural reference value is the mask
token, so when removing a certain input we simply replace it with the mask token. Let T ∈ Rv×d be
the learned token embeddings where v is the vocabulary size and d is transformer hidden dimension.
Then let fT (x) = [Tx0 , Tx1 , . . . , Txs ]. The occlusion attribution for token t of input x on concept i
is then:
OCCLUSION:

                           A(x, i, t) = ĉi (fT (x)) − ĉi (fT (xxt ←[M ASK] ))                        (2)


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Where xxt ←[M ASK] represents x with the t-th token replaced by the mask token, and ĉi (e(x)) is
the concept value predicted by our CBM model for concept i. concept prediction for concept i on
input x. For positive interventions, we typically then mask the 5% of the tokens (excluding padding)
with the smallest attribution value(token being present reduces concept value), while for negative
interventions we mask 5% of tokens with the largest attribution value(token being present increases
concept value).
While this is a good method, it requires a separate forward pass for every individual token in the
input, making it slow to run in large scale. Instead, as is common with feature attributions, we
use a gradient based approximation of the occlusion value for up to 512 times speedup compared
to occlusion. However, since our inputs are discrete, we cannot directly calculate gradients with
respect to them. Instead, we calculate gradients with respect to the learned token embeddings of the
model, and sum over these. Then
GRADIENT x (INPUT - MASK):
                        A(x, i, t) = ∇fT (x)t ĉi (fT (x)) · (Txt − T[M ASK] )                    (3)

Where fT (x)t is the t-th element of fT (x). This method is essentially a first order Taylor Approxi-
mation of the occlusion metric defined above. Alternatively this method could be seen as a version
of Integrated Gradients Sundararajan et al. (2017) with only one gradient step and the mask token
as the reference value. To see whether this approximation is sufficiently accurate to identify good
amino acids to intervene on, we compare it’s performance against occlusion itself in table 3. We
also compared against some common feature attribution baselines described below:
GRADIENT x INPUT: Shrikumar et al. (2017)
                                A(x, i, t) = ∇fT (x)t ĉi (fT (x)) · Txt                          (4)

GRADIENT: Simonyan et al. (2013a)
                                A(x, i, t) = ||∇fT (x)t ĉi (fT (x))||1                           (5)

We compared all these methods, as well as a baseline of randomly choosing tokens to mask. We
took a random sample of 50 proteins from the validation dataset, and intervened to increase/decrease
each of the 14 biopython concepts one at a time, reporting the average change across concepts when
masking 5% of the inputs in table 3. We can see choosing tokens to mask based on occlusion
attribution performs the best as expected, however our first order approximation Gradient x (Input
- Mask) also performed very well, with average intervention effect only 5% below using occlusion,
while being around 100× faster to calculate. On the other hand, simply looking at the magnitude
of the gradient performed poorly, even worse than random selection, likely because it doesn’t take
into account whether said input is increasing or decreasing the concept value. Overall we can also
see that choosing which tokens to mask is very important for controlled generation, and that with
good attribution our interventions are more than twice as effective as randomly selecting tokens to
intervene on.

                    Method                        Positive     Negative    Average
                    Random                        0.0312       -0.0125     0.0218
                    Gradient                      0.0173       -0.0201     0.0187
                    Gradient x Input              0.0358       -0.0269     0.0313
                    Gradient x (Input - Mask)     0.0480       -0.0390     0.0435
                    Occlusion                     0.0499       -0.0419     0.0459

Table 3: Average concept change after interventions using different feature attribution methods on
our 24M-CBM model. The average column reports the average change in the desired direction.

Based on these results, for all other experiments in the paper we use the Gradient x (Input - Mask)
method for our CB-pLM and CC-pLM, while the C-pLM uses random attribution as it does not
make concept value prediction ĉ which is needed for all other attribution methods.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   U NDERSTANDING CONCEPT / OUTPUT RELATIONSHIPS

To understand the model’s ability to infer biophysical properties, we visualized the weights from
the final layer for each concept in relation to each amino acid. Our findings indicate that the
model successfully learns several key biophysical relationships as defined in the BioPython library
(Figures 26, 27 and 28).


                Figure 26: Visualization of the final layer weights in CB-pLM 24M.


Some key insights include the following:

• For both charge at pH 6 and pH 7, acidic amino acids (D, E) have negative weights, while basic
  amino acids (R, K) have positive weights. The difference in charge between pH 6 and pH 7
  reflects the biophysical properties of H , as it contains an imidazole side chain with a pKa of 6.0
  and contributes more towards positive charge at lower pH (Figures 27a, 27b).
• GRAVY, which defines hydropathy based on the Kyte-Doolittle scale (Kyte & Doolittle, 1982),
  is consistent with positive weights assigned to A, I, V, F, C, and M amino acids (Figure 27c ).
• Aromatic amino acids F, Y, and W have high weights for the aromaticity concept (Figure 27d).
• Average hydrophilicity uses the Hopp-Wood scale, which differs from the Kyte-Doolittle scale
  in its empirical definitions, assigns higher values to R, D, E, and K (Hopp & Woods (1981)).
  Although the scale also assigns lower values to aromatic residues, such as F, W, Y, we find that
  our model assigns lower weights for other amino acids which could reflect biases in the dataset
  (Figure 27e).
• Average surface accessibility is defined by the Emini Surface fractional probability (Cock et al.,
  2009), which is a lookup table describing the likelihood that a residue appears on the protein
  surface. The scale defines a low value especially for C and for other non-polar amino acids,
  though to a lesser extent (Figure 27f).
• Helix fraction, sheet structure fraction, and turn structure fraction are related concepts, are defined
  by fractions of I, L, F, W, Y for helix, A, L, M, E for sheet and N, S, G, P. While the weights
  do not closely match that of the BioPython definitions, we note that the weights are nonetheless


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  consistent with amino acids that often have special propensity to be part of helical structures,
  such as A, M, L, E, K (Leiro et al., 2017) (Figures 28a, 28b and 28c).
• Isoelectric point is a property closely associated with charge at pH 7, and likewise, we observe
  low values for D and E, and high values for R and K (Figure 28d).
• Molar extinction coefficient, which quantifies absorption of a protein at 280 nm, emphasizes the
  contributions of W. Likewise, the reduced vs oxidized terms of the molar extinction parameter
  differ only in how the oxidation state of C is considered, which is also visible in our model
  weights (Figures 28f, and 28e).
• Instability index is defined by a look-up table based on the dideptide decomposition of the
  sequence (Guruprasad et al., 1990). We observe that the model attributes high values to P, which
  often introduces kinks in the protein structure and disrupts secondary structures (Figure 28g).
• We note that the model weights does not always reflect the concept definitions. For example,
  W is the heaviest amino acid but is assigned a negative value, which likely reflects biases in the
  dataset. W is typically one of the least common amino acids, and relative frequency may vary
  by sequence length. However, the model correctly identifies F as contributing to high molecular
  weight, and A, and G towards contributing to low molecular weight (Figure 28h).


                (a) Charge at pH6                                  (b) Charge at pH7


                   (c) GRAVY                                        (d) Aromaticity


            (e) Average Hydrophilicity                      (f) Average Surface Accessibility

        Figure 27: The weights of concepts to amino acids in the last layer CB-pLM 24M.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Helix Fraction                          (b) Sheet Structure Fraction


            (c) Turn Structure Fraction                         (d) Isoelectric Point


     (e) Molar Extinction Coefficient Oxidized        (f) Molar Extinction Coefficient Reduced


               (g) Instability Index                           (h) Molecular Weight

   Figure 28: The weights for selected concepts to amino acids in the last layer CB-pLM 24M.


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     E XTENDED R ELATED WORKS AND D ISCUSSION

E.1   R ELATED W ORK

L ANGUAGE MODELS

Language models are increasingly widespread in their usage, spanning from natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023) to specialized fields
such as chemistry (Bran et al., 2023) and biology (Cui et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2023). These models
have demonstrated exceptional performance on intricate tasks, facilitating new frontiers in diverse
applications (Brown et al., 2020; Hayes et al., 2024). However, the lack of concrete and effec-
tive interpretability methods limits their use in many high-stakes applications, engendering distrust
among domain experts, and raising concerns regarding regulatory compliance, safety, and alignment
(Goodman & Flaxman, 2017; Gabriel, 2020).
Current interpretability research for large language models (LLMs) focuses on pre-trained models,
either by explaining the model’s predictions (Zhao et al., 2024) or by analyzing the internal cir-
cuits of the network through mechanistic interpretability (Räuker et al., 2023; Bricken et al., 2023).
Recent work in mechanistic interpretability (Bricken et al., 2023) demonstrated that sparse autoen-
coders (SAEs) could uncover interpretable monosemantic features. To apply this on large-scale
production models, it involves training very large SAEs, retrieving millions of features, and then
trying to assign meaning to these features using an autointerpretability approach (Bills et al., 2023).
Although there have been promising results in controlling large production models like Claude us-
ing such SAEs, it remains unclear how this approach will help when controlling for a concept not
found in the SAE or when autointerpretability is not feasible, such as in domains like proteins. Con-
cept bottleneck language model (CB-LM) demonstrates similar capabilities (see Appendix C.3.1 for
experiments). However, for CB-LMs, there is no need to train an additional SAE and conduct a post-
hoc search for the meaning of different concepts, as each concept’s encoding is known by design.


C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK M ODELS

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020) incorporate interpretability into neural net-
works by inserting an interpretable “concept bottleneck” layer into the network and mapping the
inputs to a set of human-understandable concepts, which are then used to make the final prediction.
Recently, Ismail et al. (2023) demonstrated that a concept layer can be integrated into generative
models (CBGMs). Intervening on this layer allows for controllable generation, and examining the
activations provides concept-level explanations. Their work focused on image generation and eval-
uated the effectiveness of this approach in architectures where the entire input is represented as an
embedding, such as GANs, diffusion models, and VAEs.
In this paper, we extend this approach to language models, demonstrating that we can achieve global
control over the entire input while retaining token-level generation. To make this adaptation, we in-
serted a concept bottleneck layer into a language model and created a novel concept module. This
differs from CBGMs in several key aspects: (a) We focus on sequential data where inputs are repre-
sented as tokens. (b) We employ a unique model architecture tailored to language models. (c) We
introduce a new intervention procedure specific to our architecture.
A few very recent works have proposed CBMs for text classification tasks Tan et al. (2024); Sun
et al. (2024), but this is a much easier and less interesting setting than generative language modeling
which we address, as the input and output space of generative models is much larger and cannot be
adequately modeled using only known concepts, highlighting the need for an unknown part in the
embeddings.
Recent work Yuksekgonul et al. (2022); Oikarinen et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2023); Rao et al. (2024)
has also proposed methods to train Concept Bottleneck Models for image classification that do not
require labeled concept data by leveraging pretrained multimodal models. While interesting, this
approach reduces reliability of concept predictions, and is not feasible in protein setting as no good
pretrained general concept predicting models are available.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similar to ours, some previous work has proposed including an unknown part in the embeddings to
improve task performance in the image classification settings Yuksekgonul et al. (2022); Sawada &
Nakamura (2022), but they employ quite different methods to achieve this in a different setting.


P ROTEIN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Protein language models are widely used in biological machine-learning research, trained on ex-
tensive protein sequences spanning the evolutionary tree of life. Although pLMs have numerous
critical applications in healthcare and drug discovery (Hie et al., 2024), they currently lack inter-
pretability. Their performance is often explained through intuitive arguments about compression
and the learning of co-evolutionary patterns (Rives et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2022; Hayes et al., 2024),
but it remains unclear whether these models truly capture meaningful protein concepts.
Historically, pLM architectures, loss functions, and training setups have closely mirrored the orig-
inal masked language model setup (Devlin et al., 2018), with the primary differences being the
vocabulary and dataset. Our goal is to develop a pLM that offers controllability, interpretability, and
debuggability, making it more reliable for design applications. While some protein language models
support conditional generation by concatenating different protein functions and properties to the in-
puts (Shuai et al., 2021; Madani et al., 2020; Hayes et al., 2024), in contrast to our work, they do not
provide any mechanisms for interpretability, debuggability, or offer any insights on what a model
has learned.


E.2   D ISCUSSION

CB-LM FOR OTHER DOMAINS AND ARCHITECTURES

In this paper, we applied our proposed architecture to masked language models for proteins. This
versatile architecture can be adapted to any domain, such as NLP, by simply changing the training
dataset, vocabulary, and concepts while keeping the model itself unchanged. Additionally, it can be
easily adapted to other types of language models, such as autoregressive models, as demonstrated in
Figure 29. For autoregressive models, the embedding output from the transformer, typically used to
predict the next token, is passed to the CB-layer to extract the known concept embedding and to an
orthogonality network to extract the unknown concept embedding. These two embeddings are then
concatenated and used to predict the next token.


          Figure 29: Inserting concept bottleneck into an autoregressive language model.



                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DDING NEW CONCEPTS TO A TRAINED CB-LM
An intuitive question that might arise is how we can control for new concepts. Specifically, if we are
given a dataset with a new concept, can we fine-tune CB-LM to incorporate it? This can be achieved
by creating a new CB-LM with an additional concept and copying the weights from the original
model. In this setup, the only randomly initialized weights are for the new concept embedding ek+1 ,
the concept classifier head for the new concept, and the linear decoder. The new model can then be
trained to match the old model’s concept output for existing concepts while aligning with the ground
truth for the newly added concept.

G ENERALIZATION TO NEW CONCEPT COMBINATION
In many real-world applications, we may need to generate sequences with previously unseen con-
cepts or novel combinations of concepts not present in the training dataset. CB-LM provides this
capability, as long as the new concepts can be expressed as functions of the existing ones. We demon-
strate this capability in a toy task detailed in Appendix C.3.2, where we train a masked autoencoder
vision transformer (MAE-ViT) (He et al., 2022) with our architecture on a simple color-MNIST gen-
eration task. Our results show that the architecture can successfully generate blue-colored MNIST
digits, despite the model never having encountered the color blue in the training dataset.


                                                 33
