C ODE C LOAK : A M ETHOD FOR M ITIGATING C ODE
L EAKAGE BY LLM C ODE A SSISTANTS


                                             A BSTRACT

          LLM-based code assistants are becoming increasingly popular among developers.
          These tools help developers improve their coding efficiency and reduce errors by
          providing real-time suggestions based on the developer’s codebase. While bene-
          ficial, the use of these tools can inadvertently expose the developer’s proprietary
          code to the code assistant service provider during the development process. In this
          work, we propose a method aimed at mitigating the risk of code leakage when us-
          ing LLM-based code assistants. CodeCloak is a novel deep reinforcement learning
          agent that manipulates the prompts before sending them to the code assistant ser-
          vice. CodeCloak aims to achieve the following two contradictory objectives: (i)
          minimizing code leakage, while (ii) preserving relevant and useful suggestions for
          the developer. Our evaluation, employing StarCoder and Code Llama, LLM-based
          code assistants models, demonstrates CodeCloak’s effectiveness on a diverse set
          of code repositories of varying sizes, as well as its transferability across different
          models. We also designed a method for reconstructing the developer’s original
          codebase from code segments sent to the code assistant service (i.e., prompts)
          during the development process, to thoroughly analyze code leakage risks and
          evaluate the effectiveness of CodeCloak under practical development scenarios.


1       I NTRODUCTION

LLM-Based Code Assistants. The use of large language models (LLMs) for code generation is
growing and becoming increasingly useful to the global community Vaithilingam et al. (2022). The
efficiency of these models has been demonstrated in a number of studies Chang et al. (2023). Code
assistance tools, like Code Llama,1 GitHub Copilot,2 and StarCoder,3 leverage advanced LLMs to
provide real-time suggestions, improving developers’ coding efficiency and reducing errors. The
flow of interaction with a code assistant during the coding process takes place as follows: First, the
developer writes code or describes the desired functionality in code or free text, within an integrated
development environment (IDE). The code assistant client, which is often a plugin integrated in the
IDE, actively monitors the code being developed. It gathers relevant contextual information, includ-
ing the developer’s recent interactions in the IDE and segments of code that may be relevant from
other code sections and files in order to generate code suggestions. Then, based on the data gathered,
the code assistant client generates a prompt that contains relevant information for generating useful
suggestions and sends it to the code assistant service (also referred to as the model). The code assis-
tant service uses an LLM to generate suggestions about how the code can be completed and sends
them back to the code assistant client. Finally, these suggestions are presented to the developer via
the IDE interface. The developer can integrate suitable suggestions in the code.
Privacy and Security Risks. While LLMs have become invaluable in various tasks, their integra-
tion and use may inadvertently introduce security risks and expose sensitive data. In the context of
code assistants, the use of LLMs may introduce new vulnerabilities to the developed code Pearce
et al. (2022) or unintentionally expose sensitive data (i.e., proprietary code). Previous studies have
addressed three main security and privacy concerns: (1) the risk of inferring whether specific code
was used to train an LLM model, known as a membership inference attack Carlini et al. (2021); Sun
et al. (2022); Niu et al. (2023); (2) the challenge of preventing proprietary code from being recom-
mended by an LLM-based code assistant, particularly when the model has been trained on similar
    1
      https://ai.meta.com/blog/code-llama-large-language-model-coding/
    2
      https://github.com/features/copilot
    3
      https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder


                                                    1
code, such as code from an open-source repository, by employing code manipulation strategies be-
fore the code is released Ji et al. (2022); and (3) exploration of whether an LLM code assistant
can be poisoned during its trainingphase, leading to the presentation of intentional suggestions of
vulnerable code to developers, thereby introducing vulnerabilities into the developed software Perry
et al. (2022); Khoury et al. (2023); Inan et al. (2021). However, while these security and privacy
concerns have received research and media attention4 , to the best of our knowledge, the risk and po-
tential extent of private code leakage via prompts transmitted to a third-party code assistant service,
along with strategies to mitigate this risk, have not been investigated. We regard this as a significant
risk given that the entire codebase of an organization’s proprietary software could be leaked to an
untrusted third-party service provider or an adversary capable of intercepting communication be-
tween developers and code assistant services. One approach for addressing the private code leakage
concern is to use a local code assistant LLM, which is possible due to the proliferation of open-
source models. The use of local models prevents sending prompts outside the network. However,
commercial remote alternatives offer advantages in terms of model freshness, maintenance, perfor-
mance, ease of use, and integration with well-designed plugins for IDEs. The convenience of these
commercial services continues to attract developers, despite the privacy concerns associated with
remote services.

                                 Original prompt                                     CodeCloak Prompt


                                       same suggestion



Figure 1: An example of CodeCloak’s performance. Left: an original prompt and the code suggested
by StarCoder. Right: the manipulated prompts obtained by applying CodeCloak and the code sug-
gested by StarCoder for the manipulated prompt.
Goal. There is a lack of comprehensive methods that effectively mitigate code exposure. In this
research, we address this gap by proposing CodeCloak, a novel deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
agent that manipulates code prompts before they are sent to the code assistant service. CodeCloak
addresses the critical and underexplored issue of code leakage in LLM-based code assistants. By
defining and formalizing the leakage problem in real-time IDE environments, we provide a foun-
dation for enhancing privacy when using code assistants. Our approach solves this challenge by
manipulating prompts in real-time to mitigate leakage without requiring modifications to the under-
lying assistant model, ensuring both practicality and seamless integration into existing workflows.
 As an example, in Figure 1 we present an original prompt (left) and a manipulated prompt gen-
erated by CodeCloak (right), both provided as input to the StarCoder code suggestion model. At
the bottom, the code suggestions provided by StarCoder for the original prompt and manipulated
prompt are presented (outlined in white). As can be seen, while the manipulated prompt is signifi-
cantly different from the original one, the response in both cases (suggested code) is similar. In our
evaluation, our mitigation method, CodeCloak, was shown to successfully reduce code leakage to an
average of 40% while maintaining an average of 70% similarity in terms of the CodeBLEU metric,
between the suggestions obtained for the manipulated prompts and those for the original prompts.
Contributions. The contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: (1) To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to explore the risk of code leakage via the prompts and propose a
mitigation. (2) We present CodeCloak, a novel method based on a DRL agent, which is aimed at both
  4
    https://www.forbes.com/sites/siladityaray/2023/05/02/
samsung-bans-chatgpt-and-other-chatbots-for-employees-after-sensitive-code-leak/
?sh=581383d16078


                                                   2
reducing code leakage and preserving useful suggestions. CodeCloak is generic and transferable and
thus, can be applied to any LLM code assistant. This approach can also be extended to LLMs in
other domains. (3) We present a method for reconstructing codebase from code segments; in our
usecase, we utilize prompts sent from the IDE to the code assistant model. We utilize the proposed
method in order to evaluate the amount and quality of the potential code leakage. and (4) We provide
to the research community a unique dataset containing authentic requests (prompts) and responses
(suggestions) generated by simulating the code development process and interactions with code
assistant service. This dataset captures the prompts sent to the code assistant services along with the
corresponding suggestions received, enabling evaluation of code leakage and mitigation techniques.

2   R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we provide a review of related work relevant to our study, including work on: privacy
and security risks inherent in LLM code assistants, and prompt editing.
Privacy and Security Risks. As the adoption of code assistant tools has increased, inherent security
and privacy risks have emerged Sandoval et al. (2023); Pearce et al. (2022).
Pearce et al. (2022) investigated the security implications of GitHub Copilot’s code contributions by
designing scenarios that crafted prompts sent to Copilot results in vulnerable code being suggested.
Incorporating suggestions from code assistants can intentionally or unintentionally introduce vul-
nerabilities or malicious content into the developer’s software. Inan et al. (2021) demonstrated how
improperly use of these tools can perpetuate existing security flaws in their training data. Khoury
et al. (2023) evaluated 21 programs in various programming languages, focusing on their vulnera-
bility to common security flaws. There are also concerns regarding inference attacks, when code
repositories are used to train LLMs. The risk of inferring whether specific code was used to train
the LLM model, also know as a membership inference attack (MIA), was discussed in Carlini et al.
(2021); Sun et al. (2022); Niu et al. (2023); Lukas et al. (2023). For example, Lukas et al. (2023)
proposed a novel MIA methodology and evaluated it on multiple code generation LLMs. They de-
signed specific prompts to induce personally identifiable information (PII) leakage in programming
languages and established a practical, automated pipeline for verifying such leaks. To mitigate the
privacy risks associated with unauthorized learning and code leakage, several studies have proposed
different strategies to protect sensitive information from LLM-based code assistants. Ji et al. (2022)
addressed the challenge of protecting proprietary code against unauthorized learning by LLM-based
code assistants, particularly when these models are trained on open-source repositories. They pro-
posed a method that involves applying lightweight, semantics-preserving transformations to the code
before it is open-sourced. This strategy effectively obstructs models trained on the modified code,
safeguarding the code from unauthorized learning while preserving its readability and functionality.
Lin et al. (2024) suggested a method defense that converts sensitive information in the original LLM
input prompt into an encrypted format that, while indecipherable to human interpretation, retains its
informativeness for the LLM to process. Pape et al. (2024) introduced prompt obfuscation to prevent
the extraction of the system prompt using Greedy Coordinate Gradient. While Those researches fo-
cused on mitigating leakage for general LLMs, we focus on code LLMs. Patil et al. (2023) presented
a model level defense, which deletes sensitive information from the LLM model weights directly,
assuming access to the model parameters, while we assume black-box access to the LLM. While the
studies above focused on assessing the security and potential vulnerabilities of code suggested by
the code assistant, or developing methods for protecting proprietary code, we focus on the risks of
code leakage via prompts when using code assistance models.
Prompt Editing. On the rise of pretrained generative language models, the domain of prompt engi-
neering for these LLMs has rapidly gained traction. Consequently, there is a growing focus among
researchers on prompt editing to refine and optimize input prompts to enhance model output quality
and alignment with user intentions Wang et al. (2023); Hertz et al. (2022). Several studies have ex-
plored prompt editing techniques using RL. For example, Zhang et al. (2022) presented TEMPERA,
an RL method for dynamically editing prompts to enhance LLM performance on NLP tasks (such as
sentiment analysis and topic classification). Kong et al. (2024) introduced PRewrite, an automated
prompt engineering method using RL for prompt optimization. Our study introduces a data level
defense that combines RL methods along with prompt editing, in order to mitigate the code leak-
age during the code writing (development) process. Whereas previous studies mainly focused on
general LLMs in different phases of model deployment, our defense specifically aims at code assis-
tant provider. Our methodology can be integrated into diverse LLM code assistant models, without
access to the model itself or its parameters.


                                                  3
3     C ODE C LOAK : C ODE L EAKAGE M ITIGATION M ETHOD
3.1     P ROBLEM D EFINITION
As mentioned in Section 1, to receive relevant suggestions, code assistant services rely on develop-
ers to provide the code they are currently working on. Let P be the sequence of prompts sent from
the developer’s IDE to the code assistant service during the development process. Correspondingly,
let S be the sequence of suggestions received from the code assistant service for the prompts P . Our
goal is to achieve two seemingly contradictory objectives simultaneously: (i) minimize the exposure
and leakage of the developer’s proprietary code by changing and manipulating the prompts P be-
fore sending them to the code assistant service, and (ii) preserve the relevance and usefulness of the
suggestions the developer receives for the manipulated prompts, by ensuring that they are as similar
as possible to S. In our research, we treat all code sent to the LLM-based assistant as private or
sensitive. This includes not only proprietary code but also open-source code that may inadvertently
reveal the functionality of the developed application or the use of vulnerable code and libraries.
In the context of code assistants, we observe that the prompts provided to the code assistant often
contain excessive information that may not be essential for generating meaningful and relevant code
suggestions. This observation serves as the basis of our proposed method. To leverage this insight,
we introduce a trained Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) model, which is tasked with identify-
ing information that is not essential or has a negligible effect on the suggestions’ quality for a given
prompt, and manipulate the prompt accordingly.
The sequential and context-sensitive nature of prompt manipulation makes reinforcement learning
(RL) particularly suitable for this task: (1) Sequential Decision-Making - Dynamically adjust ma-
nipulations as each modification affects future decisions. (2) Learning and Planning - Understand
the effects of manipulations on code completions and plan optimal sequences of actions. (3) Prac-
tical Deployment: Operate efficiently in real-time environments, thanks to RL’s lightweight and
resource-efficient nature compared to alternatives like fine-tuning LLMs.
By leveraging RL, our approach ensures that developer’s code is adequately modified, minimiz-
ing its exposure while maintaining the relevance and usefulness of the code assistant’s suggestions.
Background on DRL can be found in the Appendix B.

3.2     C ODE C LOAK D ESCRIPTION
As illustrated in Figure 2, CodeCloak is placed between the IDE and the code assistant service,
intercepting and modifying the prompts to reduce code exposure while preserving the relevance of
the assistant’s suggestions. It can run locally on the developer’s machine or in the organization’s
gateway. The prompt manipulation process is modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP), where
the agent learns to select the optimal actions (the manipulations) in order to maximize a reward that
aims to minimize code leakage and maintain suggestion relevance. The key components of the DRL
agent are described in the subsections below:
3.2.1    S TATES
To enable the agent to effectively choose the appropriate manipulation, we provide it with detailed
information about the prompt it is currently processing. In each iteration, the agent determines
which manipulation to apply by analyzing the state that captures this information. We incorporate
the following key elements into the state representation:
Prompt Embedding. The primary element is the prompt that is being manipulated. Since prompts
are textual data, we need to represent them in a way that captures their semantic meaning and context.
To achieve this, we feed the prompt to a pretrained code encoder model and use the last hidden
state as an embedding representation of the prompt. This embedding technique allows the agent to
capture the prompt’s semantic information, which is essential for making informed decisions. In
cases where the prompt length exceeds the encoder’s maximum token limit, we split the prompt into
segments. Each segment is processed individually through the encoder to generate its embedding
and is represented as a separate state. This segmentation approach allows the agent to handle longer
prompts effectively, providing better context for targeted modifications. Moreover, this method is
efficient and tailored for real-time use, ensuring that manipulations are applied within the short time
constraints of practical coding scenarios.
Relative Location. In the state, we include a fragment that represents the segment’s relative location
within the full prompt. This positional information is important for the agent ,enabling it to better
understand the order and placement of the code segments within the full prompt.


                                                   4
Cursor Position. The prompt sent to the code assistant includes the developer’s cursor location,
helping the code assistant understand where in the code the developer is currently focusing on. In
the state, we also include the relative locations of the developer’s cursor position (divided into two
fragments: one indicates the cursor’s relative line location, and the second indicates the relative
location in the line). Including the cursor position in the state representation is important, since it
provides contextual information about the part of the code the developer is currently working on and
allows the agent to understand what areas of the code it should focus on to apply the manipulations
(for example, changing code that is “close” to the cursor might affect the code assistant’s suggestions
more than manipulations in other areas).
The agent processes these states sequentially, applying manipulations in a loop over the segments.
This segmentation strategy allows the agent to navigate and refine extensive prompts effectively,
ensuring comprehensive coverage and strategic manipulations. More formally, let pt be a prompt
after t manipulations, which is divided into n segments: pt,0 , ..., pt,n−1 . We calculate the state
representation for the pt (σt ) as follows: i = t mod n is the location of the current segment to be
manipulated at time t. Given pt,i , the segment in the ith location at time t, the state embedding is:
σpemb
   t,i
       = L(pt,i ), where L(·) is the pretrained encoder producing the embedding. We represent the
segment’s relative location as σploc
                                   t,i
                                       and the cursor relative position for pt as σtcur .
The complete state representation σt is the concatenation:
                                         σt = [σpemb
                                                  t,i
                                                      , σploc
                                                           t,i
                                                               , σtcur ]                            (1)
Observation Normalization. Given that we used the last hidden states of pretrained LLM as ob-
servation representation, there might be slight differences across various samples. In order to deal
with this, we keep a running calculation of the mean and standard deviation for these observations
and normalize them prior to inputting them into the policy and value networks. Such normalization
is a standard practice in RL, and we observed that it enhances the efficacy of our approach.
3.2.2   ACTIONS
We defined a set of manipulations (referred to as A) designed to provide our agent with the flexibility
to effectively manipulate the prompts. In each step, our agent can apply a manipulation on the
prompt or decide to stop the prompt manipulation process and send it to the code assistant service
without further changes. The full list of the agent’s possible actions can be found in Appendix C.
3.2.3   R EWARDS
The reward function Rt is designed to capture the trade-off between minimizing code leakage and
preserving suggestion relevance. During training, the agent interacts with the code assistant service,
sending manipulated prompts and receiving suggestions. This allows computation of the reward Rt
based on the similarity between the original and manipulated suggestions, guiding the agent towards
an optimal prompt manipulation policy. Note that the reward considers the similarity of a full prompt
and the corresponding suggestion received for the prompt.
The reward function for training CodeCloak is based on the CodeBLEU metric Ren et al. (2020),
which effectively captures the syntactic, structural, and semantic similarities between code seg-
ments. CodeBLEU extends the traditional BLEUPapineni et al. (2002) metric by incorporating
domain-specific features of code, making it particularly suited for evaluating code generation and
manipulation tasks. This metric score ranges are from 0% to 100%, where a higher score reflects
greater similarity in terms of both code structure and functionality.
Let pt and p′t denote the original and manipulated prompts at timestep t, respectively. Let st and s′t
denote the suggestions generated by the code assistant model for pt and p′t . The total reward score
is defined as:
             RScore(pt , p′t , st , s′t ) = λ1 · CodeBLEU (st , s′t ) − λ2 · CodeBLEU (pt , p′t )   (2)

λ1 > 0 and λ2 > 0 are hyperparams for the trade-off between the prompts’ and the suggestions’
similarity. We chose to use complementary values to balance the two components (i.e., λ2 = 1−λ1 ).
Naturally, the RScore awards a positive reward when the similarity between the original and ma-
nipulated suggestions exceeds that of the prompts. Conversely, it awards a negative reward when
the similarity between the suggestions is smaller than the similarity between the prompts. The goal
is to optimize the RScore for the final manipulated prompt.
In traditional RL, the objective is to optimize the cumulative reward Gt over the entire MDP. How-
ever, in our prompt manipulation scenario, we are primarily interested in the performance of the


                                                       5
final manipulated prompt. Therefore, instead of using the RScore directly, we propose using the
difference in the RScore between successive manipulations as the immediate reward:
                 Rt = RScore(pt , pt′ , st , st′ ) − RScore(pt−1 , pt′ −1 , st−1 , st′ −1 )        (3)
 To better reward high performance, we apply a scaling mechanism that uses multipliers based on
predefined similarity ranges, boosting the total reward proportionally for more accurate results.


                                  Figure 2: CodeCloak interactions.
Reward Normalization. To maintain consistency in the reward range, we apply an exponential
moving average. We observed that this enhances the efficacy of our approach.
Reward Shaping. To enhance our agent’s effectiveness, we implemented reward shaping by defin-
ing score ranges with scaling factors, which enable the agent to better balance privacy and relevance.

3.2.4    P ROMPT M ANIPULATION P ROCESS
Given an initial prompt p, the agent starts in the state representation σ0 as described above. In each
timestep t, the agent selects an action at from the set of possible manipulations A, such as deleting
or inserting lines, renaming variables or functions, or modifying functions. After applying the action
at to the prompt pt , the agent transitions to a new state σt+1 representing the manipulated prompt
pt+1 . Note that in each step, the agent manipulates one segment of the total prompt. However, a
manipulation applied to one segment might influence other segments. For example, if a variable
name is changed in one segment, the agent will replace that variable name in all other segments
where that variable instance appears.
During the training process, The DRL agent interact with the code assistant model and receive the
code suggestions by sending the manipulated prompts to the code assistant model. This allows the
agent to measure the similarity between the suggestions received for the original and manipulated
prompts, and calculate the reward required by the learning algorithm to train the DRL agent. The
output of this phase is a trained DRL agent capable of effectively manipulating code prompts sent to
an LLM-based code assistant in a manner in which the privacy of the code owner and the effective-
ness/relevance of the code assistant’s suggestions are preserved. Note that the training of the DRL
agent is performed according to a policy which defines the preferred balance between preserving
privacy (preventing the leakage of sensitive code) and preserving the relevance of suggestions made
by the code assistant.
3.3     C ODE C LOAK T RAINING P HASE
In order to produce an efficient agent, capable of manipulating the prompts in an optimal manner,
a DRL algorithm is used to train the agent (see Figure 2). The input to the DRL agent is a dataset
of prompts from various projects, all generated by the code assistant client. During its training, the
agent processes the prompts and iteratively selects an action to apply on the prompt until the ‘stop
manipulation’ action is selected; eventually, this will enable the trained DRL agent to successfully
manipulate unseen or complex prompts during the inference phase. To assess the effectiveness of the
DRL agent’s manipulations during the training process, the agent interacts with the code assistant
model and receives the code suggestions by sending the manipulated prompts to the code assistant
model. This allows the agent to measure the similarity between the suggestions received for the
original and manipulated prompts, and calculate the Reward required by the learning algorithm
to train the DRL agent. The output of this phase is a trained DRL agent capable of effectively
manipulating code prompts sent to an LLM-based code assistant in a manner in which the privacy
of the code owner and the effectiveness/relevance of the code assistant’s suggestions are preserved.
Note that the training of the DRL agent is performed according to a policy; this policy defines
the preferred balance between preserving privacy (preventing the leakage of sensitive code) and
preserving the original code suggestions made by the code assistant.

                                                     6
3.4      C ODE C LOAK ’ S I NFERENCE P HASE
Following the training phase, the Mitigating component, which includes the DRL agent, is placed
between the IDE and the code assistant service (see Figure 2). During coding, each prompt
sent from the developer’s IDE to the code assistant service is processed by the DRL agent be-
fore it is sent. The agent manipulates the prompt, minimizing the leakage while preserving
the suggestion’s relevance, and sends the manipulated prompts to the code assistant service. In
some cases, an additional component called the Code Translation component, which is part of
the Mitigating module, is applied to the returning suggestions of the code assistant service be-
fore it is sent back to the developer’s IDE; for example, in cases in which the DRL agent
changes the names of functions/variables in the prompts before sending them to the code as-
sistant service, the Code Translation component maps the names of the functions/variables to
the original ones so they will be aligned with the developer’s code. The complete process
of the CodeCloak agent for a given prompt in the inference stage is outlined in Algorithm 3.

In our research, we used recurrent                    Figure 3: CodeCloak Inference Stage.
proximal policy optimization (recur-
                                              Input: original prompt p, CodeCloak policy πCodeCloak
rent PPO) Schulman et al. (2017) as           Output: CodeCloak’s suggestion s′
our RL model. We chose to use this            p0 ← p
model due to its ability to handle tem-       Divide prompt p0 into n segments p0,0 , . . . , p0,n−1
poral dependencies effectively. This is       t←0
crucial in sequential tasks, as prompt        while True do
manipulations build on prior steps.               i ← t mod n
Additionally, recurrent PPO enables               σt ← state representation for pt,i
us to feed different segments of the              at ← πCodeCloak (σt )
source code to the model at each step             if at = “StopManipulations” then
within an episode, allowing the agent                 break
                                                  else
to make decisions based on evolving                   pt+1,i ← apply at on pt,i
context throughout the episode.                       t←t+1
                                              s′ ← CodeAssistant suggestion for pt = pt,0 , . . . , pt,n−1
4       E VALUATION                           s′ ← apply CodeTranslation on s′
                                              return s′
4.1      E VALUATION S ETUP

Models. In our experiments, we used local versions of the following LLM-based code assistant
models: StarCoder Li et al. (2023) and Code Llama-13B Roziere et al. (2023). Due to GitHub
Copilot’s policy prohibiting automated processes that manipulate and analyze the model’s behavior,
we were unable to use CodeCloak to manipulate prompts sent to Copilot. Therefore, we trained
CodeCloak using StarCoder and evaluated it using the StarCoder and Code Llama models.
Datasets. To train and evaluate CodeCloak, we created a dataset by randomly sampling repositories
in the Python language from the CodeSearchNet Husain et al. (2019) dataset. For each repository,
we simulated a coding process by navigating to random locations in the repository, copying a random
number of code lines to the IDE, and using our Developer Coding Simulator which are explained in
Appendix E, simulating typing from this point for a short period of time (between 20-90 seconds),
capturing the generated prompts. This process yielded a dataset of around 30K diverse prompts of
various sizes from around 500 repositories, allowing CodeCloak to learn how to manipulate prompts
effectively. To assess the effectiveness of CodeCloak, we used prompts containing more than four
functions, since they contain a substantial amount of code that can be leaked and allow the agent to
apply manipulations.
CodeCloak Details. To train the DRL agent, we used the Recurrent PPO algorithm from the Stable
Baselines3 Contrib library Raffin et al. (2021). The state embedding was obtained by using the
last hidden state of the StarEncoder5 model. The maximum token limit for input prompts was set
at 1,600 tokens. To accommodate prompts that exceed the StarEncoder model’s maximum token
limit, we divided each prompt into two segments. The output response length was set at 20 tokens.
In addition, unless otherwise specified, the hyperparameters λ1 and λ2 were both set at 0.5, giving
equal importance to both of CodeCloak’s objectives.

    5
        https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starencoder


                                                  7
4.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

CodeBLEU. The CodeBLEU Ren et al. (2020) score extends the BLEUPapineni et al. (2002) as
descried before. To evaluate CodeCloak using CodeBLEU, we set the weights of CodeBLEU com-
ponents as proposed in the original paper Ren et al. (2020) to be the most suitable for measuring
similarity in code refinement tasks, capturing the preservation of the code’s semantic meaning and
functional behavior: α, β, γ, δ = 0.1, 0.4, 0.1, 0.4.
LLM as a Judge. LLMs have been found to be effective evaluators for a wide range of tasks,
aligning well with human preferences Zheng et al. (2023). In particular, Zheng et al. reported that
GPT-4 achieves over 80% agreement with human judgments, establishing it as a reliable tool for
evaluation. Building on this, recent studies have explored the use of LLMs, specifically ChatGPT, in
various code-related applications, showcasing its potential for code analysis. For instance, methods
using ChatGPT for automatic code documentation Khan & Uddin (2022), code summarization and
refinement Guo et al. (2024); Sun et al. (2023) tasks have demonstrated its ability to understand
code semantics. ChatGPT’s successful use in static code analysis and application security test-
ing Bakhshandeh et al. (2023); Sadik et al. (2023), highlight its code “understanding” capabilities.
Leveraging ChatGPT’s strengths in code-related tasks, we used ChatGPT 4 (1106-preview version)
to measure the similarity between code segments and assess CodeCloak’s manipulation effective-
ness through two metrics; for each metric we created a dedicated prompt: PrivacyGPT measures the
percentage of the original code that was successfully protected from leakage, ranging from 0% (fully
leaked) to 100% (no leakage), based on the comparison between the original code segment and the
version obtained by an adversary. A higher score indicates that a larger portion of the original code
was effectively prevented from being exposed. SugSimGPT - Given the original prompt and two
code suggestions (the original suggestion and the one received for the manipulated prompt), Chat-
GPT provides a similarity score between 0% and 100%. A higher score indicates greater similarity
between the suggestions. For each prompt, we instructed ChatGPT to consider different factors such
as functional similarity, visual similarity, and the intended purpose or code meaning.
4.3   C ODE C LOAK ’ S R ESULTS
Our Agent’s Effectiveness. To evaluate CodeCloak’s effectiveness, we compare its performance
against two baseline models: (1) a Random baseline, where manipulations are applied randomly
for each prompt, with the number of actions ranging up to the maximum possible numuber of ma-
nipulations, and (2) an LLM-based baseline, which leverages a large language model (specifically
ChatGPT-4) to dynamically determine both the type and extent of manipulations. In the LLM-based
baseline, ChatGPT-4 is provided with a system prompt explaining the objective of reducing code
leakage while maintaining suggestion relevance, allowing it to make informed, context-aware deci-
sions. The results, as shown in Table 1, demonstrate CodeCloak’s effectiveness in balancing code
leakage mitigation and preserving suggestion relevance. For the CodeBLEU metric on suggestions,
CodeCloak achieved a significantly higher score of 72.3%, compared to 49.2% for the random base-
line and 42.6% for the LLM-based baseline, demonstrating its superior ability to maintain suggestion
quality. Additionally, CodeCloak excelled with an 80.2% score for the SugSimGPT metric, outper-
forming both the random baseline (46.2%) and the LLM-based baseline (38.7%), further indicating
the high relevance of the suggestions generated after prompt manipulations.
While the random baseline performed slightly better in terms of code leakage, this improvement
came at the expense of suggestion quality, where CodeCloak clearly excels. Similarly, while the
LLM-based baseline achieved a balanced trade-off between leakage mitigation and suggestion rel-
evance, its performance was still inferior to that of CodeCloak, which optimizes this balance more
effectively. An analysis of the actions taken by CodeCloak reveals that it tends to apply more aggres-
sive manipulations, such as ’Delete Functions’ Body,’ during the initial steps of the process. This
indicates that the agent prioritizes reducing leakage by focusing on critical aspects of the prompt
while still preserving the utility of the suggestions.
An analysis of the actions taken by CodeCloak reveals that it tends to apply more aggressive ma-
nipulations, such as ’Delete Functions’ Body’ during the initial steps of the process. This indicates
that the agent prioritizes reducing leakage by focusing on significant modifications early on. As the
process progresses, the agent transitions to more refined actions, such as ’Change Variables Names’,
which fine-tune the suggestions while preserving relevance. A heatmap illustrating the action selec-
tion distribution can be found in Appendix G.
 Prioritizing Suggestions and Requests. In addition to the baseline model with equal prioritization
(λ1 = λ2 = 0.5), we trained two additional models to explore the trade-offs between mitigating


                                                  8
           Table 1: Performance comparison of the random and CodeCloak approaches
                                                   CodeBLEU                  ChatGPT Metrics
                                             Prompts ↓ Suggestions ↑    PrivacyGPT ↑ SugSimGPT ↑
                  Random baseline               35%        49.2%           62.4%        46.2%
                  LLMs based baseline          41.1%       42.6%           53.9%        38.7%
                  CodeCloak                    36.4%       72.3%           58.2%        80.2%


                   Table 2: CodeCloak’s performance for different prioritizations
                                                   CodeBLEU                   ChatGPT Metrics
                                             Prompts ↓ Suggestions ↑    PrivacyGPT ↑ SugSimGPT ↑
                 Equal prioritization          36.4%       72.3%           58.2%        80.2%
                 Prioritizing Suggestions       68%        82.5%           24.9%        90.7%
                 Prioritizing Requests         30.1%       50.2%           76.2%        55.3%



leakage and preserving functionality: (1) Prioritizing Suggestions: A model that prioritizes the rel-
evance of suggestions over mitigating leakage, configured with λ1 = 0.3 and λ2 = 0.7. This setup
ensures developers receive high-quality, useful suggestions despite prompt manipulations, focusing
on enhancing coding efficiency. (2) Prioritizing Requests: A model that emphasizes mitigating code
leakage over preserving the relevance of suggestions, configured with λ1 = 0.7 and λ2 = 0.3.
This setup ensures that manipulated prompts effectively hide and protect the developer’s original
code. These two configurations allowed us to investigate the impact of different priorities on the
effectiveness of our approach in real-time coding environments.

            Table 3: CodeCloak’s performance of in a cross-LLM transferability setup
                                             CodeBLEU                       ChatGPT Metrics
                                       Prompts ↓ Suggestions ↑         PrivacyGPT ↑ SugSimGPT ↑
                  StarCoder                 36.4%       72.3%             58.2%        80.2%
                  CodeLlma 13B              36.2%       73.8%             58.2%        78.3%


The results presented in Table 2 demonstrate how CodeCloak can be adjusted for different compo-
nent weights, depending on the developer’s needs.
Transferability. As can be seen in the results presented in Table 3, CodeCloak demonstrates full
transferability between StarCoder and Code Llama (i.e., training the DRL agent on StartCoder and
using the trained agent on Code Llama), which emphasizes its robustness and usefulness.
4.4   E VALUATING C ODE C LOAK ’ S S UGGESTIONS U SING H UMAN J UDGMENT

To further emphasize the relevance of the suggestions provided by CodeCloak, we conducted a
user study involving human judgment. We created two separate questionnaires, each containing 20
prompts, along with two corresponding suggestions for each prompt. In Questionnaire 1, partic-
ipants were shown code suggestions from StarCoder for both the original prompt and the prompt
manipulated by CodeCloak. Questionnaire 2 followed the same format, but instead of presenting
the suggestions that were generated by CodeCloak, we present the suggestion created by baseline
model (see 4.3). Participants were tasked with evaluating the relevance of the suggestions without
knowing which was original or manipulated. For each prompt, developers were shown both sugges-
tions side by side (in random order) and were asked to indicate which suggestion they found more
relevant, using a five-point scale where one side represented preference for the first suggestion and
the other for the second. After collecting their responses, we analyzed the results by mapping their
ratings to a scale from -2 to 2, where -2 indicates that the suggestion for the original prompt is more
relevant, 0 indicated equal relevance and 2 indicates that the suggestion for the manipulated prompt
is more relevant. Then, for each prompt, we averaged the developers’ rankings to produce a final rel-
evance score. We distributed the questionnaires to 20 experienced developers, with 10 participants
evaluating each set of 20 prompts. The prompts used in this evaluation were randomly selected
from the test set of the evaluation dataset. The results from the questionnaires closely align with the
previous metrics, reinforcing CodeCloak’s ability to preserve suggestion quality. In Questionnaire
1, 13 out of 20 prompts (65%) rated the suggestions from the manipulated prompts as equal to or
better than the original ones, with a mean score of -0.24 and a standard deviation of 0.54, indicating
only a slight preference for the original suggestions. In contrast, Questionnaire 2 demonstrated that
only 4 out of 20 prompts (20%) rated the suggestions from the baseline manipulations as equal or


                                                            9
better, with a significantly lower mean score of -1.02 and a standard deviation of 0.72. These results
clearly show that CodeCloak produces significantly more relevant and useful suggestions than those
created by the baseline model, while effectively reducing code leakage.
4.5      E VALUATING C ODE L EAKAGE ON C OMPLETE R EPOSITORIES
Code Reconstruction. To assess CodeCloak’s effectiveness in reducing code leakage, we employed
a dynamic code reconstruction method that simulates how an attacker could potentially reconstruct
a developer’s complete repository from intercepted prompts during the coding process. The method
includes the following stages: (1) Prompt Interception and Monitoring: During the developing
simulated process, we capture all prompts sent from the IDE to the code assistant over time. (2)
Aggregating and Reconstructing the Codebase: Using an LLM model with a detailed reconstruction
instructions prompt, we dynamically aggregated the captured prompts to reconstruct the evolving
codebase, reflecting changes and modifications made during development. This approach accounts
for changes and modifications made during development. (3) Comparative Analysis: We compared
the reconstructed code with and without CodeCloak to measure code leakage mitigation.
Prompts were intercepted using BURP Suite6 within the PyCharm IDE. To reconstruct a codebase
from the code segments, we used ChatGPT 4.0 (1106-preview version). Additional details regarding
this experiment can be found in Appendix D.
Evaluating CodeCloak on Complete Repositories To evaluate CodeCloak ’s real-world effective-
ness, we conducted experiments on five randomly selected GitHub repositories of varying sizes,
created after the formal cutoff date for ChatGPT-4 training to minimize the likelihood of overlap
with its training data. Each repository contained 3-4 files, ranging from 30 to 900 lines (see Ap-
pendix F). For each repository, we simulated the coding process twice: once without CodeCloak
and once with it. Due to the sequential nature of prompts during development, we applied a pre-
processing step to ensure consistent manipulations across the codebase. Without CodeCloak, the
reconstructed repositories achieved an average CodeBLEU score of 79.1%, indicating substantial
code leakage. However, with CodeCloak applied, the average CodeBLEU score for these repos-
itories dropped significantly to 40.1%, highlighting a notable reduction in code exposure. This
preprocessing step identified previously manipulated code segments and applied the same changes
to subsequent prompts. After preprocessing, CodeCloak further manipulated the prompts to mini-
mize code leakage while maintaining the relevance and usefulness of suggestions. Finally, We then
employed our code reconstruction method to evaluate the extent of code leakage, reconstructing the
codebase using the captured prompts with and without CodeCloak. Additionally, the SugSimGPT
metric, which leverages ChatGPT’s code analysis capabilities, produced an average similarity score
of 74.3%, showing that the relevance of the suggestions remained largely intact. The CodeBLEU

                    Table 4: CodeCloak’s performance on complete repositories

                                      Avg CodeBLEU        CodeBLEU
                                                                         SugSimGPT ↑
                                      Complete Repos↓    Suggestions ↑
                  Without CodeCloak       79.1%             100%            100%
                  With CodeCloak          40.1%             68.4%           74.3%


score for suggestions averaged 68.4%, further confirming CodeCloak ’s effectiveness in preserving
the usefulness of the code assistant’s suggestions during the development process.

5       C ONCLUSION
This study addressed the critical issue of code leakage risk resulting from the widespread adoption of
LLM-based code assistants. We proposed CodeCloak, a novel DRL agent that manipulates prompts
sent to code assistant services to mitigate this risk. CodeCloak effectively reduces code leakage
while preserving the relevance and the usefulness of the code assistant’s suggestions. These con-
tributions pave the way for more secure and privacy-preserving use of LLM-based code assistants.
By offering a practical solution for mitigating leakage during the development process, CodeCloak
facilitates the responsible adoption of these powerful tools. We anticipate that our work will serve as
a catalyst for further research into the security and privacy challenges associated with LLM-based
code assistants.
    6
        https://portswigger.net/burp/documentation/desktop/tools/proxy


                                                    10
R EFERENCES
Atieh Bakhshandeh, Abdalsamad Keramatfar, Amir Norouzi, and Mohammad Mahdi
  Chekidehkhoun. Using chatgpt as a static application security testing tool. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.14434, 2023.

Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.

Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Linyi Yang, Xiaoyuan
  Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. A survey on evaluation of large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.03109, 2023.

Qi Guo, Junming Cao, Xiaofei Xie, Shangqing Liu, Xiaohong Li, Bihuan Chen, and Xin Peng. Ex-
  ploring the potential of chatgpt in automated code refinement: An empirical study. In Proceedings
  of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 1–13, 2024.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.

Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc Brockschmidt.
  Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code search. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.09436, 2019.

Huseyin A Inan, Osman Ramadan, Lukas Wutschitz, Daniel Jones, Victor Rühle, James Withers, and
  Robert Sim. Training data leakage analysis in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05405,
  2021.

Zhenlan Ji, Pingchuan Ma, and Shuai Wang. Unlearnable examples: Protecting open-source soft-
  ware from unauthorized neural code learning. In SEKE, pp. 525–530, 2022.

Wang Junmei and Yan Chengkang. Automation testing of software security based on burpsuite. In
 2021 International Conference of Social Computing and Digital Economy (ICSCDE), pp. 71–74.
 IEEE, 2021.

Junaed Younus Khan and Gias Uddin. Automatic code documentation generation using gpt-3. In
  Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineer-
  ing, pp. 1–6, 2022.

Raphaël Khoury, Anderson R Avila, Jacob Brunelle, and Baba Mamadou Camara. How secure is
  code generated by chatgpt? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09655, 2023.

Weize Kong, Spurthi Amba Hombaiah, Mingyang Zhang, Qiaozhu Mei, and Michael Bendersky.
 Prewrite: Prompt rewriting with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08189, 2024.

Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.

Guo Lin, Wenyue Hua, and Yongfeng Zhang. Promptcrypt: Prompt encryption for secure commu-
  nication with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05868, 2024.

Nils Lukas, Ahmed Salem, Robert Sim, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz, and Santiago Zanella-
  Béguelin. Analyzing leakage of personally identifiable information in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.00539, 2023.

Liang Niu, Shujaat Mirza, Zayd Maradni, and Christina Pöpper. Codexleaks: Privacy leaks from
  code generation language models in github copilot. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
  (USENIX Security 23). USENIX Association, 2023.


                                                11
David Pape, Thorsten Eisenhofer, and Lea Schönherr. Prompt obfuscation for large language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11026, 2024.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Vaidehi Patil, Peter Hase, and Mohit Bansal. Can sensitive information be deleted from llms? ob-
  jectives for defending against extraction attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17410, 2023.
Hammond Pearce, Baleegh Ahmad, Benjamin Tan, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Ramesh Karri.
  Asleep at the keyboard? assessing the security of github copilot’s code contributions. In 2022
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 754–768. IEEE, 2022.
Neil Perry, Megha Srivastava, Deepak Kumar, and Dan Boneh. Do users write more insecure code
  with ai assistants? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03622, 2022.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. The Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 22(1):12348–12355, 2021.
Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sundaresan, Ming Zhou,
  Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. Codebleu: a method for automatic evaluation of code synthesis.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.10297, 2020.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Ahmed Sadik, Antonello Ceravola, Frank Joublin, and Jibesh Patra. Analysis of chatgpt on source
  code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00597, 2023.
Gustavo Sandoval, Hammond Pearce, Teo Nys, Ramesh Karri, Siddharth Garg, and Brendan Dolan-
  Gavitt. Lost at c: A user study on the security implications of large language model code assis-
  tants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09727, 2023.
Christian Schauer, Matthias Prandtstetter, and Günther R Raidl. A memetic algorithm for recon-
  structing cross-cut shredded text documents. In International Workshop on Hybrid Metaheuris-
  tics, pp. 103–117. Springer, 2010.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Kulesh Shanmugasundaram and Nasir Memon. Automatic reassembly of document fragments via
  data compression. In 2nd Digital Forensics Research Workshop, Syracuse, 2002.
Weisong Sun, Chunrong Fang, Yudu You, Yun Miao, Yi Liu, Yuekang Li, Gelei Deng, Shenghan
 Huang, Yuchen Chen, Quanjun Zhang, et al. Automatic code summarization via chatgpt: How
 far are we? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12865, 2023.
Zhensu Sun, Xiaoning Du, Fu Song, Mingze Ni, and Li Li. Coprotector: Protect open-source
  code against unauthorized training usage with data poisoning. In Proceedings of the ACM Web
  Conference 2022, pp. 652–660, 2022.
Priyan Vaithilingam, Tianyi Zhang, and Elena L Glassman. Expectation vs. experience: Evaluating
  the usability of code generation tools powered by large language models. In Chi conference on
  human factors in computing systems extended abstracts, pp. 1–7, 2022.
Yunlong Wang, Shuyuan Shen, and Brian Y Lim. Reprompt: Automatic prompt editing to refine
  ai-generative art towards precise expressions. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on
  Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–29, 2023.
Tianjun Zhang, Xuezhi Wang, Denny Zhou, Dale Schuurmans, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Tempera:
  Test-time prompting via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11890, 2022.

                                               12
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.


                                            13
A     A PPENDIX

B    D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an area of machine learning (ML) that addresses multi-step decision-
making processes. An RL algorithm normally consists of an agent that interacts with an environment
in a sequence of actions and rewards. In each time step t, the agent selects an action ai ∈ A =
{a1 , a2 , ..., ak }. As a result of ai , the agent transitions from the current state st to a new state st+1 .
The selection of the action may result in a reward, which can be either positive or negative. The
goal of the agent in each state is to interact with the environment in a way that maximizes the sum
of future rewards Gt . Eq. 4 represents the cumulative reward over time:
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                           Gt =         γ k Rt+k+1                                         (4)
                                                  k=0

where:

         • Gt is the expected return at step t.
         • Rt+k+1 represents the reward received after k steps from step t.
         • γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor, which provides the present value to future rewards. A
           reward received k steps in the future is valued at γ k times its immediate value.

In order to maximize Eq. 4, the agent needs to learn its optimal policy. The policy defines how
the agent behaves at any given time; i.e., which action to select when in a given state. When faced
with complex environments with high-dimensional data, it is common to use DRL, i.e., incorporate
deep neural networks to learn the optimal policy. This enables the agent to learn more sophisticated
strategies and make more informed decisions. DRL algorithms can efficiently explore vast state
and action spaces and devise strategies for addressing complex problems. Moreover, DRL excels in
handling partial and noisy information. Utilizing the reward function, DRL algorithms can reconcile
multiple, sometimes conflicting objectives, making them invaluable in security-related scenarios.


                                                      14
C    C ODE C LOAK ACTION L IST
Table5 contains a list of all the possible actions that CodeCloak can apply in each step.

                          Table 5: CodeCloak’s code manipulation actions

 Action                           Description
 Detect and Replace PII           Detect PII (e.g., names, API keys, emails) in the current code segment and
                                  replace them with random strings of a fixed length.
 Change Random Lines              Swap positions of two random lines present in the current code segment.
 Delete Random Line               Remove a random line from the current code segment.
 Insert Random Line               Insert a random line in the current code segment.
 Delete Functions’ Body Incre-    Incrementally remove function bodies from the current code segment and re-
 mentally                         place the removed body replaced with summarization comments (that were gen-
                                  erated using a local summarization model).
 Delete Functions’ Body (Keep     Remove all function bodies except the last one in the current code segment and
 Last)                            replace the removed bodies with summarization comments (that were generated
                                  using a local summarization model).
 Delete Functions’ Body           Remove all function bodies present in the current code segment and replace
                                  them with summarization comments describing the original function bodies
                                  (that were generated using a local summarization model).
 Delete Functions Incrementally   Incrementally remove functions from the current code segment.
 Change Functions Names           Replace all function identifiers in the current code segment with random strings
                                  of a fixed length (5 characters) consisting of letters and numbers.
 Change variables names           Replace all variable identifiers in the current code segment with random strings
                                  of a fixed length (5 characters) consisting of letters and numbers.
 Change Arguments Names           Replace all argument identifiers in the current code segment with random strings
                                  of a fixed length (5 characters) consisting of letters and numbers.
 Stop Manipulations               Stop processing the current prompt and send it to the code assistant service
                                  without further manipulations.


                                                   15
D     C ODE R ECONSTRUCTION M ETHOD


                Coding              Prompt                    Prompt

                                  Suggestions Date Leakage Suggestions     Code Assistant
    Developer             IDE                    Monitor                      Service
                                              1

                                     Code Segments
                                              2                 3                           4
                                                                                 Reconst-
                                                                                  ructed
                                                                                   Code

                                                  Data              Code
                                              Preprocessing     Reconstruction                  Evaluation

                             Source Code


Figure 4: An illustration of the proposed code reconstruction process long with its main components.
D.1     P ROBLEM D EFINITION

In this section, we introduce our method for code reconstruction using prompts when using LLM-
based code assistants. Our method aims to evaluate the extent of codebase leakage during the devel-
opment process. In order to achieve this, three challenges must be addressed:
       1. The need to determine an effective method for intercepting and monitoring prompts sent to
          the code assistant service during the development process;
       2. The need to formulate and design a code reconstruction approach capable of reconstructing
          the developer’s codebase, based on LLMs, in which the prompts are aggregated over time;
          and
       3. The need to define a method for evaluating the severity of the leakage, given the original
          and reconstructed codebases.
The main challenge in reconstructing code from the prompts sent to the code assistant over time
stems from the frequent modifications made by the developer during coding, such as editing and
deleting code segments in different locations. Because of such modifications, early prompts that
have been leaked and captured may be irrelevant and outdated or duplicated, preventing the use
of traditional reconstruction methods that combine all available code segments into one complete
codebase Schauer et al. (2010); Shanmugasundaram & Memon (2002).
The main components of our proposed method are presented in Figure 4.

D.2     DATA C OLLECTION AND P REPARATION

To collect the prompts during the development process, the Data Leakage Monitor component (com-
ponent 1 in Figure 4) intercepts the traffic between the IDE and the code assistant service and ex-
tracts the prompts that are being sent from the code assistant client to the service. This process is
performed in real time, for example, by placing a proxy (such as Burp Suite Junmei & Chengkang
(2021)) between the IDE and the code assistant service.
In the next step, the proposed method performs a preparatory process, using the Data Preparation
component (component 2 in Figure 4), which is focused on analyzing the prompts. Its goal is to
extract the code segments and additional contextual data (for example, in some code assistants, the
prompt includes the source files’ names from which the code segments were extracted). In cases
where the prompt includes this information, we process the prompts by aggregating them by the file
they belong to (based on the filename).Next, we order the prompts chronologically (by their sending
timestamp). At this stage, for each file, we have an ordered sequence of code segments. Finally, we
remove code segments that are contained within subsequent code segments to avoid duplication and
reduce code reconstruction time. By removing redundant code segments, we streamline the recon-
struction process, enabling out method to receive a more comprehensive and concise representation
of the codebase segments, resulting in a more accurate code reconstruction.


                                                  16
            Figure 5: System and user prompts for code reconstruction using ChatGPT.


D.3   C ODE R ECONSTRUCTION

Following the data collection and preparation phase, our method employs an LLM, which serves as
the Code Reconstruction component (component 3 in Figure 4). As input, this model receives the
processed prompts in the order in which they were transmitted from the code assistant client (in the
IDE) to the code assistant service. In case where the total segments’ size exceeds the max token
limit the LLM is able to process, we send the LLM segments of each file separately. If the total
segments’ size still exceeds the max token limit, we perform the following iterative process: we
take the maximum possible segments (that do not exceed the max token limit) and send them to the
LLM. In the next iteration, we provide the LLM the codebase reconstructed in the last step, along
with new segments. We repeats this process until we complete processing all the segments.The Code
Reconstruction component then combines these code segments, building a representation of the
developer’s final code. When these prompts are submitted to the LLM (ChatGPT4 in our evaluation),
they are accompanied detailed instructions that clearly define the task (see Figure 5). This is done
to ensure that the model produces relevant and accurate output consisting of the name and content
of each file identified, providing a comprehensive view of the leaked code.



D.4   L EAKAGE E VALUATION

After reconstructing the codebase from the collected code segments, our next step is to evaluate the
effectiveness of the code reconstruction process and the amount of code leakage (component 4 in
Figure 4). This involves assessing whether the proposed method accurately reconstructed the code
in its original form and whether the reconstructed version clearly conveys the original intent and
functionality of the code. This evaluation process allows our method to accurately determine the
percentage of the developer’s code that was leaked. In our evaluation, we use the normalized edit
distance metric, which measures how similar two texts are by calculating the least number of changes
needed to transform one text into another, adjusted by their lengths. This offers a straightforward,
scaled gauge for visually comparing text differences and clearly depicting variations or mistakes.


                                                17
E    D EVELOPER C ODING S IMULATOR
We developed a Python-based simulator designed to mimic the realistic behavior of developers dur-
ing the coding process. The simulator incorporates features such as introducing coding errors at
random intervals, correcting those errors after writing additional lines of code, simulating pauses in
typing, going back and forth in the file, and maintaining a developers’ average typing speed rate.
This simulator was used to generate datasets to train and evaluate CodeCloak. It operates within an
IDE configured with code assistant plugins, allowing us to capture the prompts sent from the IDE to
the code assistant servers and the corresponding suggestions received. The prompts and suggestions
captured during these simulated coding sessions formed the datasets used to evaluate our mitigation
method across different code assistants, including StarCoder and Code Llama models.

F    G IT H UB DATASET
In Table 6 we list the repositories used in our experiments (we randomly selected 5 repositories with
the condition of 3-4 files in each repository).

                        Table 6: GitHub repositories used in our experiments

 #   Github File Path
 1   https://github.com/robert-koch-institut/mex-backend/blob/main/tests/test_roundtrip.py
     https://github.com/robert-koch-institut/mex-backend/blob/main/tests/test_exceptions.py
     https://github.com/robert-koch-institut/mex-backend/blob/main/tests/identity/test_provider.py
     https://github.com/robert-koch-institut/mex-backend/blob/main/tests/graph/test_query.py
 2   https://github.com/stocknear/backend/blob/main/app/twitter.py
     https://github.com/stocknear/backend/blob/main/app/ta_signal.py
     https://github.com/stocknear/backend/blob/main/app/rating.py
     https://github.com/stocknear/backend/blob/main/app/market_movers.py
 3   https://github.com/zinabkaviani/Trellomize/blob/main/Codes/globals.py
     https://github.com/zinabkaviani/Trellomize/blob/main/Codes/register.py
     https://github.com/zinabkaviani/Trellomize/blob/main/Codes/User/user.py
 4   https://github.com/ScanMountGoat/xenoblade_blender/blob/main/xenoblade_blender/import_camdo.py
     https://github.com/ScanMountGoat/xenoblade_blender/blob/main/xenoblade_blender/__init__.py
     https://github.com/ScanMountGoat/xenoblade_blender/blob/main/xenoblade_blender/export_root.py
     https://github.com/ScanMountGoat/xenoblade_blender/blob/main/xenoblade_blender/export_wimdo.py
 5   https://github.com/ToTheBeginning/PuLID/blob/main/eva_clip/loss.py
     https://github.com/ToTheBeginning/PuLID/blob/main/eva_clip/hf_model.py
     https://github.com/ToTheBeginning/PuLID/blob/main/eva_clip/modified_resnet.py
     https://github.com/ToTheBeginning/PuLID/blob/main/eva_clip/timm_model.py


G     C ODE C LOAK ACTION D ISTRIBUTION H EATMAP
The heat map in Figure 6 presents the distribution of different manipulations/actions (x-axis) cho-
sen by CodeCloak across various time steps (y-axis) during the evaluation process. Note that the
heatmap refers to sequences of manipulations of variable length.


                                                 18
                        Figure 6: CodeCloak Action Distribution Heatmap.


H    H YPER PARMAMETERS FOR TRAINING C ODE C LOAK
The table below provides the training details for CodeCloak. In addition, We also adopt parallel
environment in our training process (eight environments). We have noticed that large size of parallel
environments helped for our training process.

                Hyperparameter               Value
                Learning Rate                0.00025
                Time Limit (per episode)     15
                Gamma (Discount Factor)      0.99
                GAE Lambda                   0.95
                N Steps                      128
                Batch Size                   64
                Clip Range                   0.2
                Entropy Coefficient          0.01
                                             Policy Network: [256, 256, 256, 128],
                Policy Net Arch
                                             Value Network: [256, 256, 256, 128]

           Table 7: Hyperparameters and Policy Configuration for Training CodeCloak


                                                 19
