Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S YSTEM -1.x: L EARNING TO BALANCE FAST AND S LOW
P LANNING WITH L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Swarnadeep Saha                           Archiki Prasad                       Justin Chih-Yao Chen

 Peter Hase                               Elias Stengel-Eskin                             Mohit Bansal

 UNC Chapel Hill



                                               A BSTRACT
            Language models can be used to solve long-horizon planning problems in two
            distinct modes. In a fast ‘System-1’ mode, models directly generate plans without
            any explicit search or backtracking, and in a slow ‘System-2’ mode, they plan
            step-by-step by explicitly searching over possible actions. System-2 planning,
            while typically more effective, is also computationally more expensive and often
            infeasible for long plans or large action spaces. Moreover, isolated System-1 or
            System-2 planning ignores the user’s end goals and constraints (e.g., token budget),
            failing to provide ways for the user to control the model’s behavior. To this end,
            we propose the System-1.x Planner, a framework for controllable planning with
            language models that is capable of generating hybrid plans and balancing between
            the two planning modes based on the difficulty of the problem at hand. System-1.x
            consists of (i) a controller, (ii) a System-1 Planner, and (iii) a System-2 Planner.
            Based on a user-specified hybridization factor x governing the degree to which the
            system uses System-1 vs. System-2, the controller decomposes a planning problem
            into sub-goals, and classifies them as easy or hard to be solved by either System-1 or
            System-2, respectively. We fine-tune all three components on top of a single LLM,
            requiring only search traces as supervision. Experiments with two diverse planning
            tasks – Maze Navigation and Blocksworld – show that our System-1.x Planner
            outperforms a System-1 Planner, a System-2 Planner trained to approximate A∗
            search, and also a symbolic planner (A∗ search), given a state exploration budget.
            We also demonstrate the following key properties of our planner: (1) controllability:
            by adjusting the hybridization factor x (e.g., System-1.75 vs. System-1.5) we can
            perform more (or less) search, improving performance, (2) flexibility: by building
            a neuro-symbolic variant composed of a neural System-1 planner and a symbolic
            System-2 planner, we can take advantage of existing symbolic methods, and (3)
            generalizability: by learning from different search algorithms (BFS, DFS, A∗ ), we
            show that our method is robust to the choice of search algorithm used for training.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
A key feature of intelligence – both human and artificial – is the ability to plan. Indeed, planning has
been a major topic of AI research for most of its history (Russell and Norvig, 2016), with applications
ranging from navigation and robotics to manufacturing and story-telling. These days, auto-regressive
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used for various long-horizon planning and reason-
ing tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2024). Despite some initial promise, recent
careful investigations have highlighted LLMs’ shortcomings on classical planning tasks (Pallagani
et al., 2023; Valmeekam et al., 2023; 2024; Momennejad et al., 2024). Supervising models with
correct plans has also led to limited success, especially for out-of-distribution generalization (Dziri
et al., 2023). Fundamentally, this issue is attributed to a lack of explicit search, backtracking, or
learning from mistakes (Kambhampati et al., 2024; Bachmann and Nagarajan, 2024; Gandhi et al.,
    1
        Code available at https://github.com/swarnaHub/System-1.x


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          System 1                       System 2                                 System 1.x
                                                                                                                              This is easy, use System-1    .
       Fast         Accurate          Fast            Accurate                    Fast               Accurate
                                                                        4,0                                     1,2
              4,0                                                                        3,2                          (0,0)
                                                4,0
                                                                                                                                                                    This is hard, use
                                                                        3,0                                     1,1                                                 System-2       .
              3,0                                                                 2,2          3,3
                                          3,0          4,1
                                                                        3,1   +                            +    1,0
              3,1                                            …                           2,3         3,4
                                   3,1          2,0
                                                                        3,2                                     0,0
                                                                                          x%
                …



                                         2,1
              0,0
                                                                              I want a system 1.x!
                                                                                                                      (4,0)                                         (4,4)


         User                  Starting Point                Obstacle               States Explored (Valid)
                                                                                                                               This is easy, use System-1       .
         LLM Planner           End Point                     State Taken           States Explored (Invalid)



Figure 1: Comparative overview of a System-1 Planner, a System-2 Planner, and our hybrid and
controllable System-1.x Planner. Given a Maze Navigation task, a System-1 Planner directly
generates a plan as a sequence of steps without search, thus making it fast but inaccurate. A System-2
Planner performs search before generating a plan and hence is more accurate but much slower.
Our System-1.x Planner generates hybrid plans, where the level of hybridization is controlled by
a user-defined hyperparameter. Hybrid plans balance System-1 sub-plans for easier sub-goals and
System-2 sub-plans for harder ones, making System-1.x fast, accurate, and controllable.

2024), all of which are essential components of standard planning systems. LLMs directly generating
plans generally resemble humans’ fast ‘System-1’ decision-making (Kahneman, 2011), characterized
by quick, intuitive judgments rather than slow, deliberate planning (Kambhampati et al., 2024).
As potential remedies, slow ‘System-2’-inspired LLM planning approaches have emerged that either
(1) augment LLMs during inference with symbolic search algorithms (Yao et al., 2024; Sel et al.,
2023; Ahn et al., 2022) or (2) directly teach LLMs to carry out search themselves (Gandhi et al., 2024;
Lehnert et al., 2024). While the former approach of using external search tools can enhance test-time
performance, the latter approach – training models to search – has the advantage of resulting in a
single unified search model and also discovering better and more efficient search strategies (Gandhi
et al., 2024). However, such training-time approaches also face challenges due to high computational
demands and potential infeasiblity. For instance, one such recently proposed (trained) System-2
method, Searchformer, uses token sequences that verbalize entire search trajectories (Lehnert et al.,
2024). Consequently, during inference, based on the action space and the plan length, these models
explore a large number of states, resulting in an increased number of generated tokens. The cost
of exploration is further exacerbated by the fact that Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) typically
exhibit quadratic complexity w.r.t. the sequence length. Thus, as sequence length increases, the
computational complexity grows, significantly impacting memory usage and speed, rendering many
long-horizon tasks infeasible due to token limits.2 A more promising alternative would thus be
to avoid incurring a high cost on all samples and steps by training a planner with a smarter, more
balanced allocation of compute, i.e., one that uses System-1 for easier (sub-)problems while reserving
the more expensive System-2 for harder (sub-)problems based on the budget.
To this end, we propose the System-1.x Planner, drawing inspiration from the Dual-Process
Theory (Wason and Evans, 1974; Kahneman, 2011) that argues for the co-existence of fast and slow
planning in humans. The fast system, relying on expertise and quick judgments, can be cheaply and
quickly applied either instinctively or in areas where an individual has acquired expertise. The slow
system is more costly, involving sequential processing and relying on working memory to formulate
a more deliberate plan and includes the consideration of hypothetical alternatives (Evans, 2003).
Crucially, humans can switch between these two modes as determined by the task at hand (Kahneman,
2011). Based on this distinction, we develop the System-1.x Planner, a controllable framework
for long-horizon planning with LLMs that is capable of generating hybrid plans interleaved with
System-1 and System-2 sub-plans. System-1.x offers a promising middle ground between a fast
but inaccurate System-1 Planner, used for easy problems, and an accurate but slow System-2 Planner,
used for hard problems (see Fig. 1 for an overview).
System-1.x is composed of three trained components: (1) a controller that decomposes a planning
problem into easier and harder sub-goals, (2) a System-1 Planner that solves the easier sub-goals

   2
       For example, full System-2 on 5 × 5 mazes with a plan length of 8 requires ∼ 1500 tokens on average.


                                                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


without any explicit search or exploration, and (3) a System-2 Planner that solves the harder sub-goals
by deliberately searching over possible actions. One of the primary strengths of System-1.x is its
train-time controllability – based on a user-specified hyperparameter x ∈ [0, 1], we train a controller
that ultimately governs the degree of hybridization between the System-1 and 2 planners. It also
offers test-time controllability, by which an already trained controller can be adjusted towards
solving more or fewer problems using System-2, providing another level of inference-time compute.3
Importantly, System-1.x is a fully (LLM-based) neural planner built on top of one base LLM, using
supervision only from search traces and not relying on any external solvers or verifiers. Thus, it
has an advantage over inference-time methods that rely on symbolic planners which may not exist
for certain domains, making data-driven approaches like System-1.x self-contained and easier to
apply to new domains and to scale up. At the same time, our LLM-based System-1.x can also
be seamlessly converted into a neuro-symbolic planner by replacing the System-2 Planner with a
symbolic solver (e.g., A∗ ), allowing us to integrate powerful symbolic tools when they are available.
We conduct experiments on the domains of Maze Navigation and Blocksworld to show that System-
1.x Planner matches and generally outperforms a System-1 Planner, a System-2 Planner, and a
System-1.x variant (without sub-goal decomposition) at all budgets by generating up to 33% more
valid plans. We also report similar findings with our neuro-symbolic System-1.x, that in fact typically
outperforms symbolic search, beating A∗ by up to 39% at a fixed budget of explored states and
matching it at maximum budget. Next, we show the controllability of our framework by training
a System-1.75 Planner that, compared to a System-1.5 Planner, trades off efficiency for greater
accuracy. This trend can be continued to recover the full System-2 performance. System-1.x also
generalizes to different search algorithms (BFS, DFS, A∗ ) and exhibits exploration behavior that
closely resembles the corresponding algorithm it is trained on. Overall, the System-1.x Planner
introduces a novel way of applying LLMs to controllable and hybrid planning, optimizing for both
accuracy and efficiency. This, in turn, allows System-1.x to outperform both System-1 and -2 at a
fixed budget. By intelligently allocating more resources to harder sub-goals, System-1.x is able to
save its System-2 budget for cases where it is necessary.


2     S YSTEM -1.x: C ONTROLLABLE AND H YBRID P LANNING WITH LLM S

2.1   BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S ETUP

A planning problem can be modeled as a Markov Decision Process M = (S, A, T , R) defined with
a set of states S, a set of actions A on any given state, a transition function T : S × A → S defining
transitions between pairs of states based on an action, and a reward function R : S → R assigning a
reward for reaching the goal state. Given such a planning problem, a start state s0 ∈ S and a goal
state sg ∈ S, the objective of classical planning is to generate a plan P = (a1 , ..., an ), as a sequence
of n actions ai ∈ A that helps transition from the start state to the goal state. Using this notation, we
define some salient concepts in a planning problem below:

• System-1 Planner. We use the term “System-1 Planner” to denote any planner that directly
  generates a plan as a sequence of actions without conducting any explicit exploration or search.
  System-1 Planners are typically only model-based, trained to only output the final plan. Within the
  scope of this study, a System-1 Planner will specifically refer to a neural LLM-based planner.
• System-2 Planner. We use this term to denote planners that do conduct explicit search before
  generating a plan. Unlike model-based System-1 Planners, System-2 Planners can also be symbolic
  (e.g., search algorithms like Depth First Search, Breadth First Search, A∗ ). A model-based System-
  2 Planner, within the scope of this study, will specifically refer to an LLM trained to verbalize
  search trajectories (defined below) before generating a plan. Broadly, the terms System-1 and
  System-2 will refer to LLM-based planners while symbolic algorithms will be addressed separately.
• Search Trajectory. Given a search algorithm, we define a search trajectory or a search trace as the
  step-by-step execution of the algorithm for an input problem. In the context of LLMs, this will
  mean a verbalized representation of a search trajectory. Trajectories consist of the final plan, all
  intermediate actions explored during search, their corresponding states, their validity, etc.
   3
     E.g., we can train a System-1.5 model and then add a bias term to the controller at test time to increase the
probability of System-2, inducing it to act like a System-2 model (or System-1.25, System-1.75, etc.).


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Valid Plan: A plan P = (a1 , ..., an ) is considered valid if starting from the start state s0 , se-
  quentially executing all taken actions in the plan leads to the goal state sg , or more formally,
  T (T (...T (s0 , a1 )..., an−1 ), an ) = sg . Plan Validity is a metric measuring the fraction of valid
  plans that reach the goal state.
• #States-Explored: Given a planning problem and a planner (System-1, 2, or 1.x), we define
  #States-Explored (SE , in short) as the set of all states (both valid as well as invalid) that are visited
  by the planner on its way to generating the plan. In the case of an LLM planner, this corresponds
  to the number of states that the planner needs to verbalize for exploration (see right of Fig. 2
  for an example output), and thus adds to the token cost of generation. Since a System-1 Planner
  generates a plan directly without any additional explorations, it only explores the states that are
  part of its plan, i.e., SE Sys1 = n, where n is the length of the generated plan. A System-2 Planner,
  on the other hand, will perform additional state explorations before generating a plan, resulting
  in SE Sys2 ≫ SE Sys1 . Note that #States-Explored for a System-2 Planner will vary based on the
  underlying search algorithm or the LLM planner learning from that algorithm’s traces. For example,
  A∗ , being an informed search algorithm, will typically explore fewer states than Breadth First
  Search. Plan Validity and #States-Explored will be our two metrics of interest, using which we will
  compare the performance at varying budgets of all planners (discussed in §4).
• Sub-goal. Finally, planning problems are typically compositional, meaning that they can be
  decomposed into sub-problems, which we will refer to as sub-goals. Formally, given a plan P
  between states s0 and sg , a sub-goal can be characterized by a pair of states (si , sj ) s.t. i, j ∈
  [0, g], i ≤ j, where si and sj are intermediate states on the plan to get from s0 to sg .

Problem Setup. Having defined the key terms above, we now describe the setup underlying our
LLM-based System-1.x Planner. To build it, we assume access to two things: (1) a training dataset D
of search trajectories for N planning problems, and (2) a user-specified hybridization factor x ∈ [0, 1].
Given a planning problem of initial state s0 , goal state sg , and a gold plan P, let us denote the cor-
                                                                               (i) (i)
responding gold search trajectory as T , making the training dataset D = {(s0 , sg ), P (i) , T (i) }N
                                                                                                     i=1 .
In our experiments, the gold plans and the corresponding trajectories will be obtained using a
symbolic System-2 Planner (e.g., A∗ search) but more generally, the source of these trajectories
could be any neural or symbolic engine capable of exploration or search. The hybridization factor
x is a user-defined hyperparameter that will determine the balance between System-1 and System-2.

2.2   S YSTEM -1.x OVERVIEW

System-1.x Planner consists of three trained components: (i) a Controller for decomposing planning
problems into sub-goals and classifying them as easy or hard, (ii) a System-1 Planner for fast planning
of easy sub-goals, and (iii) a System-2 Planner for slow planning of hard sub-goals. Fig. 2 shows an
overview of our method. We train all three components by automatically generating data from the
gold search traces in a way that also respects the user’s constraints (specified via the hybridization
factor). Below, we describe each component and how they combine to make System-1.x.

2.3   T RAINING DATA G ENERATION FOR S YSTEM -1.x
                                                                      (i)   (i)
System-1 Planner Training Data. We denote it as DSys1 = {(s0 , sg ), P (i) }N   i=1 where the input
                                                                                       (i)
is a natural language description of the planning problem consisting of a start state s0 and a goal
       (i)
state sg and the output is the corresponding plan in natural language P (i) (see Appendix D for
examples). For Maze Navigation, these gold plans are also optimal plans (i.e., having the minimum
length) while for Blocksworld, they may include additional explorations, making them sub-optimal
at times (though always valid).
System-2 Training Data. Similar to System-1, the input to a System-2 Planner is also a natural
language description of the planning problem. However, the target output of the System-2 Planner is
a verbalized search trajectory T (i) as described in §2.1 (refer to Appendix D for examples). This
                                        (i) (i)
yields a training dataset of DSys2 = {(s0 , sg ), T (i) }N
                                                         i=1 .

Controller Training Data. Recall that the System-1.x Planner is designed to minimize state
explorations by only performing System-2 planning as needed, i.e., saving states with System-1 for
easier sub-goals and reserving System-2 for harder sub-goals. Hence, the role of the controller is


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Constructing Training Data from Search Traces                                                                        Controller (Easy à System-1 ; Hard à System-2)                                 System-2 Planner Output
                                                                                                                                      Input Maze                                                                              (verbalized search trace)
     System-1                   System-2                                         Controller
   Training Data              Training Data                                    Training Data                                                                              System-1 Planner #States-Explored: 4

                                                                                                                                                                         1,2         1,1           1,0          0,0     (Current State: [3, 2])
   Linear Chains               Search Trees                    Sub-goal decomposition + Easy/Hard Annotation                                                                                                            Exploring action left
                                                                                                   Based on x, generate:
                                                                                                                                                                                               +                        State [3, 1] is valid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exploring action right
       1,1                                                             I want a system 1.x!                                                                                          System-2 Planner
                                     1,1                                                                                                                                                                                State [3, 3] is valid
                                                                                                                                                                                           #States-Explored: 32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exploring action up
                                                              The walls between [4, 0] to [0, 0] are at [0, 3],
                                                                                                                                                                               3,2                                      State [2, 2] is invalid
                                                              [2, 0], [2, 1], [2, 2], [2, 3], [4, 4] which
       0,1                                                    are a total of 6 walls. Based on this, the plan                                                                                                           Exploring action down
                       1,0     1,2         0,1     2,1                                                                        Decomposed Subgoals
                                                              should be broken down into 3 sub-goals:                                                                                                                   State [4, 2] is valid
        …


                                                                                                                           Sub-goal 1: [4, 0] to [3, 2] w/ System-1            3,1    3,3          2,2    4,2           Take right from state [3, 2]
                                                              1. Start State: [4, 0] and Goal State: [3, 2].               Sub-goal 2: [3, 2] to [1, 2] w/ System-2                                                     Moved to state [3, 3]
       3,3
                                                              Planning for this subgoal is easy and can be                 Sub-goal 3: [1, 2] to [0, 0] w/ System-1
                       0,0     0,2         -1,1    1,1                                                                                                                                                                  Plan so far []
                                                              solved fast using system 1
                                                              2. Start State: [3, 2] and Goal State: [1, 2].                                                                                                            Exploring action left


                                     …
                                                                                                                                                                               3,2    3,4          2,3    4,3
                                                              Planning for this subgoal is hard and can be                                                                                                              State [3, 2] is invalid
       3,4                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exploring action right


                                                                                                                                                                                             …
                                     3,4                      solved slow using system 2
                                                              3. Start State: [1, 2] and Goal State: [0, 0].                                                                                                            State [3, 4] is valid
                                                              Planning for this subgoal is easy and can be                                                                                   1,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exploring action up
                                                              solved fast using system 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        State [2, 3] is invalid
                                                                                                                                                                                              +                         Exploring action down
                             Supervised Fine-tuning with an LLM                                                                                                          System-1 Planner #States-Explored: 4           State [4, 3] is valid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Take right from state [3, 3]
                                                                                                                                                                        4,0          3,0            3,1         3,2     Moved to state [3, 4]
     System-1                  System-2                                             Controller
      Planner                   Planner                                                                                                                                                                                 ...
                                                  Training                                                                                                            Inference

                       Starting State             End State       Taken States                Explored Valid States          Explored Invalid States                    Easy Subgoal               Hard Subgoal       Overlapped States


Figure 2: Overview of our System-1.x Planner. Left: The process for training data construction. We
generate three kinds of data to fine-tune our three components: (1) System-1 data (linear chains),
(2) System-2 data (search trees), and (3) controller data (consisting of sub-goals and easy/hard
annotations) conditioned on a user-specified hybridization factor x. Right: During inference, the
controller generates the sub-goals and predicts whether each is easy or hard. Then, it invokes System-1
and System-2 for easy and hard sub-goals respectively to construct the final plan.

two-fold: (i) decomposing a problem into sub-goals characterized by a start and end state (si , sj ),
and (ii) classifying those sub-goals as easy or hard so that System-2 can be invoked only for the hard
sub-goals. However, most planning domains lack gold annotations of sub-goal decompositions and
their easy and hard classifications. Therefore, we propose an automatic data generation process for
training our controller, as described below and more formally in Algorithm 1. The inputs to preparing
the controller data are (1) the gold plans {P (i) }N
                                                   i=1 that will be decomposed into sub-goals, (2) the
user-defined hybridization factor x, and (3) a hardness function h(·, ·) for (sub-)goals.
• Step 1: Defining and Ranking using a Hardness Function. A hardness function h(si , sj ) takes
  a start state si and a goal state sj as input, and returns a scalar value estimating the hardness of
  the goal or the sub-goal. An example of a hardness function for a Maze Navigation task is the
  number of obstacles in a sub-maze, where a higher value indicates greater difficulty. Appendix A
  and Appendix B more concretely describe and compare these hardness functions for different
  tasks, respectively. Generally, hardness functions can be constructed for most planning domains
  where standard heuristics are frequently applied for various search techniques.4 Using this hardness
  function between the start and the goal state h(s0 , sg ), we generate a rank ordering of the training
  examples.
• Step 2: Annotating Easy Instances as System-1-only. Intuitively, some planning problems in the
  train set can be solved successfully via only a System-1 Planner. For such instances, no further
  decomposition is needed. These correspond to the first (1 − x) × N easiest samples with the least
  h(·, ·). Note that this is a definition of hardness, and what is considered as easy is determined
  by the hybridization factor x. For example, when x = 0.0, all samples will be annotated as easy,
  making System-1.x the same as System-1.
• Step 3: Annotating Hard Instances as Hybrid System-1 + System-2. For the remaining
  x × N (hard) samples, we assume that they can be decomposed into sub-goals, each of which
  can be assigned to either System-1 or System-2. However, to ensure overall task success, the
  decompositions should neither be too coarse, i.e., requiring further decompositions, nor too fine-
  grained, making them susceptible to decomposition errors (Prasad et al., 2024). Hence, we adopt a
  sliding window approach that optimizes for the following: find a contiguous chunk of length x × n
  of an n-length plan to be assigned System-2, such that it corresponds to the hardest sub-goal and
  the sub-goals on either side of it correspond to the easiest (and hence assigned System-1). More
  formally, this requires us to solve the following constrained optimization problem:
                   (j, k) = argminu,v∈[0,g],u≤v h(s0 , su ) − h(su , sv ) + h(sv , sg ), s.t. |v − u| = x × n
  Given a start state s0 and goal state sg , we want to find two intermediate states sj and sk between s0
  and sg along the length of the plan, such that the hardness of that sub-goal h(sj , sk ) is maximized
  (and hence assigned System-2) while the hardness of the other two sub-goals h(s0 , sj ) and h(sk , sg )
   4
       https://www.fast-downward.org/Doc/Evaluator


                                                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    is minimized (and hence assigned System-1). This process results in a three-way decomposition.5
                                                              (i) (i)
    The final result is a controller training dataset Dc = {(s0 , sg ), {G (i) }tj=1 }N
                                                                                      i=1 where for each
    planning problem, we have an annotated list of t ∈ {1, 2, 3} sub-goals {Gj (i) }tj=1 and their
    corresponding System-1/System-2 assignments. In practice, the components we use for controller
    data generation (e.g., sub-goal decomposition strategy, hardness heuristic) can easily be swapped
    with other variants, based on the problem at hand (further explored in Appendix B).

2.4        T RAINING AND I NFERENCE OF S YSTEM -1.x P LANNER

Using the data generation process described above, we finetune a single base LLM to behave as a
System-1 Planner, a System-2 Planner, or a controller. During inference, we first use the controller to
generate a meta-plan – a list of sub-goals and their easy versus hard assignments. After solving each
with the appropriate planning model, we concatenate the sub-plans from the two planners, in order, to
construct the final plan (see Fig. 2 for an example of a concatenated plan, denoted by ‘+’).
Train- and Test-time Controllability. We design System-1.x such that there is a single point of
control for training the system, i.e., the hybridization factor x, and this control lies with the end-user.
Setting it adjusts the training data for the controller, i.e., what is annotated as easy versus hard,
both across samples (Step 2 of the algorithm) and within samples (with sub-goals; Step 3 of the
algorithm). This ultimately yields the user-specified level of hybridization. Hence, System-1.x
offers training-time control of compute (e.g., one could train a System-1.25, 1.5, or a 1.75 Planner).
Furthermore, the controller’s design also offers an additional degree of test-time control: since the
controller classifies sub-goals as System-1 or 2, the end-user could also re-balance the model towards
either system based on the controller confidence threshold. This means that an already trained
System-1.5 Planner, for example, can be biased to behave as a System-1.25 or a System-1.75 at test
time. In our experiments, we explore how both train-time and test-time control impacts performance.

3        E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Tasks. We evaluate System-1.x Planner on two classical planning tasks that are challenging for
LLMs (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Lehnert et al., 2024): (1) Maze Navigation and (2) Blocksworld.
In Maze Navigation, given a 2D maze with some cells containing obstacles and four permissible
actions {‘left’, ‘right’, ‘up’, ‘down’}, the objective is to find a path from a start state to a goal state
by avoiding the obstacles. We randomly generate a balanced dataset of 4K planning problems (split
into 3200/400/400 samples) with 5x5 mazes, 40% of the cells containing obstacles, and having
optimal plan lengths between 1 to 8. Next, to test out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization to longer
plans, we experiment with Blocksworld: a task of moving blocks to another goal configuration by
only moving one unstacked block at a time. Following the data creation algorithm in Bohnet et al.
(2024), we generate problems consisting of 4-7 blocks (without repetition). From there, we create a
train/validation/test split of 3000/250/200 samples where the train and the validation split consist of
samples with plan lengths 1-6 and the test split consists of samples with plan lengths 7-10.
Baselines. We compare our System-1.x Planner with (1) a System-1 Planner, (2) a System-2 Planner,
and (3) a System-1.x Planner without sub-goal decomposition. The latter is also a hybrid planner
but the controller is trained to predict an instance as either fully System-1 or fully System-2, thus
allowing us to evaluate the effectiveness of sub-goal decomposition of our full System-1.x model.
For showing the effectiveness of our neuro-symbolic System-1.x variant, we compare it to A∗
by matching their #States-Explored. Under the umbrella of System-2 Planners, we train multiple
variants that are fine-tuned with data obtained from different search algorithms. In particular, we
consider two uninformed search algorithms (Breadth-First Search and Depth-First Search) and an
informed search algorithm (A∗ ). Given the superiority of A∗ , our primary experiments will be based
on A∗ traces while we reserve the other search algorithms for further analysis in §4.3. Refer to
Appendix A for a short background on A∗ .
Evaluation Metrics. We compare all methods along two axes: plan validity and cost. As defined
in §2.1, plan validity is given by the fraction of valid plans generated by a planner while for cost,
we compute the average #States-Explored by a planner before reaching the goal. Note that in order
     5
         Note that when u = 0 or v = g, there will be two decompositions rather than three.


                                                          6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Sys-1        Sys-1.5 w/o sub-goals     w/ Truncation                                Sys-1          Sys-1.5 w/o sub-goals        w/ Truncation
                          Sys-2        Sys-1.5 w/ sub-goals      w/ Test-Time Control                         Sys-2          Sys-1.5 w/ sub-goals         w/ Test-Time Control
                100                                                                                 100

                 80                                                                                  80
                                                  70.4
Plan Validity


                                                                                    Plan Validity
                 60                                                                                  60
                                      48.7           50.0
                 40                                                                                  40
                                                    37.2                                                                                   25.0
                 20                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                       9.0                    13.0

                      0           5          10    13.615       20        25                              0           10         20        30        40           50
                                             #States-Explored                                                                     #States-Explored
                                      (a) Maze Navigation                                                                     (b) Blocksworld

    Figure 3: Comparison of System-1.x Planner (with and without sub-goals) with a System-1 Planner
    and a System-2 Planner. (a) Maze Navigation: System-1.x with sub-goals matches or generally
    outperforms all baselines. (b) Blocksworld: For out-of-distribution generalization, System-1.x with
    sub-goals leads to much higher plan validity at lower #States-Explored.

    to fairly compare all systems, their #States-Explored should be matched, such that we compare
    performance at a fixed budget for each system. First, since System-1 does not do any exploration, it is
    constant w.r.t. budget and hence has the same plan validity irrespective of #States-Explored. Next, to
    adapt System-2 and System-1.x to lower budgets, we truncate the search when the maximum number
    of states allowed by the budget has been reached. This value of maximum allowed states is given by
    the highest possible value such that the average #States-Explored matches the desired budget. We
    refer to this as truncation below. Finally, to adapt System-1.x to higher budgets, we use System-1.x’s
    test-time controllability, increasing the bias term on System-2 reasoning (cf. §2.4). As this term
    increases, the model uses more and more System-2 planning, i.e., x → 1 in System-1.x. We refer to
    this as test-time control. We perform this matching and report plan validity for the following values
    of #States-Explored. First, we vary the maximum budget of states explored in intervals of 5 for Maze
    and 10 for Blocksworld, up to the number of states used by System-2 (the most compute-intensive
    system we consider). We also consider two specific points in the range of #States-Explored: we
    match System-2’s #States-Explored to the number of states that System-1.x uses by default. In the
    other direction, we match System-1.x’s #States-Explored to the number of states used by System-2.
    These points let us directly compare the two systems without any truncation or test-time control. In
    the main paper, we present our results with plots while we refer to the Appendix E for detailed tables.
    Implementation Details. We choose Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023) as the base LLM
    and fine-tune all our components with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) with a rank of 8 for a maximum of 3
    epochs and a batch size of 4, resulting in three adapters for System-1, System-2, and the controller.
    For the purposes of §4.1, System-1.x will specifically refer to a System-1.5 Planner (i.e., x = 0.5,
    which is a balanced hybrid between a System-1 Planner and System-2 Planner) and fine-tuned from
    A∗ traces. Refer to Appendix A for additional implementation details e.g., our hardness functions
    and System-2 implementations.

     4                R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
     4.1                  S YSTEM -1.x OUTPERFORMS S YSTEM -1 AND S YSTEM -2
    Study Setup. In this first set of experiments, we compare our System-1.x Planner with (1) a System-1
    Planner, (2) a System-2 Planner, and (3) a System-1.x Planner without sub-goal decomposition.
    Results for Maze Navigation. Fig. 3(a) (cf. Table 3) shows the plan validity obtained by each
    planner at different #States-Explored. The values of #States-Explored are as described previously in
    §3. Based on this, we summarize our key findings.
    • System-1.x outperforms all baselines at all budgets. Without truncation or test-time control,
      System-1.x (x = 0.5) uses 13.6 states on average. At this number of states, it generates 70.4%


                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  valid plans, outperforming the System-1 Planner by 21% (48.7% → 70.4%), the System-2 Planner
  by 33% (37.2% → 70.4%), and the System-1.x variant without sub-goal decomposition by 20%
  (50.0% → 70.4%). Next, to compare all methods at lower budgets (i.e., with #States-Explored
  of 5 and 10), we do state truncation (as described in §3) by limiting the search (generation) to
  a maximum number of states. We find that even at these lower budgets, System-1.x continues
  to be significantly more accurate compared to baselines, pointing to an effective allocation of
  resources. Finally, System-1.x’s test-time control capability lets us increase compute to match
  that of System-2 by biasing the controller and solving more sub-goals with System-2. Doing so
  eventually transforms a System-1.x Planner into a System-2 Planner with sub-goal decomposition,
  outperforming vanilla System-2 by 3% and achieving the highest validity of 96.7% at 27.3 states.
  This highlights the effectiveness of our sub-goal decomposition (more details below).
• System-1.x benefits from sub-goal decomposition. We validate the utility of sub-goal decompo-
  sition from two observations. First, the full System-1.x outperforms the System-1.x variant that
  does not perform sub-goal decomposition. Second, System-2 also benefits from sub-goal decom-
  position as shown by the maximum validity of 96.7% which is achieved via test-time control and
  biasing the controller to solve every sub-goal using System-2. However, note that System-2 with
  decomposition still applies System-2 planning to every step, making System-1.x more performant
  at any given budget.
• System-1 is cheaper but not accurate. On one extreme of the plot, System-1 Planner is cheaper
  since it only explores the states that are part of its plan, amounting to an average of 3 states.
  However, this comes at a cost to performance: it also only generates 49% valid plans. Another
  limitation of a System-1 Planner is that unlike System-1.x, it is not controllable and hence, there is
  no easy affordance for improving performance by exploring more states.
• System-2 is more accurate but expensive. On the other extreme, System-2 Planner achieves a
  maximum validity of 94% but explores a much higher 24.4 states in the process. While System-2
  can be adapted to minimize #States-Explored, such adaptivity is only possible during inference via
  state-truncation. Test-time truncation of #States-Explored is typically ad-hoc and not preferable
  because the loss in performance will only increase as the plan length grows. This is in contrast to
  the System-1.x Planner, which allows for systematic control of compute both at training-time (via
  a user-defined hybridization factor x), and at test-time (by biasing the controller).

Results for Blocksworld. Fig. 3(b) (cf. Table 4) reports our results on Blocksworld (BW) that studies
out-of-distribution generalization to longer plan lengths. Our first observation is that System-1 only
obtains a plan validity of 9% and although System-2’s validity is higher at 28%, given the longer plan
lengths, it also explores a significantly higher number of states (55). Thus, when we perform trunca-
tion to get lower values of #States-Explored, System-2’s valid plans drops to almost 0%. System-1.x
without sub-goal decomposition also does not work for OOD test points because the controller predicts
almost all samples as hard and solves them using System-2. Hence, System-1.x without sub-goal de-
composition practically becomes a System-2 in such scenarios, suffering major losses to performance
with truncation. However, in contrast to all baselines, System-1.x with sub-goal decomposition can
solve a larger fraction of problems at lower budgets (e.g., 25% at 30 states compared to System-2 Plan-
ner’s 13%) because of its ability to leverage a System-1 Planner for simpler sub-goals that have shorter
plan lengths and are more likely to be in-distribution (refer to example in Fig. 9). At maximum #States-
Explored, System-1.x obtains comparable performance to System-2. Overall, when testing on OOD
data, the results in Fig. 3(b) highlight the key role that the System-1.x controller plays in decomposing
longer-horizon planning problems. Crucially, what is generally a weak System-1 Planner for harder,
OOD goals can be used effectively to solve easier, ID sub-goals, thereby saving a lot of compute.


4.2   N EURO - SYMBOLIC S YSTEM -1.x OUTPERFORMS OR MATCHES A∗ AT ALL STATE BUDGETS

Study Setup. While we primarily designed System-1.x as a fully neural planner with all three
components (System-1, 2, and the controller) developed on top of the same LLM, we note that
System-1.x can also act as a neuro-symbolic planner. This can be achieved by using a symbolic solver
like A∗ as the System-2 component. We follow this setup to report results on the Maze Navigation
task, again setting x = 0.5.
Results. Fig. 4 (cf. Table 5) compares the validity of all planners at different #States-
Explored. We note that an LLM-based planner may not be directly comparable to symbolic


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


planners like A∗ with respect to our #States-Explored metric because the former generates to-
kens for states which computationally can be more expensive than invoking a symbolic planner.
However, for the purpose of this study, we                Sys-1      Sys-1.5 w/o sub-goals   w/ Truncation
compare them only based on the number of                  Sys-2      Sys-1.5 w/ sub-goals    w/ Test-Time Control
explored states, without considering the un-        100
derlying computation responsible for such ex-
plorations. Our main result is that the conclu-      80                          70.5
sions drawn with a fully neural System-1.x


                                                           Plan Validity
also transfer to a neuro-symbolic System-1.x.        60
Notably, at an average of 11.6 states, neuro-                   48.7
symbolic System-1.x outperforms A∗ by a              40                          45.7
large margin of 39% (31.0% → 70.5%). This
can again be explained by the ineffectiveness        20                         31.0
of #States-Explored truncation for System-2
Planners, symbolic or neural. The trend is              0          5         10 11.6      15      20
also consistent at all lower budgets. System-                             #States-Explored
1.x can be test-time controlled to obtain a
near-perfect validity (99.2%), matching that Figure 4: Performance of System-1.x in conjunction
of A∗ .                                         with a symbolic (A∗ ) System-2 Planner on Maze.

4.3   A NALYSES AND A BLATIONS OF S YSTEM -1.x P LANNER

We conduct all analyses and ablations on the maze navigation task.

Train-time Control: System-1.75 trades off efficiency for plan validity compared to System-
1.5. One of the core strengths of our planner is its training-time controllability. The hy-
bridization factor x allows the user to specify the System-1 to System-2 balance they want in
the final planner. To demonstrate this capability, we train a System-1.75 Planner by setting
x = 0.75. Table 6 (cf. Table 6) shows our results on the maze task. By default, System-
1.75 uses 16.6 states on average and generates 75.7% valid plans, compared to System-1.5’s
70.4% with a default average of 13.6 states (Table 3) i.e., a 5% gain at the cost of 3 more states.
Thus, as we increase the value of x, the
                                                     Sys-1     Sys-1.75 w/o sub-goals     w/ Truncation
System-1.x Planner will use more states              Sys-2     Sys-1.75 w/ sub-goals      w/ Test-Time Control
and improve performance, converging to
                                                 100
a System-2 Planner that additionally per-
forms sub-goal decomposition. Compared to                                          75.7
System-2, System-1.75 is again significantly      80
more performant at all budgets (e.g., by 28%                                     59.7
                                                    Plan Validity


at 16.6 states) and eventually obtains the high-  60
est fraction of valid plans at 96.7% when act-                     48.7
ing as a System-2 with sub-goals. This echoes     40                                 47.0
our System-1.5 Planner findings, which also
demonstrated similar gains at high budgets.       20

Broadly, these results showcase our con-
troller’s effectiveness, which in turn validates                           0   5   10   15 16.6   20   25
our hardness measures and sub-goal decom-                                   #States-Explored
positions. We further ablate features of the           Figure 5: Train-time controllability of System-1.x
controller in Appendix B, comparing against            Planner by setting x = 0.75. System-1.75 largely out-
a random controller, testing the effectiveness         performs System-2. Compared to Fig. 3(a), System-
of the sliding window, and contrasting differ-         1.75 yields 75.7% valid plans vs. 70.4% (with
ent hardness functions.                                System-1.5) by utilizing 3 more states.

Generalizability: System-1.x beats System-2 with all search algorithms (A∗ , DFS, BFS). We
conducted our main experiments by leveraging supervision from A∗ traces. In Appendix Fig. 6, we
show that System-1.x is robust to different search algorithms, working with other options like Breadth
First Search (BFS) and Depth First Search (DFS) and outperforming baselines by large margins
(see Appendix B for details). In Appendix C, we show a representative example of System-1.x
outperforming the baseline systems.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5    R ELATED W ORK

Combining LLMs and Symbolic Planners. A large body of recent work has highlighted the
shortcomings of LLMs on long-horizon planning problems (Valmeekam et al., 2023; 2024; Pallagani
et al., 2023; Momennejad et al., 2024; Hirsch et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Aghzal et al., 2023),
persisting across popular prompting techniques like Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022), ReAct (Yao
et al., 2022), and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2024). These methods largely resemble System-1 inference-
time methods in which the LLM does not explicitly search, backtrack, or learn from incorrect actions.
Systematic search is either not performed at all or delegated to symbolic solvers (e.g., Liu et al.,
2023; Pan et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023, discussed further below), thus deviating from the focus of
this work on equipping LLMs to solve harder planning problems via search. More related to our
work are inference-time methods that do involve planning, tree search, and backtracking. These
System-2-inspired methods have a search algorithm that operates on top of and guides an LLM with
reward models, value functions, or verifiers (Hao et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2024; Besta et al., 2024;
Zhou et al., 2023; Sel et al., 2023; Koh et al., 2024). In a similar spirit, neuro-symbolic planning
systems like LLM-Modulo Frameworks (Kambhampati et al., 2024) have emerged that combine
LLMs with symbolic planners (Nye et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023;
Zuo et al., 2024; Fabiano et al., 2024; Katz et al., 2025; Zhuang et al., 2024). System-1.x differs
from this class of inference-time methods in two major ways. Firstly, it is a training-time method
that teaches the LLM to search, with the goal of enhancing the LLM’s intrinsic planning capabilities
and discovering more effective search strategies, making it self-contained (as opposed to complex
inference-time methods relying on external modules). Secondly, it is also a hybrid system that can
alternate between System-1 and System-2-style planning, whereas past work is capable of one or the
other, but not both. Notably, this kind of hybridization distinguishes System-1.x from other work that
either creates hybrids between weaker and stronger models in the form of model cascades (Lin et al.,
2024; Yue et al., 2023) or between neural and symbolic methods (e.g., LLM-Modulo frameworks).


LLMs Generating Plans. Methods combining LLMs and symbolic planners need some com-
munication channel between the LLM and the symbolic planning component. This is usually a
value function or reward model producing a single score for a state, making the method’s success
contingent on the quality of the reward model, or the LLM’s ability to act as a value function (as in
Yao et al. (2024); Lightman et al. (2023)). Furthermore, off-loading planning or search adds additional
modules at test-time that may not always be available for certain domains. It also assumes that the
model’s representation is already sufficient for the task and complicates finetuning the representation,
since externalized search is typically non-differentiable. In an attempt to mitigate such concerns,
a second line of work removes the dependency on separate reward models and external tools and
teaches LLMs to conduct search by themselves (Yang et al., 2022; Gandhi et al., 2024; Lehnert et al.,
2024). For example, Gandhi et al. (2024) introduce Stream-of-Search (SoS), which teaches LLMs
to search by verbalizing trajectories and Lehnert et al. (2024) propose Searchformer, that learns
from A∗ search dynamics. This line of work predates LLMs: Anthony et al. (2017) generate data
from tree search which they use to iteratively train a neural model to perform System-1 planning.
However, Gandhi et al. (2024) and Lehnert et al. (2024) differ from our work in that their final models
are System-2-only, incurring a high computational cost for all examples and states by performing
full planning at all times, whereas our method is a hybrid between Systems 1 and 2, dynamically
allocating computation to more difficult parts of the plan. Moreover, to meet user budget constraints,
System-2-only methods also have to rely on approaches like post-hoc truncation while System-1.x
offers more systematic controllability via its controller.


6    C ONCLUSION

We introduced the System-1.x Planner, a novel LLM-based planner that adaptively interleaves quick
and cost-efficient System-1 planning with more costly but performant System-2 planning. On two
tasks, we showed that our method results in strong performance across a range of budgets: on Mazes,
System-1.x obtains the best performance at every budget, and on Blocksworld it outperforms System-
2 at all budgets except the highest, where it is comparable. In our analysis, we find that System-1.x is
controllable, generalizes to various search algorithms, and performs better out-of-distribution.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT

Large Language Models have been shown to reflect stereotypes, biases, and other negative traits
present in their pre-training data (Weidinger et al., 2021). Hence, the outputs produced by our
fine-tuned planner may exhibit undesirable behavior similar to the base model and have the same
potential for misuse as other fine-tuned LLMs. Hence, more studies are needed to evaluate and
mitigate such biases in LLMs.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We are making our code and data available in the supplementary material to enable replication of our
findings. We also show the exact prompts in Appendix D.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by NSF-CAREER Award 1846185, NSF-AI Engage Institute DRL-2112635,
DARPA MCS Grant N66001-19-2-4031, and Google PhD Fellowships. The views contained in this
article are those of the authors and not of the funding agency.

R EFERENCES
Mohamed Aghzal, Erion Plaku, and Ziyu Yao. Can large language models be good path planners?
 a benchmark and investigation on spatial-temporal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03249,
 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03249.

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i
 say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691.

Thomas Anthony, Zheng Tian, and David Barber.    Thinking fast and slow with
  deep learning and tree search. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  d8e1344e27a5b08cdfd5d027d9b8d6de-Abstract.html.

Gregor Bachmann and Vaishnavh Nagarajan. The pitfalls of next-token prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.06963, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.06963.

Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi,
 Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of thoughts:
 Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pages 17682–17690, 2024. URL https://ojs.aaai.
 org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29720.

Bernd Bohnet, Azade Nova, Aaron T Parisi, Kevin Swersky, Katayoon Goshvadi, Hanjun Dai,
  Dale Schuurmans, Noah Fiedel, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring and benchmarking the planning
  capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13094, 2024.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2303.12712.

Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean
 Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, et al. Faith and fate: Limits
  of transformers on compositionality. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  hash/deb3c28192f979302c157cb653c15e90-Abstract-Conference.html.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan St BT Evans. In two minds: dual-process accounts of reasoning. Trends in cognitive
  sciences, 7(10):454–459, 2003.
Francesco Fabiano, Vishal Pallagani, Marianna Bergamaschi Ganapini, Lior Horesh, Andrea Loreggia,
  Keerthiram Murugesan, Francesca Rossi, and Biplav Srivastava. Plan-sofai: A neuro-symbolic
  planning architecture. In Neuro-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning in the era of Large Language
  Models, 2024.
Kanishk Gandhi, Denise Lee, Gabriel Grand, Muxin Liu, Winson Cheng, Archit Sharma, and
  Noah D Goodman. Stream of search (sos): Learning to search in language. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.03683, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03683.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning
  with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 8154–8173, 2023.
Eran Hirsch, Guy Uziel, and Ateret Anaby-Tavor. What’s the plan? evaluating and developing
  planning-aware techniques for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11489, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.11489.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
  06825.
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. macmillan, 2011.
Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Kaya Stechly, Mudit Verma, Siddhant
  Bhambri, Lucas Saldyt, and Anil Murthy. Llms can’t plan, but can help planning in llm-modulo
  frameworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01817, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2402.01817.
Michael Katz, Harsha Kokel, Kavitha Srinivas, and Shirin Sohrabi Araghi.  Thought
 of search: Planning with language models through the lens of efficiency.     Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:138491–138568, 2025.    URL
 https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
 fa080fe0f218871faec1d8ba20e491d5-Abstract-Conference.html.
Jing Yu Koh, Stephen McAleer, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Tree search for language
   model agents. Preprint, 2024.
Lucas Lehnert, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Paul Mcvay, Michael Rabbat, and Yuandong Tian. Be-
  yond a*: Better planning with transformers via search dynamics bootstrapping. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.14083, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14083.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2305.20050.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang, Chandra Bhagavatula,
  Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. Swiftsage: A generative agent with fast and
  slow thinking for complex interactive tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  hash/4b0eea69deea512c9e2c469187643dc2-Abstract-Conference.html.
Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11477, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11477.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ida Momennejad, Hosein Hasanbeig, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Hiteshi Sharma, Nebojsa Jojic, Hamid
  Palangi, Robert Ness, and Jonathan Larson. Evaluating cognitive maps and planning in
  large language models with cogeval. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  hash/dc9d5dcf3e86b83e137bad367227c8ca-Abstract-Conference.html.
Maxwell Nye, Michael Tessler, Josh Tenenbaum, and Brenden M Lake.         Improv-
 ing coherence and consistency in neural sequence models with dual-system, neuro-
 symbolic reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25192–
 25204, 2021.     URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
 d3e2e8f631bd9336ed25b8162aef8782-Abstract.html.
Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Muppasani, Keerthiram Murugesan, Francesca Rossi, Biplav Srivastava,
  Lior Horesh, Francesco Fabiano, and Andrea Loreggia. Understanding the capabilities of large
  language models for automated planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16151, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.16151.
Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Wang. Logic-LM: Empowering large
  language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. In Houda Bouamor, Juan
  Pino, and Kalika Bali, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2023, pages 3806–3824, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.248. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.248.
Archiki Prasad, Alexander Koller, Mareike Hartmann, Peter Clark, Ashish Sabharwal, Mohit Bansal,
  and Tushar Khot. Adapt: As-needed decomposition and planning with language models. In
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pages 4226–4252, 2024.
Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. Pearson, 2016.
Bilgehan Sel, Ahmad Al-Tawaha, Vanshaj Khattar, Lu Wang, Ruoxi Jia, and Ming Jin. Algo-
  rithm of thoughts: Enhancing exploration of ideas in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.10379, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10379.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao.     Reflexion:  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learn-
  ing.   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.    URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
 1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambham-
  pati. On the planning abilities of large language models-a critical investigation. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:75993–76005, 2023.            URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  efb2072a358cefb75886a315a6fcf880-Abstract-Conference.html.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao
  Kambhampati. Planbench: An extensible benchmark for evaluating large language models
  on planning and reasoning about change. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 36, 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2023/hash/7a92bcdede88c7afd108072faf5485c8-Abstract-Datasets_
  and_Benchmarks.html.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Peter C Wason and J St BT Evans. Dual processes in reasoning? Cognition, 3(2):141–154, 1974.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V
  Le, Denny Zhou, et al.    Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large lan-
  guage models.   Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837,
  2022.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
  Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2112.04359.
Yaqi Xie, Chen Yu, Tongyao Zhu, Jinbin Bai, Ze Gong, and Harold Soh. Translating natural language
  to planning goals with large-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05128, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.05128.
Mengjiao Sherry Yang, Dale Schuurmans, Pieter Abbeel, and Ofir Nachum. Chain of thought
 imitation with procedure cloning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:36366–
 36381, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10816.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.
  03629.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
  Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601.
Murong Yue, Jie Zhao, Min Zhang, Liang Du, and Ziyu Yao. Large language model cascades with
 mixture of thoughts representations for cost-efficient reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03094,
 2023.
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Hugh Zhang, Xinyun Chen, Minmin Chen, Azade Nova,
  Le Hou, Heng-Tze Cheng, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, and Denny Zhou. NATURAL PLAN: Bench-
  marking llms on natural language planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04520, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04520.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Language
  agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.04406, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04406.
Yuchen Zhuang, Xiang Chen, Tong Yu, Saayan Mitra, Victor Bursztyn, Ryan A Rossi, Somdeb
  Sarkhel, and Chao Zhang. Toolchain*: Efficient action space navigation in large language models
  with a* search. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=B6pQxqUcT8.
Max Zuo, Francisco Piedrahita Velez, Xiaochen Li, Michael L Littman, and Stephen H Bach.
 Planetarium: A rigorous benchmark for translating text to structured planning languages. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2407.03321, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A DDITIONAL D ETAILS OF S YSTEM -1.x P LANNER

Algorithm 1 Training Data Generation for System-1.x Controller
                                                        (i)   (i)
    Input: System-1 Training Data DSys1 = {(s0 , sg ), P (i) }N       i=1 , Hybridization Factor x ∈ [0, 1],
    Hardness Function h(·, ·)
    Output: Training Data Dc for System-1.x Controller
    sort(DSys1 , key = h(s0 , sg )) // Ranking data points in increasing order of hardness
    Dc ← {}
                      (i) (i)
    for data point ((s0 , sg ), P (i) ) ∈ DSys1 do
        if i < (1 − x) × N then
            // For the first (1 − x)% of instances (easiest), solve them directly using System-1 planner
                        (i)   (i)
            y (i) ← {(s0 , sg ), “Sys1”}
        else:
            // For the remaining x% hardest instances, find the best decomposition into three sub-goals such that
            the middle sub-goal (sj , sk ) is solved using System-2 and has a length of x% of the total plan length
                                                  (i)                               (i)
            (j, k) = argminu,v∈[0,g],u≤v (h(s0 , su ) − h(su , sv ) + h(sv , sg )) s.t. |v − u| = x × n
                        (i)
           y (i) ← {(s0 , sj ), “Sys1”}
           y (i) ← y (i) + {(sj , sk ), “Sys2”}
                                   (i)
           y (i) ← y (i) + {(sk , sg ), “Sys1”}
                         (i) (i)
        Dc ← Dc + {(s0 , sg ), y (i) }
    return Dc


A.1     BACKGROUND ON A∗

A∗ is an informed search algorithm that decides the next best state to expand with a function
f (n) = g(n) + t(n) that considers (1) the cost g(n) from the start state to the current state n, and
(2) a heuristic function t(n) that gives an estimate of the cost from state n to the goal. Note that
A∗ is optimal if the heuristic t(n) is admissible (i.e., t(n) ≤ t∗ (n) which means that the heuristic
never overestimates the true cost to the goal h∗ (n)) and consistent (i.e., t(n) ≤ c(n, n′ ) + t(n′ ) for
all states n and its successor n′ and c is the cost to transition from n to n′ ). For the Maze Navigation
task, Manhattan Distance is an example of such an admissible heuristic, and hence A∗ with it will
always generate optimal plans.

A.2     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS F OR M AZE NAVIGATION

System-2 Planner. We implement a System-2 Planner for the Maze domain by verbalizing all
possible explorations at each state, including the ones that lead to invalid states (i.e., outside the maze,
have obstacles, or have already been visited). See example in Appendix D.

Hardness Function. Given two maze states si = (a, b) and sj = (c, d) we define hardness of a
sub-goal h(si , sj ) as the number of obstacles in the rectangular sub-maze given the end-points. More
obstacles will mean that the model might have to search more and would likely benefit from System-2
planning.

A.3     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS F OR B LOCKSWORLD

System-2 Planner. In contrast to the Maze domain, the number of actions at each state in
Blocksworld problem is directly proportional to the total number of blocks. Consequently, the
number of possible states that can be explored (both valid and invalid) is significantly larger in this
domain, often exceeding the maximum input token budgets of standard LLMs (in our case, 8096
tokens). Therefore, when verbalizing the search trajectories T in DSys2 using A∗ search to train
System-2 Planner, we cap the number of valid and invalid states explored to 3 and 2 respectively.
The verbalized valid states are chosen by picking the top-3 scored states as per the A∗ heuristic (that
computes the number of mismatches between the start state and the goal state), while (up to) 2 invalid


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Sys-1          Sys-1.5 w/o sub-goals   w/ Truncation                                     Sys-1                 Sys-1.5 w/o sub-goals   w/ Truncation
                           Sys-2 (BFS)    Sys-1.5 w/ sub-goals    w/ Test-Time Control                              Sys-2 (DFS)           Sys-1.5 w/ sub-goals    w/ Test-Time Control
                 100                                                                                     100


                  80                                                                                     80
                                             67.0


                                                                                   Valid Plan Accuracy
                                                                                                                                   62.3
 Plan Validity


                  60                                                                                     60
                                   48.7                                                                                                  50.7
                                                                                                                   48.7
                  40                         45.0                                                        40


                  20                        28.0                                                         20
                                                                                                                                  23.2

                                                                                                          0
                       0             10     17.4 20         30        40                                       0                   10                    20             30
                                           #States-Explored                                                                                 #States-Explored
                                     (a) System-1.x with BFS                                                                (b) System-1.x with DFS

Figure 6: Comparison of System-1.x Planner on Maze Navigation using (a) Breadth-First Search and
(b) Depth-First Search traces. The System-1.x Planner generally outperforms System-2 Planner in
both cases, converging to System-2, showing robustness to the underlying search algorithm.

states are chosen randomly to make the model learn from mistakes. Refer to Appendix D for an
example.

Hardness Function. A state in Blocksworld is characterized by the configuration of the blocks.
Our hardness function computes a distance metric for a sub-goal: For every block that is not in its
correct position in the goal state (i.e., the blocks above and below it are different between the start
and goal states), we add a cost of 1. Additionally, for a block that is not on the table and also not in
its correct position, we add 1 more to the cost, indicating greater hardness for moving blocks that are
in the middle of a stack.


B                 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Generalizability: System-1.x beats System-2 with all search algorithms (A∗ , DFS, BFS). We
conducted our main experiments by leveraging supervision from A∗ traces. In this experiment,
we show that System-1.x is robust to different search algorithms, working with other options like
Breadth First Search (BFS) and Depth First Search (DFS). First, note that for mazes, BFS explores
all four actions (up, down, left, right) at each state and hence, on average, is the most expensive
search strategy in terms of states explored. However, for an unweighted maze, BFS always generates
optimal plans. DFS, on the other hand, explores fewer states because it returns the first valid plan,
though that plan may not necessarily be optimal. Appendix D contains examples of BFS and DFS
trajectories. Based on Fig. 6 (cf. Tables 7 and 8), we summarize our key findings:
• System-1.x continues to outperform System-2 and ‘System-1.x without sub-goal decomposition’
  by large margins (e.g., up to 39% at 17.4 states for BFS and at 10 states for DFS), showcasing our
  planner’s flexibility to learn from different algorithms.
• System-1.x closely resembles the behavior of the search algorithm it is trained on. For example,
  System-1.x (BFS) is more accurate and generates a significantly higher number of optimal plans
  than System-1.x (DFS) because the former is trained on optimal plans (refer to Table 2 for a study
  on validity versus optimality). In the process, however, System-1.5 (BFS) explores more states
  than System-1.x (DFS), similar to their symbolic counterparts. Among the three algorithms studied
  in this paper, System-1.x (A∗ ) is the most accurate and efficient.

System-1.x Controller outperforms a random controller. In Table 1, we compare our System 1.5
controller with a random controller that arbitrarily chooses 50% problems to be solved by System-2.
Our trained controller outperforms the random controller by a significant 10%.

Analyses of System-1.x Controller.                                   In this section, we analyze the different components of our
System-1.x controller.


                                                                                  16
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 1: Comparison of our trained controller in System-1.x Planner with a controller that randomly
  chooses x% of problems to solve with System-2.
                                                                                                            Plan Validity
                                                 System 1.5 (w/ random controller)                                 70.5
                                                 System 1.5 (w/ our controller)                                    79.5


                      Sys-1.5 w/o Sliding Window      w/ Truncation                                 Sys-1.5 w/ Manhattan Distance            w/ Truncation
                      Sys-1.5 w/ Sliding Window       w/ Test-Time Control                          Sys-1.5 w/ #Obstacles                    w/ Test-Time Control
                100                                                                               100
                 80                                                                                80
Plan Validity


                                                                                  Plan Validity
                 60                                                                                60
                 40                                                                                40
                 20                                                                                20

                      0    5      10      15   20    25   30     35                                     0          5        10      15        20
                                       #States-Explored                                                                   #States-Explored

  Figure 7: Comparison of System-1.x Planner                                       Figure 8: Comparison of two hardness functions
  with and without sliding window-based sub-goal                                   (Manhattan Distance and #Obstacles) for Maze
  decomposition on the Maze Navigation task.                                       Navigation. Both yield comparable results, with
  Sliding window-based decomposition outper-                                       #Obstacles being slightly better.
  forms the variant without it at all budgets.


  • Effectiveness of Sliding Window Decomposition. Recall that we generated training data for
    the controller by using a sliding window approach that assigned a contiguous x% of the plan to
    System-2 according to a hardness function. Here, we evaluate the effectiveness of this approach by
    comparing it to a System-1.x variant without the sliding window decomposition. In this variant,
    the x% System-2 allocation can either be at the beginning or at the end of the plan but not in the
    middle, resulting in a maximum of two decompositions instead of three. As shown in Fig. 9, our
    sliding window variant not only obtains higher plan validity but is also far more efficient. This is
    because with three decompositions, a weaker System-1 Planner can be used to solve two granular
    sub-goals (instead of one) and hence is more likely to succeed.
  • Comparison of Hardness Functions. Our experiments on maze used the number of obstacles in a
    sub-maze as the hardness function. In Table 10, we compare it to Manhattan Distance, which rates
    goals that are further away (according to the distance function) as more difficult. We observe that
    both functions lead to comparable performance, with obstacles being slightly more efficient. Taken
    together with the previous experiment, these results quantify the influence of two essential inputs
    to the controller’s training: hardness function and the decomposition strategy.



  Table 2: Comparison of Plan Validity and Optimality for System-1.x Planner in Maze Navigation
  using A∗ search. While not using sub-goal decomposition nearly guarantees optimality, using
  sub-goal decomposition may generate plans that are sub-optimal.
                                                                Plan Validity                Plan Optimality                #States-Explored
                               System-1.x (w/o sub-goals)             33.5                                  33.2                    4.8
                               System-1.x (w/o sub-goals)             38.2                                  38.0                    9.7
                               System-1.x (w/o sub-goals)             62.2                                  61.7                   15.0
                               System-1.x (w/o sub-goals)             79.5                                  78.7                   17.4
                               System-1.x (w/ sub-goals)              30.5                                  30.2                    4.5
                               System-1.x (w/ sub-goals)              56.2                                  53.7                   10.0
                               System-1.x (w/ sub-goals)              70.4                                  61.5                   13.6



                                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                  F                    System-1.x Controller’s
                                                           Decomposition
                                 D                                                                    B

                                 G             Use System-2                    Use System-1           A
                                                 Planner                         Planner
                                 B                                                                    G
                                              (Hard)                                (Easy)
                                 A                          A     E                             F     E
                                 C        E            B    C     D    F       G               C      D

                               Init State !!     Controller Generated Sub-goal ""            Goal State !#

Figure 9: An example decomposition generated by System 1.5 for Blocksworld. The controller
generates an intermediate state G1 where blocks ‘C’ and ‘F’ are a block apart, with the sub-goal
s0 → G1 solved using System-2 and G1 → sg solved via System-1.

Optimality of System-1.x. In Table 2, we compare the optimality and validity of the plans
generated by our System-1.x Planner. While System-1.x without sub-goal decomposition generates
plans that are almost always optimal, we observe that sub-goal decomposition may sometimes hurt
optimality. This happens because the sub-goals generated by the controller may not always lie on the
optimal path.

C    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS OF S YSTEM -1, S YSTEM -2, AND S YSTEM -1.x
Fig. 10 shows an example from our test set where both System-1 and System-2 fail but System-1.x
succeeds. We consider a maze configuration where the plan length is quite long (8) and there is
a solitary path to the goal, making the problem challenging for LLMs. We find that the System-1
Planner generates an incorrect plan that ignores the placement of the obstacles. On the other hand,
the System-2 Planner avoids obstacles successfully initially but then takes a path that leads it to a
dead end. It is unable to recover from that and the search does not terminate. Our System-1.x Planner
is, however, able to solve the problem successfully by first breaking it up into 3 sub-goals and solving
the easy sub-goals close to the start state and the goal state using System-1 and the hard sub-goal in
the middle (that includes a number of obstacles) with deliberate System-2 planning.

     Input Maze      System-1 Plan                System-2 Plan                                                             System-1.x Final Plan
                                                                             Controller Output: Sub-goal Decomposition

                                                                           3 sub-goals:
                                                                           1. Start State: [1, 0] and Goal State: [1, 1].
                                                                           Planning for this subgoal is easy and can be
                                                                           solved fast using system 1
                                                                           2. Start State: [1, 1] and Goal State: [2, 4].
                                                                           Planning for this subgoal is hard and can be
                                                                           solved slow using system 2
                                                                           3. Start State: [2, 4] and Goal State: [3, 4].
                                                                           Planning for this subgoal is easy and can be
                                                                           solved fast using system 1



                      Failed because of           Failed because of                          Succeeded by combining System-1 and Syetem-2
                         invalid plan              dead-end plan



Figure 10: A qualitative example showing (1) a failure case for a System-1 Planner because it
generates a plan through the obstacles, (2) a failure case for a System-2 Planner because the generated
plan leads to a dead end and the model does not recover from it, and (3) a successful case for our
System-1.x Planner that solves the easy sub-goals near the start state and the goal state using System-1
and the hard sub-goal in the middle using System-2.


D    P ROMPTS AND E XAMPLES
See the subsequent pages for prompts and examples from both domains.


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   System-1 / System-2 Prompt for Maze

     You are in a 2d maze of dimensions 5 and 5 and some of the cells have walls.
     The walls are placed in cells [[3, 4], [0, 4], [3, 3], [1, 1], [2, 3], [0, 0],
     [2, 0], [4, 0],[1, 0], [2, 4]].

     Given a start and a goal state, your task is to generate the optimal plan as a
     sequence of actions. The optimal plan is one that has the minimum number of
     steps. The list of permissible actions that you can take at any given cell are
     [’left’, ’right’, ’up’, ’down’].

     The optimal plan from [1, 4] to [3, 2] is



                             System-1 Output for Maze (#States-Explored=4)

    start [1, 4] | left [1, 3] | left [1, 2] | down [2, 2] | down [3, 2]



                           System-2 (A*) Output for Maze (#States-Explored=16)

     Moved to state [1, 4] | Plan so far [] | Exploring action 'left' to move to
     state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is valid | Exploring action 'right' to move to
     state [1, 5] | State [1, 5] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move to
     state [0, 4] | State [0, 4] is invalid | Exploring action 'down' to move to
     state [2, 4] | State [2, 4] is invalid | Taking action 'left' from state [1,
     4] | Moved to state [1, 3] | Plan so far ['left'] | Exploring action 'left' to
     move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is valid | Exploring action 'right' to
     move to state [1, 4] | State [1, 4] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move
     to state [0, 3] | State [0, 3] is valid | Exploring action 'down' to move to
     state [2, 3] | State [2, 3] is invalid | Taking action 'left' from state [1,
     3] | Moved to state [1, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'left'] | Exploring action
     'left' to move to state [1, 1] | State [1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action
     'right' to move to state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is invalid | Exploring action
     'up' to move to state [0, 2] | State [0, 2] is valid | Exploring action 'down'
     to move to state [2, 2] | State [2, 2] is valid | Taking action 'down' from
     state [1, 2] | Moved to state [2, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'left', 'down'] |
     Exploring action 'left' to move to state [2, 1] | State [2, 1] is valid |
     Exploring action 'right' to move to state [2, 3] | State [2, 3] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'up' to move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'down' to move to state [3, 2] | State [3, 2] is valid |
     Taking action 'down' from state [2, 2] | Moved to state [3, 2] | Plan so far
     ['left', 'left', 'down', 'down'] | Goal state [3, 2] reached!


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          System-2 Output (BFS) for Maze (#States-Explored=36)

     Moved to state [1, 4] | Plan so far [] | Exploring action 'left' to move to
     state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is valid | Exploring action 'right' to move to
     state [1, 5] | State [1, 5] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move to
     state [0, 4] | State [0, 4] is invalid | Exploring action 'down' to move to
     state [2, 4] | State [2, 4] is invalid | Taking action 'left' from state [1,
     4] | Moved to state [1, 3] | Plan so far ['left'] | Exploring action 'left' to
     move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is valid | Exploring action 'right' to
     move to state [1, 4] | State [1, 4] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move
     to state [0, 3] | State [0, 3] is valid | Exploring action 'down' to move to
     state [2, 3] | State [2, 3] is invalid | Taking action 'left' from state [1,
     3] | Moved to state [1, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'left'] | Exploring action
     'left' to move to state [1, 1] | State [1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action
     'right' to move to state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is invalid | Exploring action
     'up' to move to state [0, 2] | State [0, 2] is valid | Exploring action 'down'
     to move to state [2, 2] | State [2, 2] is valid | Taking action 'up' from
     state [1, 3] | Moved to state [0, 3] | Plan so far ['left', 'up'] | Exploring
     action 'left' to move to state [0, 2] | State [0, 2] is valid | Exploring
     action 'right' to move to state [0, 4] | State [0, 4] is invalid | Exploring
     action 'up' to move to state [-1, 3] | State [-1, 3] is invalid | Exploring
     action 'down' to move to state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is invalid | Taking
     action 'up' from state [1, 2] | Moved to state [0, 2] | Plan so far ['left',
     'left', 'up'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to state [0, 1] | State [0, 1]
     is valid | Exploring action 'right' to move to state [0, 3] | State [0, 3] is
     invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move to state [-1, 2] | State [-1, 2] is
     invalid | Exploring action 'down' to move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is
     invalid | Taking action 'down' from state [1, 2] | Moved to state [2, 2] |
     Plan so far ['left', 'left', 'down'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to
     state [2, 1] | State [2, 1] is valid | Exploring action 'right' to move to
     state [2, 3] | State [2, 3] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move to
     state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is invalid | Exploring action 'down' to move to
     state [3, 2] | State [3, 2] is valid | Taking action 'left' from state [0, 3]
     | Moved to state [0, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'up', 'left'] | Exploring
     action 'left' to move to state [0, 1] | State [0, 1] is valid | Exploring
     action 'right' to move to state [0, 3] | State [0, 3] is invalid | Exploring
     action 'up' to move to state [-1, 2] | State [-1, 2] is invalid | Exploring
     action 'down' to move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is invalid | Taking
     action 'left' from state [0, 2] | Moved to state [0, 1] | Plan so far ['left',
     'left', 'up', 'left'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to state [0, 0] |
     State [0, 0] is invalid | Exploring action 'right' to move to state [0, 2] |
     State [0, 2] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move to state [-1, 1] |
     State [-1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action 'down' to move to state [1, 1] |
     State [1, 1] is invalid | Taking action 'left' from state [2, 2] | Moved to
     state [2, 1] | Plan so far ['left', 'left', 'down', 'left'] | Exploring action
     'left' to move to state [2, 0] | State [2, 0] is invalid | Exploring action
     'right' to move to state [2, 2] | State [2, 2] is invalid | Exploring action
     'up' to move to state [1, 1] | State [1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action
     'down' to move to state [3, 1] | State [3, 1] is valid | Taking action 'down'
     from state [2, 2] | Moved to state [3, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'left',
     'down', 'down'] | Goal state [3, 2] reached!


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          System-2 Output (DFS) for Maze (#States-Explored=29)

     Moved to state [1, 4] | Plan so far [] | Exploring action 'left' to move to
     state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is valid | Taking action 'left' from state [1, 4]
     | Moved to state [1, 3] | Plan so far ['left'] | Exploring action 'left' to
     move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is valid | Taking action 'left' from state
     [1, 3] | Moved to state [1, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'left'] | Exploring
     action 'left' to move to state [1, 1] | State [1, 1] is invalid | Exploring
     action 'right' to move to state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is invalid | Exploring
     action 'up' to move to state [0, 2] | State [0, 2] is valid | Taking action
     'up' from state [1, 2] | Moved to state [0, 2] | Plan so far ['left', 'left',
     'up'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to state [0, 1] | State [0, 1] is
     valid | Taking action 'left' from state [0, 2] | Moved to state [0, 1] | Plan
     so far ['left', 'left', 'up', 'left'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to
     state [0, 0] | State [0, 0] is invalid | Exploring action 'right' to move to
     state [0, 2] | State [0, 2] is invalid | Exploring action 'up' to move to
     state [-1, 1] | State [-1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action 'down' to move to
     state [1, 1] | State [1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action 'right' to move to
     state [0, 3] | State [0, 3] is valid | Taking action 'right' from state [0, 2]
     | Moved to state [0, 3] | Plan so far ['left', 'left', 'up', 'right'] |
     Exploring action 'left' to move to state [0, 2] | State [0, 2] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'right' to move to state [0, 4] | State [0, 4] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'up' to move to state [-1, 3] | State [-1, 3] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'down' to move to state [1, 3] | State [1, 3] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'up' to move to state [-1, 2] | State [-1, 2] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'down' to move to state [1, 2] | State [1, 2] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'down' to move to state [2, 2] | State [2, 2] is valid |
     Taking action 'down' from state [1, 2] | Moved to state [2, 2] | Plan so far
     ['left', 'left', 'down'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to state [2, 1] |
     State [2, 1] is valid | Taking action 'left' from state [2, 2] | Moved to
     state [2, 1] | Plan so far ['left', 'left', 'down', 'left'] | Exploring action
     'left' to move to state [2, 0] | State [2, 0] is invalid | Exploring action
     'right' to move to state [2, 2] | State [2, 2] is invalid | Exploring action
     'up' to move to state [1, 1] | State [1, 1] is invalid | Exploring action
     'down' to move to state [3, 1] | State [3, 1] is valid | Taking action 'down'
     from state [2, 1] | Moved to state [3, 1] | Plan so far ['left', 'left',
     'down', 'left', 'down'] | Exploring action 'left' to move to state [3, 0] |
     State [3, 0] is valid | Taking action 'left' from state [3, 1] | Moved to
     state [3, 0] | Plan so far ['left', 'left', 'down', 'left', 'down', 'left'] |
     Exploring action 'left' to move to state [3, -1] | State [3, -1] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'right' to move to state [3, 1] | State [3, 1] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'up' to move to state [2, 0] | State [2, 0] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'down' to move to state [4, 0] | State [4, 0] is invalid |
     Exploring action 'right' to move to state [3, 2] | State [3, 2] is valid |
     Taking action 'right' from state [3, 1] | Moved to state [3, 2] | Plan so far
     ['left', 'left', 'down', 'left', 'down', 'right'] | Goal state [3, 2] reached!


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Controller Prompt for Maze

     You are in a 2d maze of dimensions 5 and 5 and some of the cells have walls.
     The walls are placed in cells [[3, 4], [0, 4], [3, 3], [1, 1], [2, 3], [0, 0],
     [2, 0], [4, 0], [1, 0], [2, 4]].

     Given a start and a goal state, your task is to first generate a set of
     subgoals that can then be solved to generate the optimal plan between the
     states. The optimal plan is one that has the minimum number of steps. The list
     of permissible actions that you can take at any given cell are ['left',
     'right', 'up', 'down’].

     Generate the subgoals for generating a plan from [1, 4] to [3, 2].



                 Controller Output (Sub-goal Decomposition + Easy / Hard Annotations) for Maze

    The walls between [1, 4] to [3, 2] are at [2, 3], [2, 4], [3, 3], [3, 4] which
    are a total of 4 walls. Based on this, the plan should be broken down into 2
    sub-goals:

    1. Start State: [1, 4] and Goal State: [2, 2]. Planning for this subgoal is
       hard and can be solved slow using system 2
    2. Start State: [2, 2] and Goal State: [3, 2]. Planning for this subgoal is
       easy and can be solved fast using system 1


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                System-1 / System-2 Prompt for Blocksworld

     Your task is to generate a plan for a blocksworld problem given an initial state and a
     goal state.

     The initial state:
     The hand is empty.
     C is on the table. B is on C. E is on B. E is clear.
     D is on the table. A is on D. A is clear.

     The goal is:
     A is on the table. C is on A. B is on C. B is clear.
     D is on the table. E is on D. E is clear.



                           System-1 Output for Blocksworld (#States-Explored=6)

    Move E from B to table | Move A from D to table | Move E from table to D | Move B from C
    to table | Move C from table to A | Move B from table to C



                         System-2 (A*) Output for Blocksworld (#States-Explored=28)

    Moved to state -> Stack 1: [C, B, E], Stack 2: [D, A] | Plan so far [] | Exploring action
    Move E from B to A | New state -> Stack 1: [C, B], Stack 2: [D, A, E] | Exploring action
    Move E from B to table | New state -> Stack 1: [C, B], Stack 2: [D, A], Stack 3: [E] |
    Exploring action Move A from D to table | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C, B, E],
    Stack 3: [D] | Exploring action Move B from C to E | New state -> Invalid | Taking action
    Move E from B to table | Moved to state -> Stack 1: [C, B], Stack 2: [D, A], Stack 3: [E]
    | Plan so far [Move E from B to table] | Exploring action Move B from C to table | New
    state -> Stack 1: [B], Stack 2: [C], Stack 3: [D, A], Stack 4: [E] | Exploring action
    Move A from D to table | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C, B], Stack 3: [D], Stack
    4: [E] | Exploring action Move D from table to E | New state -> Invalid | Exploring
    action Move A from D to E | New state -> Stack 1: [C, B], Stack 2: [D], Stack 3: [E, A] |
    Exploring action Move C from table to E | New state -> Invalid | Taking action Move A
    from D to table | Moved to state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C, B], Stack 3: [D], Stack 4:
    [E] | Plan so far [Move E from B to table | Move A from D to table] | Exploring action
    Move B from C to E | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C], Stack 3: [D], Stack 4: [E,
    B] | Exploring action Move C from table to D | New state -> Invalid | Exploring action
    Move E from table to D | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C, B], Stack 3: [D, E] |
    Exploring action Move B from C to table | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [B], Stack
    3: [C], Stack 4: [D], Stack 5: [E] | Exploring action Move C from table to A | New state
    -> Invalid | Taking action Move E from table to D | Moved to state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack
    2: [C, B], Stack 3: [D, E] | Plan so far [Move E from B to table | Move A from D to table
    | Move E from table to D] | Exploring action Move B from C to A | New state -> Stack 1:
    [A, B], Stack 2: [C], Stack 3: [D, E] | Exploring action Move B from C to table | New
    state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [B], Stack 3: [C], Stack 4: [D, E] | Exploring action
    Move C from table to B | New state -> Invalid | Exploring action Move A from table to B |
    New state -> Stack 1: [C, B, A], Stack 2: [D, E] | Exploring action Move C from table to
    A | New state -> Invalid | Taking action Move B from C to table | Moved to state -> Stack
    1: [A], Stack 2: [B], Stack 3: [C], Stack 4: [D, E] | Plan so far [Move E from B to table
    | Move A from D to table | Move E from table to D | Move B from C to table] | Exploring
    action Move A from table to B | New state -> Stack 1: [B, A], Stack 2: [C], Stack 3: [D,
    E] | Exploring action Move B from table to C | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C,
    B], Stack 3: [D, E] | Exploring action Move D from table to E | New state -> Invalid |
    Exploring action Move C from table to A | New state -> Stack 1: [A, C], Stack 2: [B],
    Stack 3: [D, E] | Exploring action Move D from table to B | New state -> Invalid | Taking
    action Move C from table to A | Moved to state -> Stack 1: [A, C], Stack 2: [B], Stack 3:
    [D, E] | Plan so far [Move E from B to table | Move A from D to table | Move E from table
    to D | Move B from C to table | Move C from table to A] | Exploring action Move C from A
    to table | New state -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [B], Stack 3: [C], Stack 4: [D, E] |
    Exploring action Move A from table to C | New state -> Invalid | Exploring action Move B
    from table to C | New state -> Stack 1: [A, C, B], Stack 2: [D, E] | Exploring action
    Move E from D to table | New state -> Stack 1: [A, C], Stack 2: [B], Stack 3: [D], Stack
    4: [E] | Taking action Move B from table to C | Moved to state -> Stack 1: [A, C, B],
    Stack 2: [D, E] | Plan so far [Move E from B to table | Move A from D to table | Move E
    from table to D | Move B from C to table | Move C from table to A | Move B from table to
    C] | Reached goal state!


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Controller Prompt for Blocksworld

     You are given a blocksworld problem and its initial state, and goal state.
     Your task is to first generate a set of subgoals that can then be solved to
     generate the plan between the states.

     The initial state:
     The hand is empty.
     C is on the table. B is on C. E is on B. E is clear.
     D is on the table. A is on D. A is clear.

     The goal is:
     A is on the table. C is on A. B is on C. B is clear.
     D is on the table. E is on D. E is clear.



              Controller Output (Sub-goal Decomposition + Easy / Hard Annotations) for Blocksworld

     The plan should be broken down into 2 sub-goals:
     1. Start State -> Stack 1: [C, B, E], Stack 2: [D, A] and Goal State -> Stack
        1: [A], Stack 2: [C, B], Stack 3: [D, E].
     Planning for this subgoal is hard and can be solved slow using system 2

     2. Start State -> Stack 1: [A], Stack 2: [C, B], Stack 3: [D, E] and Goal
     State -> Stack 1: [A, C, B], Stack 2: [D, E].
     Planning for this subgoal is easy and can be solved fast using system 1


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    TABLES CORRESPONDING TO R ESULT F IGURES
In the tables below, we report the accuracies corresponding to all the plots in the paper.


Table 3: Comparison of System-1.x Planner (x = 0.5) with all baselines on Maze Navigation
(corresponding to Fig. 3(a)). The blue rows indicate plan validity obtained by all methods when
#States-Explored is matched to that of System 1.5 with sub-goals. The green rows indicate plan
validity obtained when #States-Explored is maximized. All tables, henceforth, will use the same
color coding.
                                                               Plan Validity    #States-Explored
           System-1                                                 48.7               3.1
           System-2 (truncated)                                     12.2               4.8
           System-2 (truncated)                                     19.7               9.9
           System-2 (truncated)                                     37.2              13.6
           System-2 (truncated)                                     37.2              14.8
           System-2 (truncated)                                     63.7              19.8
           System-2 (default)                                       93.7              24.4
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                      33.5               4.8
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                      38.2               9.7
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                      50.0              13.4
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                      62.2              15.0
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (default)                        79.5              17.4
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)           83.7              20.0
           System-1.5 (w/o sub-goal) (test-time controlled)         93.7              24.4
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                       30.5               4.5
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                       56.2              10.0
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (default)                         70.4              13.6
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)            82.2              19.9
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)            92.2              24.4
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)            96.7              27.3


Table 4: Comparison of System-1.x Planner (x = 0.5) with all baselines on Blocksworld (corre-
sponding to Fig. 3(b)).
                                                              Plan Validity    #States-Explored
            System 1                                              9.0                4.5
            System 2 (truncated)                                   0.0               9.8
            System 2 (truncated)                                   0.0              19.9
            System 2 (truncated)                                  13.0              29.3
            System 2 (truncated)                                  27.0              38.2
            System 2 (default)                                    28.0              55.5
            System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                    0.0               9.8
            System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                    0.0              19.9
            System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                   13.0              29.3
            System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                   27.0              38.0
            System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (default)                     28.0              55.1
            System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                     1.5               9.6
            System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                    17.5              20.0
            System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                    25.0              30.0
            System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (default)                      25.0              38.3
            System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)         26.0              53.5


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Comparison of Neuro-symbolic System-1.x Planner (x = 0.5) with all baselines on Maze
Navigation (corresponding to Fig. 4).
                                                            Plan Validity   #States-Explored
            ∗
           A (truncated)                                       12.5               4.8
           A∗ (truncated)                                      22.5               9.8
           A∗ (truncated)                                       31.0             11.3
           A∗ (truncated)                                      42.0              14.5
           A∗ (truncated)                                      67.7              19.8
           A∗ (default)                                        100.0             22.4
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  33.0              4.8
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  40.2              9.8
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  45.7             11.5
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  65.7             14.9
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (default)                    84.2             16.5
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)       94.0             20.0
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)      100.0             22.4
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                   30.5              4.5
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                   58.7             10.0
           System-1.5 (default)                                 70.5             11.6
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)        76.0             14.8
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)        89.7             19.9
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)        99.2             23.9


Table 6: Comparison of System-1.x Planner (x = 0.75) with all baselines on Maze Navigation
(corresponding to Fig. 5).
                                                            Plan Validity   #States-Explored
          System-2 (truncated)                                  12.2               4.8
          System-2 (truncated)                                  19.7               9.9
          System-2 (truncated)                                  37.2              14.8
          System-2 (truncated)                                  47.0              16.6
          System-2 (truncated)                                  63.7              19.8
          System-2 (default)                                    93.7              24.4
          System-1.75 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  24.2               4.6
          System-1.75 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  29.2               9.8
          System-1.75 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                  44.5              14.6
          System-1.75 w/o sub-goal (default)                    59.7              16.6
          System-1.75 w/o sub-goal (default)                    86.5              20.3
          System-1.75 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)       93.7              24.4
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                   23.0               4.9
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                   38.7               9.6
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                   66.7              15.0
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (default)                     75.7              16.6
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)        82.0              19.9
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)        91.2              24.4
          System-1.75 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)        96.7              26.8


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Comparison of System-1.x Planner (x = 0.5 and BFS) with all baselines on Maze Navigation
(corresponding to Fig. 6(a)).
                                                               Plan Validity      #States-Explored
           System-2 (truncated)                                    11.7                 9.4
           System-2 (truncated)                                    28.0                17.4
           System-2 (truncated)                                    28.0                19.9
           System-2 (truncated)                                    56.2                29.7
           System-2 (default)                                      91.2                39.8
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                     35.2                 9.6
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                     45.0                17.2
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                     52.5                19.9
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (default)                       77.2                26.9
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)          81.2                30.0
           System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)          91.2                39.8
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (truncated)                      43.0                 9.8
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (default)                        67.0                17.4
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)           78.5                29.7
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)           86.5                39.9
           System-1.5 w/ sub-goal (test-time controlled)           91.7                45.4


Table 8: Comparison of System-1.x Planner (x = 0.5 and DFS) with all baselines on Maze Navigation
(corresponding to Fig. 6(b)).
                                                                  Plan Validity      Avg States
              System-2 (truncated)                                    11.7              4.7
              System-2 (truncated)                                    23.2              9.7
              System-2 (truncated)                                    42.0             14.5
              System-2 (truncated)                                    69.7             19.8
              System-2 (truncated)                                    81.2             25.0
              System-2 (default)                                      83.5             30.4
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                     36.0              4.7
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                     50.7              9.8
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (truncated)                     73.2             15.0
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (default)                       74.0             18.7
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)          76.3             19.8
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)          81.2             25.0
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (test-time controlled)          83.5             30.4
              System-1.5 (truncated)                                  40.2              4.5
              System-1.5 (default)                                    62.3             10.0
              System-1.5 (test-time controlled)                       76.3             14.9
              System-1.5 (test-time controlled)                       79.7             20.0
              System-1.5 (test-time controlled)                       82.7             33.6


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Comparison of System-1.x Planner with and without sliding window decomposition
(corresponding to Fig. 7).
                                                                Plan Validity    #States-Explored
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (truncated)                    27.5                4.6
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (truncated)                    45.2               10.0
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (default)                      67.2               17.0
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (test-time controlled)         72.1               20.0
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (test-time controlled)         77.2               25.0
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (test-time controlled)         83.2               30.0
       System-1.5 w/o Sliding Window (test-time controlled)         90.0               35.3
       System-1.5 w/ Sliding Window (truncated)                     30.5                4.5
       System-1.5 w/ Sliding Window (truncated)                     56.2               10.0
       System-1.5 w/ Sliding Window (default)                       70.4               13.6
       System-1.5 w/ Sliding Window (test-time controlled)          82.2               19.9
       System-1.5 w/ Sliding Window (test-time controlled)          92.2               24.4
       System-1.5 w/ Sliding Window (test-time controlled)          96.7               27.3


Table 10: Comparison of two hardness functions (Manhattan Distance and #Obstacles) for Maze
Navigation (corresponding to Fig. 8).
                                                      Plan Validity     #States-Explored
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           33.5                4.8
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           38.2                9.7
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           50.0               13.4
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           62.2               15.0
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           79.5               17.4
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           83.7               20.0
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (#Obstacles)           93.7               24.4
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (Manhattan)            31.7                4.8
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (Manhattan)            54.5               15.0
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (Manhattan)            35.2               10.0
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (Manhattan)            80.0               18.8
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (Manhattan)            81.5               19.9
              System-1.5 w/o sub-goal (Manhattan)            93.7               24.4


                                                 28
