Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E XACT B YTE -L EVEL P ROBABILITIES
FROM T OKENIZED L ANGUAGE M ODELS
FOR FIM-TASKS AND M ODEL E NSEMBLES

 Buu Phan1∗ , Brandon Amos2 , Itai Gat2 , Marton Havasi2 , Matthew Muckley2 , Karen Ullrich2
 1
  University of Toronto, 2 Meta AI
 truong.phan@mail.utoronto.ca
 {bda, itaigat, marton, mmuckley, karenu}@meta.com



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Tokenization is associated with many poorly understood shortcomings in language
             models (LMs), yet remains an important component for long sequence scaling
             purposes. This work studies how tokenization impacts model performance by
             analyzing and comparing the stochastic behavior of tokenized models with their
             byte-level, or token-free, counterparts. We discover that, even when the two mod-
             els are statistically equivalent, their predictive distributions over the next byte
             can be substantially different, a phenomenon we term as “tokenization bias”. To
             fully characterize this phenomenon, we introduce the Byte-Token Representation
             Lemma, a framework that establishes a mapping between the learned token dis-
             tribution and its equivalent byte-level distribution. From this result, we develop a
             next-byte sampling algorithm that eliminates tokenization bias without requiring
             further training or optimization. In other words, this enables zero-shot conver-
             sion of tokenized LMs into statistically equivalent token-free ones. We demon-
             strate its broad applicability with two use cases: fill-in-the-middle (FIM) tasks
             and model ensembles. In FIM tasks where input prompts may terminate mid-
             token, leading to out-of-distribution tokenization, our method mitigates perfor-
             mance degradation and achieves 18% improvement in FIM coding benchmarks,
             while consistently outperforming the standard token healing fix. For model en-
             sembles where each model employs a distinct vocabulary, our approach enables
             seamless integration, resulting in improved performance up to 3.7% over individ-
             ual models across various standard baselines in reasoning, knowledge, and cod-
             ing. Code is available at: https://github.com/facebookresearch/Exact-Byte-Level-
             Probabilities-from-Tokenized-LMs.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Transformers form the backbone of all widely-used state-of-the-art language models (LMs) such as
GPTs (Brown et al., 2020), Llama (Touvron et al., 2023), ans Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023a). A com-
mon pre-processing step in these models is tokenization, a method that shortens the input sequence
by mapping multiple bytes, i.e. characters into discrete tokens, i.e. words or subwords, from a fixed
vocabulary 1 . Efforts to bypass tokenization have shown limited empirical success (Yu et al., 2024;
Limisiewicz et al., 2024), suggesting tokenization is critical to the performance of large language
models (LLMs). It has been speculated that the reason for the performance gap between tokenized
and byte-level models is due to the reduction of input tokens, allowing models to handle longer con-
texts at less compute (Zouhar et al., 2023; Goldman et al., 2024). Recent work by Rajaraman et al.
(2024) provides an additional explanation: Even for unlimited data and compute 2 , tokenized models
can achieve better cross-entropy loss than untokenized ones, resulting in superior performance.
         *
       Work done during internship at Meta AI.
     1
      In the context of this study, we use the terms “character” and “byte” interchangeably to refer to an element
from a subset of the tokenization vocabulary. This subset is somewhat flexible. Precision is only important in
the experiment section where we define the subset to be all utf-8 bytes.
    2
      And assuming the data source can be approximated as a kth order Markov chain.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                       Completion Prompt
                       def add5(aa):                                                                   Exact Next-Byte
                                                                    LLMs       Next-Token Prediction
 Next-Token              return 5 + a                  Next-Byte                                       Prediction (Ours)
 Prediction                                            Prediction               Token   Probability
                                                                                                       Byte   Probability
    Token    Probability                      Byte   Probability                  A         0.4                             Ensemble Method
                                                                                                        A         0.5
                                                                                  B         0.5                                 of Choice
     \n          0.6                           \n       0.01                                            B         0.5
                           Exact Byte-Token
      a          0.0                           \t       0.02                     AA         0.1                             Byte   Probability
                             Conversion
    pple        0.11                           a         0.9                                                                 A         0.4
      …          …                             …         …                      Token   Probability                          B         0.6
                                                                                                       Byte   Probability
                                                                                  A         0.3
                                                                                                        A         0.3
 def add5(aa): ❌                              def add5(aa): ✓                     B         0.5
                                                                                                        B         0.7
   return 5 + a\n                               return 5 + aa                    BB         0.2


Figure 1: Left: Tokenized LMs can experience tokenization bias when prompts end mid-token, as in
this code completion example. This means that the correct solution, a has zero probability of being
chosen. Our method avoids this problem and can predict the correct token while using the same
model. Right: Our method maps next-token predictions of arbitrary tokenized LMs to statistically
equivalent next-byte predictions (see Section 4.1 for details). This enables any model ensemble
strategy, such as averaging or mixture of experts.
To contribute to the understanding of the impact of tokenization, we demonstrate that for any to-
kenized LM, there exists a statistically equivalent byte-level process. Despite this fact, we find a
surprising discrepancy in their predictive behaviors—particularly in next-token and next-byte pre-
dictions, where there can be significant differences. We hence introduce the concept of tokenization
bias to describe the discrepancy between the predictive distributions of the tokenized model and the
byte-level equivalent. Towards mapping tokenized predictions to byte-level predictions, we present
the Byte-Token Representation Lemma (Section 4.1). This result enables both byte-level predictions
and an algorithmic correction of tokenization bias in any trained LM without the need for additional
training or optimization, allowing us to sample bias-free next-bytes from any tokenized LM.
Since tokenization bias limits certain token combinations and impairs the model’s ability to sample
specific tokens, it is especially detrimental for tasks such as coding, where precise completion is
necessary. We focus on fill-in-the-middle (FIM) tasks, where tokenization bias poses significant
challenges, particularly when a prompt ends mid-token. Previous research (Dagan et al., 2024)
highlights this issue, showing that language models struggle to generate the correct completion in
such cases. Our theory predicts this phenomenon precisely, and the failure example shown in Figure
1 (Left) can be reproduced with any open-weight model to date. Our experiments show that our
next-byte prediction method outperforms tokenized models with the same cross-entropy by 18%,
and is able to corrects cases where specialized fixes, such as token healing/alignment (Dagan et al.,
2024; Roziere et al., 2023; Athiwaratkun et al., 2024), consistently fails to backup.
A byproduct of our byte-level prediction algorithm is that it enables ensembling of arbitrary LMs.
Ordinarily, one cannot average the predictions of LMs that do not share a vocabulary. By map-
ping their predictions and conditioning domains to byte-space, one can easily aggregate predictions
from multiple models and leverage the benefits of ensembling. Combining multiple models is ad-
vantageous because ensembles are generally more accurate and robust than any individual member
(Hastie et al., 2009). We confirm this empirically: ensembling LMs with our byte-level predictions
outperform individual models in many cases. Overall, the key contributions of this work are:
            1. We convert tokenized LMs into statistically equivalent token-free models, and demonstrate
               that their predictive distributions differ. We define this discrepancy as tokenization bias.
            2. We introduce a method that enables next-byte prediction for any tokenized language model
               to fully mitigate tokenization bias. This algorithm is applied at inference time and carries
               an O(1) computational cost in terms of model runs.
            3. We present strong empirical evaluations on FIM benchmarks (18% improvement) and
               model ensemble tasks (up to 3.7% improvement), further demonstrating the effectiveness
               of our approach.

2         N OTATIONS AND S ETUP
2.1         S TRING AND B YTE -L EVEL L ANGUAGE M ODELS
We denote the alphabet set as A and its element character, or byte, as x. By default and consistent
with real-world data, unless otherwise stated, we include the end of string <EOS> byte in A. For any
(finite) string s, we denote its substring from location i to j as xji := xi xi+1 ..xj . We view any byte-


                                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


level LM as a discrete stochastic process that defines the autoregressive probability P (xn+1 |xn1 ) for
all n. This defines an infinite (stochastic) sequence x = x1 x2 ... where x ∈ X . With the existence of
<EOS>, we have P (xn+1 |xn1 ) = 1.0 for xn+1 = xn =<EOS> and P (xn+1 = <EOS>|xn1 ) ̸= 0.0
for any xn1 . Effectively, x have finite length and the set X is countably infinite. We refer to x as a
byte sequence instead of a string, which has a finite length and does not necessarily end with <EOS>.
Given xn1 , the function prefix(.) returns all possible prefixes of xn1 , i.e. prefix(xn1 ) =
{x11 , x21 , x31 , ..., xn1 }. We denote the concatenation operation as concat(.), i.e. concat(xn1 1 , y1n2 ) =
x1 ...xn1 y1 ...yn2 . We define X (xn1 ) as the set of all byte sequences x with prefix xn1 , i.e.
                                      X (xn1 ) = {x|xn1 ∈ prefix(x)},
which corresponds to the byte-level probability of obtaining a sequence with prefix xn1 , or P (xn1 ).

2.2   T OKENIZED L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We consider two commonly used tokenization algorithms, namely Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) (see
Algorithm 2 in Appendix A.4) and Maximum Prefix Encoding (MPE). Tokens are elements within a
vocabulary V, where A ⊆ V, an individual token is denoted as t ∈ V. We also assume <EOS> is not
a part of any token but itself. An encoding consisting of k tokens of a string xn1 is tk1 = encode(xn1 ).
Conversely, a decoding of tk1 is a string denoted as xn1 = decode(tk1 ). Encodings with an unspecified
number of tokens are denoted as ⃗t and ⃗t[i:j] are the elements from i to j of ⃗t. Note that BPE and
MPE are deterministic, i.e. each string s and sequence x correspond to a unique encoding. We
define X (tk1 ) as a set consisting of all sequences whose encodings start with tk1 , i.e.
                                     X (tk1 ) = {x|tk1 = encode(x)k1 },
which corresponds to the token-level probability P (tk1 ), i.e the probability of obtaining a sequence
whose encoding starts with tk1 . We also view any tokenized LM as an autoregressive process that
defines P (tk+1 |tk1 ) and refer to an infinite token sequence as t = t1 t2 ... and t ∈ T . Similar as the
byte-level process, with the existence of <EOS>, t is effectively finite and T is countably infinite.

3     L ANGUAGE M ODELS AND T OKENIZATION B IAS
3.1   S TATISTICAL E QUIVALENCE B ETWEEN DATA G ENERATING P ROCESSES

We begin by establishing the definition of statistical equivalence between two stochastic processes.
Then, we show that byte-level LMs and their induced tokenized LMs are statistically equivalent.
Definition 1. (Statistical Equivalence) For a countably infinite set X , the byte-level data generating
processes G1 and G2 are statistically equivalent if and only if:
                                     PG1 (x) = PG2 (x) for all x ∈ X ,
i.e., the chance of sampling x are identical for processes G1 and G2 , denoted by their subscripts.
We consider the following two stochastic processes:
       • G1 : the ground truth byte-level language models P (xn+1 |xn1 ).
       • G2 : consists of the tokenized model P (tk+1 |tk1 ) induced from the process G1 and tokeniza-
         tion. The process G2 generates sequence x by autoregressively sampling new tk+1 and
         maps tk+1 to its byte-level representation using the decode(.) function.
Since every sequence x maps to a unique encoding t=encode(x) that again maps to the same x,
we have P (x)=P (t), and thus PG1 (x)=PG2 (x) or two processes are statistically equivalent. This
correspondence is unique because x must end with <EOS>. Importantly, we note that in general,
P (xn1 ) ̸= P (encode(xn1 )), as there exist other encodings in addition to encode(xn1 ) sharing the
same prefix xn1 . Nevertheless, this establishment implies that tokenized LMs can be converted into
a statistically equivalent byte-level counterpart.
3.2   T OKENIZATION B IAS
Despite their statistical equivalence, the generation behavior of tokenized and byte-level LMs can
be significantly different when prompted with the same string. We characterize the tokenization bias
phenomenon that describes this discrepancy between conditioning domains, i.e. bytes versus tokens.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                                                                                       α
                                                                   (1−α)2                                                     1−β
                                                                                                AA                 B
                                           Token Vocabulary                                          (1−α)β
                       α
                                                                                                     0.0
                                              ID     Token                                                 αβ
        1−α      A             B   1−β                                     α(1−α)                                     1.0
                                               1       A
                       β
                                               2       B                                               A
                                               3      AA
                                                                                                                0.0
              Before Tokenization
          Input Prompt: “AABABAA” |      −→ BPE/ MPE −→               Output Tokens: “AA|B|A|B|AA”

Figure 2: Tokenization bias on a 1st -order Markov chain. Given the context token “A”, the model
will never sample the next token as “A”, rather than with probability 1 − α. In practice, this bias
occurs when prompts end with tokens that are part of another token, a common issue in the FIM
tasks, leading to incorrect completions by the model.

Definition 2. (Tokenization Bias) Let the input prompt xn1 have the corresponding encoding
tk1 =encode(xn1 ). The tokenization bias occurs for this prompt when:
                                       P (xn+1 |xn1 ) ̸= P (xn+1 |tk1 ),                                                                     (1)
where P (xn+1 |tk1 ) = t∈E P (tk+1 =t|tk1 ) and E = {t ∈ V|xn+1 = decode(t)1 }, i.e. the set of
                           P
tokens whose first byte is xn+1 .
For example, the probability of the next byte being “c” may be different from the sum of the prob-
abilities of all tokens that start with “c”, which offers a broader perspective compared to the proba-
bility of the subsequent token being exactly “c”.

3.2.1    T OKENIZATION B IAS IN M ARKOV C HAINS
To systematically study tokenization bias, we employ a simplified autoregressive model, represent-
ing the data generating process as a Markov chain. As a result, we can derive a closed-form expres-
sion for the induced tokenized model and directly observe the tokenization bias phenomenon.
We consider a 1st order Markov chain with two states {“A”, “B”}, shown in Figure 2 (left) where
each string is tokenized with either MPE or BPE, which yields the same result. With the vocabulary
V = {“AA”, “A”, “B”}, we obtain a new Markov chain whose states and transition matrix are
shown in Figure 2 (right). Appendix A.7 provides details on computing the transition matrix. The
statistical equivalency between two chains is described in Rajaraman et al. (2024). First, notice that
no tokenization bias occurs when conditioning on t1 =“AA” or t1 =“B”, e.g.
        P (x3 =“A”|x21 =“AA”) = P (t2 =“AA”|t1 =“AA”) + P (t2 =“A”|t1 =“AA”) = 1 − α

However, when conditioning on t1 =“A”, tokenization bias                                                         Ground Truth: P (xn+1 |xnn−2 )
emerges, i.e. the probability P (x2 =“A”|t1 =“A”)=0.0 is not                              BBB                    Our Bias Correction Method
                                                                                                                 Biased Estimate: P (xn+1 |ti1 )
equal to P (x2 =“A”|x1 =“A”) = 1−α, i.e. the token-level                                  BBA
Markov chain never samples “A” with any prompt ending with
token “A”. The reason is that whenever two consecutive bytes                              BAB
                                                                           Last 3 Bytes


“A” appear together, the tokenizer immediately merges them                                BAA
into a single token “AA”, results in zero probability. Despite
                                                                                          ABB
being simple, this model portrays the exact phenomenon as the
coding example discussed in Figure 1 (Left).                                              ABA


Higher-Order Markov Chain. We now show this phe-                      AAB

nomenon in a more complex, 3rd order Markov chain, but
                                                                      AAA
shift from mathematical derivation to an empirical approach to
demonstrate its relevance in practice. Furthermore, we lever-            0.0    0.2       0.4      0.6     0.8
                                                                              Probability of Next Byte being A
age this example to illustrate the effectiveness of our byte-
token conversion method, to be introduced in Section 4, as Figure   rd
                                                                             3: Tokenization bias on a
a viable bias correction technique. Here, we train a decoder       3    order  Markov chain. Our byte-
transformer on tokenized data and analyse its next-token prob- token conversion (bias correction)
abilities, shown in Figure 3. As we expect, the trained tok- method in Sectionn 4 accurately re-
enized model exhibits severe bias in its predictions. Neverthe- covers P (xn+1 |x1 ) of the original
less, when combined with our bias correction technique, we chain.
accurately recover the original transition probabilities, demonstrating its potential for generalization
to other LMs. We detail the experiment setup in Appendix A.7.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Representation of 𝑃 𝑥!" under                                                 Algorithm 1: Efficient Search Algorithm for Cover Encodings by
          Tokenized Language Model 𝑃 𝑡#$! |𝑡!#                                             Backward Tokenization
                                                                                                                      encode(“yumm”)          Tokens start with “y”
    Query String (𝑛 = 5)                                          Vocabulary 𝒱
                                                                                              Iteration 𝑖
                                                                  ID   Tokens                                   y        u      m       m       y    ❌
      y      u        m        m       y                                   y
                                                                   1                         Find all tokens
                                                                                                         !
                                                                                             start with 𝑥!"#
    Cover Encodings                                                2       u                                    y        u      m       m      y         u      ❌
                                                                   3       m
      y      u        m        m       y
                                                                   4       y·u
                                                                                                                y         u     m       m       y        u          m   ✓
                                                                        yu·m                encode(𝑥$!"#"$)
                                                                   5                                                 encode(“yum”)     Tokens start with “my”
      y      u        m        m       y       u
                                                                   6       m·y
                                                                   7    m·my
                                                                                               Verify the
                                                                                                                 y        u     m       m       y   ✓
      y      u        m        m       y       u     m             8    m·yu                   combined
                                                                                               encoding.        y         u     m       m       y        u      ✓
                 Valid Encoding ✓
                                                                                                               encode(“yu”)    Tokens start with “mmy”
                 y u m m y                 u   = encode   y   u    m   m       y   u         Last token
                                                                                            candidates:
 Accept/Reject
    Criteria   Invalid Encoding ❌                                                            Last token          y        u     m       m       y    ❌
                                                                                              position:
                  y    u   m       m   y   u   ≠encode    y   u    m   m       y   u
                                                                                                               Terminate – No token contains more than 3 characters



Figure 4: Left: Representation of P (xn1 ) using tokenized LM with an example of cover encodings
and valid/invalid encoding. Right: Illustration of Algorithm 1 for cover encodings search. Green
tick and red cross denote valid and invalid encodings respectively (Definition 3). The termination
step can be easily implemented despite not shown in the algorithm. We use BPE in this example.

3.2.2        I NVALID E NCODINGS
The investigation on the zero probability events observed in our Markov chain example leads us
to introduce the definition of invalid encodings, which sets constraints on the probability P (⃗t) of
tokenized LMs. We remind the readers that this definition specifically targets BPE/MPE.
Definition 3. (Invalid Encodings) An encoding ⃗t is invalid under BPE/MPE encoding scheme if
encode(decode(⃗t))̸=⃗t, else it is valid.

In other words, invalid encodings represent the string with different tokens than the one produced
by the tokenizer. For example, assume MPE tokenizer and V={“c”, “a”, “t”, “at”, “cat”}, then
encode(“catt”)=[“cat”, “t”]. Encodings [“c”,“at”,“t”] and [“c”,“a”,“t”,“t”] are invalid.
With this definition, Proposition 1 states that no invalid encodings will exist in the token distribution.
Proposition 1. X (tk1 ) = ∅ if and only if tk1 is invalid. As a result, P (tk1 ) = 0.0. Furthermore,
P (tk |tk−1
        1   ) = 0.0 if tk−1
                        1   is valid, otherwise, it is undefined.
Proof. See Appendix A.4
Remark 1. Proposition 1 indicates the constraints of P (tk1 ) for tokenized LM induced by the byte-
level data generating process. For trained LMs, P (tk |tk−1
                                                         1    )̸=0 for invalid tk1 due to softmax ac-
tivations but we observe it to be very low compared to the valid tk1 , similar to those in Figure 3.
Since invalid encodings are provably non-existent in the ground-truth token-level distribution, we
can truncate these invalid probabilities to zero without any loss in terms of perplexity score, de-
tailed in Appendix A.6. From now, we assume that the LMs will assign zero probability to provably
non-existent encodings in the token-level distribution.

4         E XACT B YTE -L EVEL P ROBABILITIES
4.1       B YTE -T OKEN R EPRESENTATION L EMMA FOR P (xn1 )
To addresses the tokenization bias, we derive byte-level predictions P (xn+1 |xn1 ) from token-level
predictions P (tk+1 |tk1 ). To this end, we compute P (xn1 ) and begin with the concept of cover en-
codings of xn1 . These encodings are valid encodings that “optimally” contain xn1 , i.e. their last
tokens start at locations i < n. Results in this section, i.e. Section 4.1, apply for any deterministic
tokenizer, not just BPE/ MPE (also see Remark 1).
Definition 4. (Cover Encodings) Given a prefix xn1 , an encoding tk1 is said to be covering xn1 when
all the following conditions are satisfied:
          1. X (tk1 ) ̸= ∅ (i.e. tk1 is a valid encoding in the case of BPE/MPE).
          2. There exists an index i such that xni ∈ prefix(decode(tk )) and decode(tk−1   1   ) = xi−11
             where 1 ≤ i ≤ n, i.e. decode(t1 ) starts with x1 and the last token tk covers a suffix of xn1 .
                                           k                n



                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We denote cover(xn1 ) to be the set of all cover encodings of xn1 , with examples in Figure 4 (mid-left).

We now establish the BTR Lemma that allows us to exactly compute P (xn1 ) from P (tk+1 |tk1 ). The
main idea is that for any sequence x starting with xn1 , its encoding encode(x) must start with one of
the encodings in cover(xn1 ).
Lemma 1. (Byte-Token Representation) For a language model P (tk+1 |tk1 ), given a prefix xn1 , the
following statements hold:

        1. For any distinct ⃗t, ⃗t′ ∈ cover(xn1 ), we have X (⃗t) ∩ X (⃗t′ )=∅.
                      [
        2. X (xn1 ) =    X (⃗t).
                  ⃗
                  t∈cover(xn
                           1)


As a result, P (xn1 ) can be expressed as the marginal probability of all covering tokens of xn1
                                                    X
                                       P (xn1 ) =          P (⃗t).                                     (2)
                                                    ⃗
                                                    t∈cover(xn
                                                             1)


Proof. See Appendix A.2.
Remark 2. The BTR Lemma provides a general view of tokenization bias. Consider the cover en-
coding example in Figure 4 (middle-left). There, given the input string x51 = “yummy”, prompting
into the models encode(x51 ) = [“yum”, “my”] will discards the other two possibilities, resulting in
a skew distribution over the next-byte, i.e. tokenization bias.

Some scenarios requires conditioning on special tokens, such as when using control/synthetic tokens
(e.g., FIM code-infilling). In such cases, we want to compute the byte-level probability conditioned
on specific tokens, i.e. P (xnm+1 |tk1 ) where xm           k                         n k
                                                1 = decode(t1 ), or equivalently, P (x1 , t1 ). Corollary
1 provides a closed-form expression for this quantity.
Corollary 1. We can express P (xn1 , tk1 ) where decode(tk1 ) ∈ prefix(xn1 ) as follows:

                                                              P (⃗t′ ),
                                                    X
                                P (xn1 , tk1 ) =                                                       (3)
                                                     t⃗′ ∈cover(xn 1)
                                                         tk  ⃗′
                                                          1 =t [1:k]


i.e., to compute P (xn1 , tk1 ), we limit the set of cover encodings to those that starts with tk1 .
Proof. See Appendix A.3.

Finally, applying Lemma 1 requires searching all ⃗t ∈ cover(xn1 ), which can be time-consuming with
naive search. For the tokenizers under consideration, i.e. BPE and MPE, there exists an efficient
algorithm by using the properties of invalid encodings (Definition 3), explained in Section 4.1.1.

4.1.1     C OVER E NCODING S EARCH A LGORITHM
We present the cover search process for BPE/MPE in Algorithm 1, which is illustrated in Figure 4
(right). Note that the algorithm also returns P (⃗t) for ⃗t ∈ cover(xn1 ) which we will use to sample
subsequent characters later on. The idea is as follows: instead of searching for cover encodings from
left to right, which can be computationally expensive, we search for valid encodings in reverse order,
starting from the right. Suppose the last token tk , of a cover encoding tk1 is known and it has suffix
xni+1 , then according to Proposition 1, we must have: tk−1
                                                          1  =encode(xi1 ), else tk1 will be invalid.
As a result, searching from the reverse order, for any suffix xni+1 , we can find all tokens that start
with xni+1 , tokenize xi1 and check if their combination is valid or not. The number of model runs is at
most nℓ, where ℓ is length of the longest token in V, in order to compute P (⃗t). In practice, the actual
number of inference runs is much lower since encode(xi1 ) of the current iterations often contains
encodings of the later iterations. Finally, while we can obtain P (xn+1 |xn1 ) through factorization
using this algorithm, it is not practical for sampling purpose as we need to repeat the process for all
xn+1 ∈ A. We next show an efficient alternative in Section 4.2.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 (Cover Encodings Search). Compute P (xn1 ) and P (⃗t) for each ⃗t∈cover(xn1 ).
 1: procedure EXTRACT COVER(xN      1 )
 2:    cover dict = {} # Dictionary {⃗t : P (⃗t)}
 3:    for i = n − 1, ..., 0 do
 4:         # Find all tokens covering xni+1 and tokenize the remaining xi1
 5:        B = {t ∈ V|xni+1 ∈prefix(decode(t))}
 6:         tk−1
             1      = encode(xi1 )
 7:          # Compute P (tk1 ) where tk1 = t1 , ...tk−1 , t for all t ∈ V
 8:         P (tk1 ) = P (tk−1
                           1     ) × P (tk+1 = t|tk−1 1    ) # Broadcast Multiplication for all t
 9:          # Remove invalid encodings.
10:         for t ∈ B do
11:              ⃗t = concat(tk−11     , t)
12:               cover dict[ ⃗t ] = P ( ⃗t ) if is valid( ⃗t )
13:         end for
14:     end for
15:     # cover(xn1 ) =Pcover dict.keys()
16:     P (xn1 ) =                P ( ⃗t ) # from the BTR Lemma ( Lemma 1).
                   ⃗
                   t∈cover dict
17:    return P (xn1 ), cover dict
18: end procedure


4.2   E FFICIENT N EXT-B YTE S AMPLING A LGORITHM FOR P (xn+1 | xn1 )

To efficiently compute P (xn+1 |xn1 ) for any xn+1 =a ∈ A, we note that cover(xn+1
                                                                               1   ) contains:

       • Cn+1 (a): encodings ⃗t from the previous cover(xn1 ) whose (n + 1)th bytes is a. Formally,
         we have: Cn+1 (a)={⃗t∈cover(xn1 )|decode(⃗t )n+1 =a}.
       • C̄n+1 (a): encodings ⃗t whose last token starts with a at the (n + 1) location. Formally, we
         have: C̄n+1 (a)={tk+1
                            1    |tk1 =encode(xn1 ), decode(tk+1 )1 =a}.

Since Cn+1 (a) ∩ C̄n+1 (a) = ∅, then:
                                                    X                      X
                          P (xn1 , xn+1 = a) =               P (⃗t ) +               P (⃗t ),         (4)
                                                  Cn+1 (a)               C̄n+1 (a)

With this formulation, we find cover(xn+1
                                        1 ) following the process in Figure 5 (also see Algorithm 3
in Appendix A.8). Specifically, to find Cn+1 (a) and C̄n+1 (a) for every a ∈ A, we:
      1. Obtain cover(xn1 ) using Algorithm 1 or from Step 4 of the previous sample.
      2. Find Cn+1 (a) by checking the (n + 1)th byte of each ⃗t ∈ cover(xn1 ). We accumulate them
         for each a respectively.
      3. Find C̄n+1 (a) by querying the conditional distribution over all tokens P (tk+1 |tk1 ). Note
         that P (tk1 ) was already computed in cover(xn1 ). The encoding accept/reject step is optional.
      4. Obtain cover(xn+1
                       1   ) for all xn+1 = a ∈ A.
      5. Sample xn+1 from all computed P (xn+1
                                           1   ) (normalizing by P (xn1 )).

Thus we only need to run Algorithm 1 at the beginning of the sampling process. In Step 3, the
mapping of what tokens start with what bytes can be pre-computed and the sum over tokens can be
parallelized via matrix multiplication. Also, one can avoid storing a large number of encodings in
Step 4 by sampling the next byte immediately after Step 3, following Equation (4), and only create
the set of the sampled value xn+1 , i.e. C̄n+1 (xn+1 ).
Remark 3. Computing P (xn1 ) requires accessing to P (t1 ) but models such as the Yi series (Young
et al., 2024) do not provide P (t1 ). Nevertheless, it is possible to compute P (xn+1 |xn1 ) by leveraging
the pre-tokenization pattern such as white spaces or punctuation. Details in Appendix A.1.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

 Step 1: Prepare Cover Encodings                                                                                                                                 Step 4: Combine Cover Encodings
                                                                 Step 2: Regrouping Previous Cover Encodings with length > 𝑛.                            cover(“yummym”)
 String length > 𝑛
                                                    length > 𝑛                                  y   u      m         m   y      u                         y     u     m     m      y     m
                                                                 𝙲!"# (m)= ∅
    y      u      m      m      y      u                                         𝙲!"# (u)=                                                     combine
                                                                 𝙲!"# (y)= ∅                                                                              y     u     m     m      y     m     y
                                                                                                y   u      m         m   y      u        m
    y      u      m      m      y      u      m
                                                                                                                                                          y     u     m     m      y     m     m   y
                                                                 Step 3: Adding Cover Encodings with encode(𝑥#! )        m
 String length = 𝑛                                  length = 𝑛                                                                                            y     u     m     m      y     m     y   u
                                                                 (Require 1 Model Inference).                            my
    y      u      m      m      y                                                                                                   )!"# (m)                                                           Step 5:
                                                                                                                         mmy
                                                                                                                                    𝙲          combine cover(“yummyy”)                                 Sample 𝑥!"#
 cover(𝑥#! ) obtained from previous iteration (or                 Previous Encoding                                                                       y     u     m     m      y    y
                                                                                                                         myu
 through Algorithm 1 at the beginning of the                        y     u      m       m      y       next token
 sampling process).
                                                                                                                                                          y     u     m     m      y     y     u
                                                                                                                         y

                                                                                     Accept Token                        yu         )!"# (y)
                                                                                                                                    𝙲                     y     u     m     m      y     y     u   m
                                                                 Accept/Reject
                                                                 Encodings                                               yum                             cover(“yummyu”)
                                                                                                                                               combine
 Input String (𝑛 = 5)                                                              Reject Token                                                           y     u     m     m      y     u
                                                                                                                         u          )!"# (u)
                                                                                                                                    𝙲
    y     u      m       m      y                                                                                                                         y     u     m     m      y     u     m


Figure 5: Illustration of the sampling process for xn+1 from tokenized LM P (tk+1 |tk1 ), with exam-
ple following Figure 4. We do not include P (⃗t) for simplicity. Details in Section 4.2.

5        R ELATED W ORK
Algorithms for Tokenization Bias. Tokenization bias has been empirically observed when model
produces unusual generations when prompted with string ends with trailing whitespace (Gao et al.,
2023) or mid-word (Dagan et al., 2024). Token healing (Dagan et al., 2024; guidance ai, 2023) mit-
igates this issue by searching for tokens prefixed with the incomplete word. This method, however,
fails to consider all matching possibilities. In the “yummy” example in Figure 4, it can only recover
two encodings “yum|my” and “yum|myu” (tokens separated by “|”) , as “my” is a prefix string of
tokens “my” and “myu”, missing “yum|m|yum” (also see Appendix D). Similar techniques such
as token-alignment (Athiwaratkun et al., 2024) also failed to address all underlying issues (see Ap-
pendix E). Another proposed solution is using specific prompting strategies (Bavarian et al. (2022),
also see PSM Mode in Section 6.1), requiring additional training and specific prompt structure. In
contrast, we tackle the underlying issue by identifying the probabilistic root cause, i.e. the token-
byte domain gap, and introduce a conversion technique to recover the unbiased byte-level distribu-
tion without requiring retraining. Finally, Pimentel & Meister (2024) address a different but related
problem of computing next word probability, sharing some similar analysis but their approach is
limited to whitespace-separated tokenizers and does not support autoregressive byte sampling.
Language Model Ensembles To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to (i) compute next
token probabilities in a universal space for both input and output domains while (ii) guaranteeing
that the statistical properties of all member models are preserved (see Section 4), and (iii) without the
need for additional training, data or model modifications. Several works also attempted to combine
multiple LMs. Wan et al. (2024) introduce a model distillation technique by combining predictions
from various LMs to fine-tune a primary model, which does not tackle the issue of vocabulary
discrepancies. Jiang et al. (2023b) use ranking approach and evaluating outputs at the paragraph
level and comparing them pairwise. However, their approach requires training a scoring function,
making it sensitive to the distribution of training data and model choice. Huang et al. (2024) maps
the token probabilities of member models to a universal space, which relies on token embedding’s
similarity and involves solving an optimization task. Gu et al. (2024) also investigate character-
level ensembling, but does not provide expressions for P (xn1 ) or P (xn+1 |xn1 ) and overlooks the
issue of invalid encodings. Since their method condition on tokens without addressing the bias, it is
susceptible to invalid encoding states and division-by-zero errors, particularly with optimal sources.

6        E XPERIMENTS
6.1           C ODE C OMPLETION
Code completion with LLMs is well-suited for our byte-level predictions because the model is fre-
quently prompted with incomplete code snippets. Here, we briefly introduce the setting and show
that the byte-level predictions significantly improve upon the standard performance.
Fill-in-the-middle (FIM) code completion. Code completion is the process of taking source code
as input along with a point in the middle to generate the completion, e.g., the point the user’s cursor
is at. So, generating new code in the middle does not fit into the standard autoregressive genera-
tion provided by pre-training models, nor does it fit into standard system-user-assistant conversation
prompt templates. The solution has been to introduce a fill-in-the-middle (FIM) prompt template
that turns the middle generation back into a standard prompt that can be completed by an autoregres-
sive model (Bavarian et al., 2022). These FIM prompt templates introduce new tokens or control
sequences and cannot be used with a model that is not aware of them, so code models are then
trained (or fine-tuned) on a dataset of code formatted into these FIM prompt templates.


                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                              Byte-level                           Token-level
                       PSM                  SPM                         100                                           100
  Predictions      Greedy @10           Greedy @10


                                                              pass@10


                                                                                                            pass@10
                                                                         80                                            80
 Token-level        64.9       84.0      45.0       66.5
    + healing        |          |        62.7       83.8                 60                                            60
 + alignment         |          |        63.0       82.9
                                                                                     PSM      SPM     SPM + healing
   Byte-level       65.7       84.1      63.9       84.3                 40                                       40
                                                                              0.00     0.25      0.50   0.75 1.00 0.00      0.25      0.50       0.75   1.00
@10 here is the max over the temperature sweep on the right                                Temperature                         Temperature
Figure 6: Pass rates for the HumanEval Random Span benchmark from Bavarian et al.
(2022) with CodeLlama-7b for infilling Python. Across all settings, the byte-level predic-
tions yield better completions. We evaluate the two standard infilling prompt templates of
Prefix-Suffix-Middle (PSM) and Suffix-Prefix-Middle (SPM), and as baselines
use token healing (Dagan et al., 2024) and alignment (Athiwaratkun et al., 2024). The SPM template
forces the model to make predictions from the middle of a token, which our byte-level predictions
successfully handle.

Prompt templates for FIM. Given a {prefix} and {suffix} along with the control
tokens <PRE>, <MID>, and <SUF>, there are two main prompt formats for querying a
code model to generate the middle portion: the Prefix-Suffix-Middle (PSM) format
"<PRE> {prefix} <SUF>{suffix} <MID>", and Suffix-Prefix-Middle (SPM)
format is "<PRE> <SUF>{suffix} <MID> {prefix}".
Upsides and downsides of PSM and SPM. The default and most widely-used mode is PSM (Bavar-
ian et al., 2022; Roziere et al., 2023). We speculate this is the default mode because there are no
tokenization issues in it: the incomplete prefix is clearly separated from the middle portion to gener-
ate by the control tokens. While the PSM format solves tokenization issues with this separation, the
downside is that it creates an unnatural separation between the prefix and middle generation. SPM
mode overcomes this by prompting the model to generate immediately after the prefix, without any
separating tokens. This contiguity is desirable as it would leverage more knowledge from the pre-
training task, but now creates a tokenization issue when the prefix stops in the middle of a token. A
standard heuristic to overcoming this in SPM mode is called token healing, e.g., as described in Da-
gan et al. (2024), but it does not correct every tokenization issue here. Another fix is token-alignment
(Athiwaratkun et al., 2024) but it is biased and suboptimal (see Appendix E). These issues make the
PSM template outperform the SPM template in every previous results for code infilling.
Our results. We experimented with the standard random-span infilling benchmark from (Bavarian
et al., 2022). Figure 6 shows that our byte-level predictions in SPM mode attain superior perfor-
mance when using 10 samples, using CodeLlama-7b. This corroborates our hypothesis that the
contiguity between the prompted prefix and generated middle in SPM mode is more natural and con-
sistent with the pre-training objective of the model. Another surprising result is that the byte-level
greedy generations outperform the token-level greedy generations.
Ablation This is surprising because each token typically spans over multiple bytes, hence for greedy
generation the token model should have a slight advantage. We wanted to further investigate this
finding and hence performed beam search with beam width 2 and 4, which led to consistent improve-
ment of up to 2.9% and best performance at 67.7. The complete ablation is located in Appendix C.

6.2     M ODEL E NSEMBLES

Ensemble methods rely on two principles; model prediction averaging (aggregation) and training
each member of a model ensemble on a subset of all available data (bootstrapping). Ensemble
methods are a popular choice because aggregation reduces the variance of the expected empirical
test error, and bootstrapping reduces model bias. As a result, bootstrap aggregation leads to model
ensembles that are generally more accurate and robust than any individual member model (Hastie
et al., 2009). The recent surge of open-weights LMs, each presumably trained on different subsets
of available text, makes these LLMs ideal candidates for bootstrap aggregation.
Our method. Unfortunately, vocabulary discrepancies between LMs prevent direct aggregation, as
models map to different token spaces. Our method solves this by enabling exact next-byte predic-
tion, allowing any LM to map into the same space, so byte probabilities can be aggregated without
restrictions on the aggregation function and preserving the statistical properties of the member mod-
els. In this work, we choose simple averaging. We leave more complex methods for future work.



                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             MMLU            PIQA                NQ           TriviaQA         GSM8K
    Model                  Token   Byte   Token   Byte     Token      Byte   Token   Byte    Token   Byte
    LLama2-7B              45.4    45.7   78.1    78.2      25.0      23.4   58.4    58.1    15.1    12.5
    Yi-1.5-6B              63.4    63.4   78.5    78.5      22.8      22.7   53.7    53.4    61.3    61.5
    Mistral-7B-v0.3        62.1    62.1   80.1    80.3      28.5      28.8   63.6    63.5    39.0    39.0
    Voting (top-2)                 62.1           80.1                 |              |               |
    Top-2 ensemble (Our)           65.4           80.7                30.0           64.2            55.8

Table 1: We evaluate the token and equivalent byte-level model performance of various open source
LMs. We further show the byte-ensemble performance of the top-2 performing models. For all
benchmarks but GSM8K, byte-level ensembles outperform single models and voting.
Benchmarks and setup. We compare next-                                       Human Eval @1    MBPP@1
token, next-byte, voting and byte-ensembles              Model               Token   Byte    Token   Byte
against one another on multiple knowledge,               CodeLlama2-7b        32.3   28.7     40.6   42.4
reasoning, and coding benchmarks. We chose               Codellama2-13b       35.8   33.5     47.6   47.4
our benchmarks due to their prevalence in test-          Yi-Coder-1.5B        38.4   36.5     52.8   53.6
ing general LM ability. Due to computational             Top-2 Ensemble              42.1            53.6
constraints, we test on 7B models primarily.
Note that multiple choice tasks require likeli-     Table 2: Token and byte-level performance of
hood evaluation (MMLU, PIQA) while other            open-weight code LMs. The byte-ensemble per-
tasks require mid to long generations. Finally,     formance of the top-2 models achieves the best re-
voting is not trivially extended to reasoning       sults on the Human Eval benchmark while match-
tasks without training an evaluator network.        ing Yi-Coder-1.5B on MBPP.
Our results. Results are shown in Table 1 and 2. Byte and token predictions are on par with one an-
other. Ensembling the top-2 performing models consistently lead to performance boost except when
member model performance is too divergent, as in the case of GSM8K dataset where Yi-1.5-6B
outperforms Mistral-7B-v0.3, the second best LM, by a margin of 20%. For coding tasks,
the ensemble of Yi-Coder-1.5B and CodeLlama2-13b improves up to 3.7% on Human Eval
dataset. Overall, these results showcase ensemble as an exciting direction for LMs collaboration.

7     C ONCLUSION
Conclusion and limitations. This work shows that tokenized LMs have different predictive distribu-
tions than their statistically equivalent byte-level counterpart, i.e. tokenization bias. We introduced
an O(1) next-byte prediction algorithm to mitigate this bias at inference time and showed its empir-
ical relevance for FIM benchmarks and model ensemble tasks. Yet, our method introduces notable
memory consumption in its current implementation, and incurs additional linear computational costs
(one token = multiple bytes). At present, these factors may limit its practical application in resource-
constrained environments. While our work provides new insights into the effects of tokenization, it
can not explain or mitigate all related phenomena such as poor performance on arithmetic tasks.
Future work. While this work sheds some light on token- and byte-level LMs, several open ques-
tions remain. Notably, our theory does not provide insight into the employed greedy evaluation
process, nor do we examine the cumulative impact of tokenization bias. Regarding the latter, our
analysis is limited to single-token predictions, while real-world applications require generating hun-
dreds of tokens. Building on our findings, future research can explore broader topics, such as bias-
variance decomposition in LM ensembles, or interplays between bootstrapping and scaling laws.
Another direction is model distillation, where larger models with larger vocabularies could be dis-
tilled into smaller models with specialized tokenization. Our work can also enable prompt optimiza-
tion, such as for universal adversarial attacks, and facilitates relative uncertainty estimation. Also,
this work only scratched the surface of the possibility of model ensembles. For example, models
trained separately on different languages may outperform a single model trained on all languages
simultaneously, as they can achieve more optimal entropy bounds by leveraging language-specific
tokenizations. This might also improve the representation of otherwise underrepresented languages
in a training data corpus. Finally, our results also open up new possibilities for tackling mechanism
design problems (Duetting et al., 2024) involving different language models, where the tokenization
bias issue can potentially create unfair advantages for certain models.

8     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Shubham Toshniwal and Jack Lanchantin for early comments and discussions.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ben Athiwaratkun, Shiqi Wang, Mingyue Shang, Yuchen Tian, Zijian Wang, Sujan Kumar Gonu-
  gondla, Sanjay Krishna Gouda, Rob Kwiatowski, Ramesh Nallapati, and Bing Xiang. Token
  alignment via character matching for subword completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08688,
  2024.
Mohammad Bavarian, Heewoo Jun, Nikolas Tezak, John Schulman, Christine McLeavey, Jerry
 Tworek, and Mark Chen. Efficient training of language models to fill in the middle. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2207.14255, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Gautier Dagan, Gabriele Synnaeve, and Baptiste Rozière. Getting the most out of your tokenizer for
  pre-training and domain adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01035, 2024.
Paul Duetting, Vahab Mirrokni, Renato Paes Leme, Haifeng Xu, and Song Zuo. Mechanism design
  for large language models. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024, pp. 144–155,
  2024.
L Gao, J Tow, B Abbasi, S Biderman, S Black, A DiPofi, C Foster, L Golding, J Hsu, A Le Noac’h,
  et al. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation, 12 2023. URL https://zenodo.
  org/records/10256836, 7, 2023.
Omer Goldman, Avi Caciularu, Matan Eyal, Kris Cao, Idan Szpektor, and Reut Tsarfaty. Unpacking
 tokenization: Evaluating text compression and its correlation with model performance. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2403.06265, 2024.
Kevin Gu, Eva Tuecke, Dmitriy Katz, Raya Horesh, David Alvarez-Melis, and Mikhail Yurochkin.
  Chared: Character-wise ensemble decoding for large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.11009, 2024.
guidance ai. Guidance ai, 2023. URL https://github.com/guidance-ai/guidance.
  GitHub repository.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, and Jerome H Friedman. The elements of
  statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, volume 2. Springer, 2009.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09751.
Yichong Huang, Xiaocheng Feng, Baohang Li, Yang Xiang, Hui Wang, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu.
  Enabling ensemble learning for heterogeneous large language models with deep parallel collabo-
  ration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12715, 2024.
Albert Q. Jiang et al. Mistral 7b, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.
Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models
  with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023b.
Philipp Koehn and Rebecca Knowles. Six challenges for neural machine translation. In Thang
  Luong, Alexandra Birch, Graham Neubig, and Andrew Finch (eds.), Proceedings of the First
  Workshop on Neural Machine Translation, pp. 28–39, Vancouver, August 2017. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-3204. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/W17-3204.
Tomasz Limisiewicz, Terra Blevins, Hila Gonen, Orevaoghene Ahia, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Myte:
  Morphology-driven byte encoding for better and fairer multilingual language modeling. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.10691, 2024.
Tiago Pimentel and Clara Meister. How to compute the probability of a word. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.14561, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ivan Provilkov, Dmitrii Emelianenko, and Elena Voita. Bpe-dropout: Simple and effective subword
  regularization. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Nived Rajaraman, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward a theory of tokenization in llms.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08335, 2024.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for
  code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Felix Stahlberg and Bill Byrne. On NMT search errors and model errors: Cat got your tongue?
  In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
  ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 3356–3362, Hong Kong,
  China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1331.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1331.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Fanqi Wan, Xinting Huang, Deng Cai, Xiaojun Quan, Wei Bi, and Shuming Shi. Knowledge fusion
  of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10491, 2024.
Alex Young, Bei Chen, Chao Li, Chengen Huang, Ge Zhang, Guanwei Zhang, Heng Li, Jiangcheng
  Zhu, Jianqun Chen, Jing Chang, et al. Yi: Open foundation models by 01. ai. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.04652, 2024.
Lili Yu, Dániel Simig, Colin Flaherty, Armen Aghajanyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis.
  Megabyte: Predicting million-byte sequences with multiscale transformers. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Vilém Zouhar, Clara Meister, Juan Gastaldi, Li Du, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Ryan Cotterell. Tok-
  enization and the noiseless channel. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5184–5207, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    E STIMATE P (xn+1 |xn1 ) WHEN P (t1 ) IS NOT AVAILABLE

In practice, several models such as the Yi series do not provide P (t1 ) since it does not include
the beginning of sequence token. As a result, we cannot compute P (⃗t). However, we can still
compute P (xn+1 |xn1 ) since their tokenization algorithm often force splitting words by using pre-
tokenization pattern such as the whitespace. Let xi be the last whitespace byte in xn1 such that xi−1
is not a whitespace. Then we know that tk1 = encode(xi1 ) must be the prefix encoding of all cover
encodings of xn1 . This holds not only for xn1 but also any string s = concat(xn1 , s′ ) where s′ is an
arbitrary suffix.
As such, using the BTR Lemma 1, we have:
                                                               P (⃗t′ |tk1 )
                                 X                           X
                      P (xn1 ) =         P (⃗t) = P (tk1 ) ×                                                               (5)
                                    ⃗
                                    t∈cover(xn
                                             1)                               t⃗′ ∈cover(xn
                                                                                          i+1 )


and hence, with factorization:
                                                                                                                
                                                                      ,
                                                   P (⃗t′ |tk1 )                                       P (⃗t′ |tk1 ) ,
                                     X                                                    X
           P (xn+1 |xn1 ) =                                                                                               (6)
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                 
                               t⃗′ ∈cover(xn+1
                                           i+1 )                                    t⃗′ ∈cover(xn
                                                                                                i+1 )


which shows that we do not need P (tk1 ) to compute P (xn1 ), since conditioning on them is sufficient.
For autoregressive byte generation, we condition each probability term in Algorithm 3 with tk1 .

A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Lemma 1. (Byte-Token Representation Lemma) For a consistent tokenizer and a corresponding
language model P (tk+1 |tk1 ), given a prefix xn1 , we have the followings:

      1. For any distinct ⃗t, ⃗t′ ∈ cover(xn1 ), then X (⃗t) ∩ X (⃗t′ )=∅.
                    [
      2. X (xn1 ) =    X (⃗t).
                ⃗
                t∈cover(xn
                         1)


As a result, P (xn1 ) can be expressed as the marginal probability of all covering tokens of xn1
                                                    X
                                      P (xn1 ) =           P (⃗t).                                                         (7)
                                                        ⃗
                                                        t∈cover(xn
                                                                 1)



Proof. We prove each point as follows:

      1. Proof by contradiction, let ti1 , t′j            n       i      ′j
                                            1 ∈ cover(x1 ) and t1 ̸= t1 . Suppose that there exists a
                             i                  i      ′j                j
         sequence x where t1 = encode(x)1 and t1 = encode(x)1 . Without the loss of general-
                                                                                               ′j
         ization, suppose i < j, then ti1 = t′i1 since our tokenizer is deterministic. Hence, t1 cannot
                                   n
         be a cover encoding of x1 .
      2. This follows the definition of cover encodings.

Since each X (⃗t) is pair-wise disjoint, we arrive at the final equation.

A.3    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1

Corollary 1. We can express P (xn1 , tk1 ) where decode(tk1 ) ∈ prefix(xn1 ) as follows:

                                                              P (⃗t′ ).
                                                    X
                                 P (xn1 , tk1 ) =                                                                          (8)
                                                         t⃗′ ∈cover(xn   1)
                                                            1tk =t⃗′ [1:k]



                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Byte Pair Encoding Algorithm.
 1: procedure E NCODE BPE(xN         1 , V)
 2:     # Set initial encodings:
 3:    c tokens = xN      1
 4:     # Iterate over merging order in V, the first |A| entries correspond the the alphabet (no merge happens):
 5:    for i = |A| + 1, ...|V| do
 6:         c tokens ←    − find merge(c tokens, V[i])
 7:    end for
 8:    return c tokens
 9: end procedure
10:
11: procedure find merge(c tokens, v)
12:    # Left and right tokens for merging
13:    tleft , tright , tnew = v[1], v[2], v[3]
14:    old tokens = c tokens
15:    new tokens = []
16:    # Find and merge tokens from left to right
17:    j=1
18:    while j < |old tokens| do
19:         if old tokens[i, i + 1] = tleft , tright then
20:               new tokens.append(tnew )
21:               j =j+2
22:         else
23:               new tokens.append(old tokens[i])
24:               j =j+1
25:         end if
26:    end while
27:    return new tokens
28: end procedure



Proof. The proof follows the one for the BTR Lemma 1, where we only consider the cover encod-
ings that start with tk1 .

A.4    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

For completeness, we first show the BPE encoding algorithm in Algorithm 2. For the MPE algo-
rithm, the rule is greedily looking for the longest token that matches the prefix of the given text.
Proposition 1. X (tk1 ) = ∅ if and only if tk1 is invalid.

Proof. For the case of BPE, we prove each direction as follows.

       • If X (tk1 ) = ∅ then tk1 is invalid: Since X (tk1 ) = ∅, we know that there exist no sequence x
         such that encode(x)k1 = tk1 . This means there is also no string s that satisfy encode(s)k1 =
         tk1 . As such, for s = decode(tk1 ), we do not have encode(decode(tk1 )) = tk1 , which proves
         the result.
       • If tk1 is invalid then X (tk1 ) = ∅: Let xn1 = decode(tk1 ), it is sufficient to consider two string
         s1 and s2 that both have prefix xn1 . Furthermore, we assume the first i tokens of s1 covers
         exactly xn1 , i.e. xn1 = decode(ti1 ) and similarly, the first j tokens of s2 covers exactly xn1 ,
         i.e. xn1 = decode(t′j  1 ). Then:

            1. Proving that invalid tk1 leads to X (tk1 ) = ∅ is equivalently to proving ti1 = t′j
                                                                                                1 for any
               s1 , s2 .
            2. Re-running the BPE algorithm for s1 and s2 in parallel, we know that there will be no
               merge between any suffix of xn1 and the rest of strings, i.e. s1 \xn1 and s2 \xn1 due to
               the condition above (See Algorithm 2, line 6).
            3. Furthermore, for s1 , any time a merge happens within xn1 then the same merge must
               also happen within xn1 for s2 and vice versa.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         As the result, we have ti1 = t′j                                  n
                                       1 and they must be equal to encode(x1 ).


For the case of MPE, the proof is similar:

       • If X (tk1 ) = ∅ then tk1 is invalid: Since X (tk1 ) = ∅, similar to the case of BPE, we know
         that there exist no string s such that encode(s)k1 = tk1 . As such, for s = decode(tk1 ), we do
         not have encode(decode(tk1 )) = tk1 , which proves the result.
       • If tk1 is invalid then X (tk1 ) = ∅: Let xn1 = decode(tk1 ), we consider two string s1 and s2
         that both have prefix xn1 . Furthermore, we assume the first i tokens of s1 covers exactly
         xn1 , i.e. xn1 = decode(ti1 ) and similarly, the first j tokens of s2 covers exactly xn1 , i.e.
         xn1 = decode(t′j   1 ). Since the MPE tokenizer will greedily looking for the longest token,
         hence one of the the encodings must not follow MPE encoding rule (contradiction).

This concludes the proof.

A.5    T OKENIZATION B IAS UNDER S TOCHASTIC T OKENIZERS

Another class of tokenizers is non-deterministic, such as BPE Dropout (Provilkov et al., 2020), to
address model’s weakness against text fragmentation by randomly omitting tokens before text pro-
cessing, theoretically training the model in multiple vocabularies. Although intended to enhance
robustness, our analysis suggests that tokenization bias still exists despite less obvious. It is partially
mitigated, nevertheless, since the model needs to minimize loss across varied vocabulary sets. The
BTR lemma (Lemma 1) holds, requiring consideration of all valid encodings under this variability.
In practice, given the substantial size of the vocabulary, BPE-dropout is expected to be robust to
tokenization bias, i.e. assigning non-zero probabilities to invalid encodings. Yet, it is not commonly
employed in training large-scale LLMs because the randomized tokenization introduces a compu-
tational bottleneck, which slows down the training process. Also, it may require greater model
capacity to handle the increased complexity.
We demonstrate the tokenization bias in BPE-droupt in the following experiment. Here, we use the
1st order Markov chain example as in Figure 2 where (α, β) = (0.4, 0.3). We train a LLM with
BPE dropout where a sequence can be tokenized either with the vocabulary V1 = {“A”, “B”, “AA”}
or V2 = {“A”, “B”} with equal probability. Consider the following input tokens (separated by |)
and their next-token probabilities:

       • “|B|A|” and next token probabilities {“A” : 0.43, “B” : 0.57, “AA” : 10−5 }: tokenization
         bias happens according to Definition 2 but the probability does not go to 0.0 as the cross
         entropy loss is distributed between the two vocabularies.
       • “|B|A|A|” and next token probabilities {“A” : 0.59, “B” : 0.41, “AA” : 10−5 }: which
         approximately equal to the original byte-level probabilities since the LLM detects that the
         only possible vocabulary that produces these tokens is V2 = {“A”, “B”}.
       • “|B|AA|A|” and next token probabilities {“A” : 10−4 , “B” : 0.99, “AA” : 10−5 }: tok-
         enization bias occurs, i.e. the LM only outputs token “B”. Since “AA” only occurs in the
         vocabulary V1 = {“A”, “B”, “AA”}, the LLM detects the tokenization pattern and infer
         that the sequence must be tokenized with this vocabulary.

Finally, for the first case “BA”, we can recover the exact probability by using the BTR lemma.
In this case, its cover encoding and associated probabilities are t1 = |B|A|, t2 = |B|AA| and
P (t1 ) = 0.104 and P (t2 ) = 0.0415. For the string “BAA”, the first cover encoding is t2 , which is
already computed and the other one is t3 = |B|A|A| and P (t3 = 0.0443). Using factorization,
we obtain α = 0.405, which is approximately equal the the original value of 0.4.

A.6    O N P REDICTIVE D ISTRIBUTION OF L ANGUAGE M ODELS

In practice, LMs trained with BPE/MPE often do not strictly follow Proposition 1 due to softmax
activations. In this section, we show that given any tokenized LM, we can force its output probabil-
ities to obey Proposition 1, without any loss in terms of perplexity score on the token domain. In


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


other words, we can turn a tokenized language model that does not follow Proposition 1 to the one
that does while guaranteeing that the new model will always result in a lower token-level perplexity
score.
We first introduce Proposition 2. In this proposition, we are given a target discrete probability distri-
bution p where we know some of the values will not happen, says Φ∗ . Assume that we have another
distribution q that approximates p, then we can produce another distribution q ∗ that is closer to p in
terms of KL divergence by setting corresponding probabilities of q in Φ∗ to 0.0 and renormalize it.
Proposition 2. Given a discrete distribution p = {p1 , p2 , ..., pm } and q = {q1 , q2 , ..., qm } with
                                                       ∗                   ∗       ∗ ∗       ∗
qi > 0.0 for all i. Let Φ = {i ∈ Z|p  Pi = 0.0} and Φ ⊆ Φ, we define q = {q1 , q2 , ..., qm } where
qi∗ = 0.0 for i ∈ Φ∗ , and qj∗ = qj /( l∈Φ   q
                                         / ∗ l ). Then we  have:
                                      DKL (p||q ∗ ) ≤ DKL (p||q),                                    (9)
                     ∗                                                                   ∗
which implies that q is closer to p than q. We refer to the process of producing q as truncate-
renormalization (TR).

                                                            ∗
                P
                  / ql ) is the normalizing factor in q . Note that Z ≤ 1 and as such log(Z) ≤ 0.
Proof. Let Z = ( l∈Φ
Then:

                                    X               pi
                   DKL (p||q ∗ ) =        pi log      ∗                                      (10)
                                      i
                                                    q i

                                     X               pi
                                 =         pi log       ∗     , use 0 log 0 = 0.0            (11)
                                                     q  i
                                     / ∗
                                    i∈Φ

                                     X                  pi
                                 =         pi log                                            (12)
                                                     qi /Z
                                     / ∗
                                    i∈Φ
                                    "                  #
                                       X                pi
                                 =           pi log           + log(Z)                       (13)
                                                         qi
                                        / ∗
                                      i∈Φ

                                     X               pi
                                 ≤         pi log           = DKL (p||q),                    (14)
                                         ∗
                                                     qi
                                       i∈Φ
                                        /

which completes the proof.

Applying to our scenario, for any autoregressive LM P1 (tk+1 |tk1 ) that does not follow Proposition 1
(due to the softmax activations), we can perform the TR process (since we know which encoding is
invalid) to obtain a new LM P2 (tk+1 |tk1 ), which is guaranteed to better approximate the ground-truth
model P (tk+1 |tk1 ). Thus, we are guaranteed that the token-level perplexity score of P2 (tk+1 |tk1 ) is
always lower than or equal to P1 (tk+1 |tk1 ). Finally, in practice, we observe that the conditional
P1 (tk+1 |tk1 ) for invalid tk+1
                             1   is significantly smaller than the valid tokens.

A.7   T HE M ARKOV C HAIN E XAMPLE

We provide a detail computation of the Markov chain example in the main paper. Recall that in the
original chain (in the character domain), we have the following:
                                  P (x2 = “A”|x1 = “A”) = 1 − α                                     (15)
                                  P (x2 = “B”|x1 = “A”) = α                                         (16)
                                  P (x2 = “A”|x1 = “B”) = β                                         (17)
                                  P (x2 = “B”|x1 = “B”) = 1 − β                                     (18)
We also assume the initial probability π = {γ, 1 − γ} for “A” and “B” respectively. In the token
domain, let first compute P (t2 = “A”|t1 = “AA”) where we have:
   P (t2 = “A”|t1 = “AA”) = P (x63 = “ABA”|x21 = “AA”) + P (x63 = “ABB”|x21 = “AA”)                 (19)
                              = P (x53 = “AB”|x21 = “AA”)                                           (20)
                              = α(1 − α),                                                           (21)


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where in the first equality, we do not include the case x63 = “AAA” and x63 = “AAB” since
encode(“AAA”)1 = “AA” and encode(“AAB”)1 = “AA”, which are not the token “A” that we
are interested in. For other tokens when t1 = “B”, the computation follows the same arguments.
Finally, for the case of t1 = “A”, we note that it implies the second token must be “B” since any “A”
after the first “A” must be tokenized into “AA” (invalid tokens). Hence, we have P (t2 = “B”|t1 =
“A”) = 1.0. Finally, in this specific Markov chain, since order of the Markov chain in the character
domain is 1, we do not need to consider the higher order of the Markov chain in the token domain.
Higher-Order Markov Chain Experiment Setup. We validate the estimated byte-level probabil-
ities of the BTR Lemma (Lemma 1) using the Markov chain’s transition probabilities as ground
truth. Specifically, we simulate the data generating process as a 3rd order Markov chain with two
states A = {“A”,“B”}, where we randomly construct the transition matrix and the vocabulary
V = {“A”, “B”, “B·A”, “BA·A”, “B·BAA”, “A·A”, “BA·BA”, “B·B”}. Here, the order within V is
the merging order for the BPE encoding process and the “·” separates the merging tokens. We then
train a LM model using GPT-2 architecture with 6 hidden layers on the synthetically generated data.
Since the model is agnostic to the Markov chain order, we average the probability from 100 runs on
different context length while fixing the last 3 bytes.


A.8   N EXT-B YTE S AMPLING A LGORITHM

Algorithm 3 shows the next-byte algorithm in Section 4.2. Note that for C̄n+1 (a), we do not need to
iterate over every time since the mapping from tokens to their prefix byte can be precomputed (line
30-33).



B     N OTEWORTHY IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

Theoretically, we do not have to predict into utf-8 byte space. We could predict into the largest
set of tokens A that is contained in the vocabularies of all members of our model ensemble:
maxA ∥A∥ s.t. A ⊆ Vi for all i. This can have certain advantages, the primary one being
that generation would be faster: for example imagine an average token has four bytes. Our method
now needs to predict four times instead of one to generate the same expected amount of text. In this
context, note that symbol based languages such as Chinese characters are often based on multiple
bytes. Hence our method can be performance optimized by specializing the alphabet. Please note
that our choice of alphabet does not change the statistical properties of the model, hence we would
not expect accuracy differences due alphabet choice. However, the primary reason for us to choose
the byte alphabet regardless was the ease of use for model ensemble: To run any experiment we
need to map tokens probabilities to a universal alphabet, that is the easiest defining the alphabet as
255 bytes and the necessary control tokens.


C     A BLATION : B EAM SEARCH
Each token is made of 6.6 byte on average. Thus, a tokenized model
might have more foresight compared to a byte-level one when predicting        Beam
                                                                              width    PSM     SPM
one step at a time. Hence, even though, beam-search has not led to
improvements in tokenized models (Holtzman et al., 2020; Stahlberg &            1      65.7    63.9
Byrne, 2019; Koehn & Knowles, 2017), this might be different for byte-          2      66.8    65.9
level models.                                                                   4      67.7    66.8

We repeat the FIM experiments with beam-width 1, 2 and 4, shown in          Table 3: Performance in-
Table 3. Consistently, we see an about 1% improvement for each prompt-      creases for the next-byte
ing style and each beam-width increase. However, beam-search notably        prediction on our FIM-
increases the memory footprint of any LLM because modern transformer        task when beam search is
based models need to store the KV-cache of each beam for efficient gen-     applied.
eration. Since the KV-cache makes about 2/3 of the overall memory
consumption beam search is a memory intense operation.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Compute PA (.|xn1 ), which is a conditional distribution on xn1 over all bytes x ∈ A.
Cn+1 (a) and C̄n+1 (a) also contain the encoding probability P (⃗t) for each encoding they contain.
 1: procedure C OMPUTE(xn                           n
                                  1 , cover dict(x1 ) = None)
 2:     if cover dict(xn1 ) = None:
 3:          P (xn1 ), cover dict(xn1 ) = EXTRACT COVER(xn1 )
 4:      # Get the set Cn+1 (a) (See Section 4.2) for all a ∈ A
 5:     [Cn+1 (a1 ), ..., Cn+1 (a|A| )] = REGROUP ENCODINGS(cover dict(xn1 ))
 6:      # Get the set C̄n+1 (a) (See Section 4.2) for all a ∈ A
 7:    ⃗t = encode(xn1 ); Query P (⃗t) from cover dict(xn1 ).
 8:     [C̄n+1 (a1 ), ..., C̄n+1 (a|A| )] =ADD NEW ENCODINGS(⃗t, P (⃗t))
 9:      # Merge cover dictionaries.
10:     for a ∈ A do
11:         xn+1 = a
12:         cover dict(xn+1  1    ) = Cn+1 (a) ∪ C̄n+1 (a)
            P (xn+1                                    ⃗
                            P
13:              1     ) =      t∈cover dict(xn+1
                                ⃗                 ) P (t)
                                              1
14:     end for
15:     Obtain PA (.|xn1 ) by renormalizing P (xn+1     1   ).
16:     return PA (.|xn1 ), [cover dict(xn+1   1    ) for xn+1 = a ∈ A]
17: end procedure
18:
19: procedure REGROUP ENCODINGS(cover dict(xn                  1 ))
20:     for ⃗t, P (⃗t) ∈ cover dict(xn1 ) do
21:         byte = decode(⃗t)
22:         Cn+1 (byte)[⃗t] = P (⃗t)
23:     end for
24:     return [Cn+1 (a1 ), ..., Cn+1 (a|A| )]
25: end procedure
26:
27: procedure ADD NEW ENCODINGS(tk1 , P (tk1 ))
28:     Compute P (tk+1 = t|tk1 ) for all t ∈ V # Run 1 model inference for all t
29:     Compute P (tk+1  1    ) = P (tk+1 = t|tk1 )P (tk1 ) for all t ∈ V # Broadcasting for all t
30:     for t ∈ V do
31:         byte = decode(tk+1    1    )
32:         C̄n+1 (byte)[tk+1 1    ] =  P (tk+1
                                            1   )
33:     end for
34:     return [C̄n+1 (a1 ), ..., C̄n+1 (a|A| )]
35: end procedure


D    FIM CODE GENERATION EXAMPLES


Here, we show three examples from the random span FIM benchmark from Bavarian et al. (2022)
that we evaluate on in Figure 6. Our greedy byte-level generations significantly improve upon the
greedy token-level generations in the SPM (suffix-prefix-middle) mode with CodeLlama-7b be-
cause the prompt ends with the “prefix” portion of the code and the generation starts at a token
boundary. Each figure visualizes an example from the benchmark with the prefix and suffix at the
beginning and separated by ⟨FILL-ME⟩ indicating the portion for the LLM to generate. Then, we
show the generations from the token and byte-level models in SPM mode along with token healing
as a baseline. They illustrate exactly where tokenization issues arise when generating and show how
the byte-level predictions correct them.



                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Listing 1: Code generation example with CodeLlama-7b. This one is interesting because of the
typo in the variable “delimeter” in the dataset and the prefix ends with “delim”. The mis-
spelled “delimeter” is tokenized as two tokens: “del imeter” while the correctly spelled
“delimiter” is tokenized as a single token. This makes the 1) token-level prediction incorrectly
generate “ter” as the continuation because “delimter” is tokenized as three tokens “del im
ter”, which has a token boundary at the end of the prefix, 2) token-healed predictions incorrectly
generate “iter” because at the token-level, “delimiter” is more likely, and 3) byte-level pre-
dictions correctly generate “eter” because the probability at the byte-level correctly marginalizes
out the byte-level probability despite the context and many possible tokenizations.
# RandomSpanInfilling/HumanEval/5/1
from typing import List

def intersperse(numbers: List[int], delimeter: int) -> List[int]:
    """ Insert a number 'delimeter' between every two consecutive
    ,→  elements of input list `numbers'
    >>> intersperse([], 4)
    []
    >>> intersperse([1, 2, 3], 4)
    [1, 4, 2, 4, 3]
    """
    if not numbers:
        return []

     result = []

     for n in numbers[:-1]:
         result.append(n)
         result.append(delim ⟨FILL-ME⟩ mbers[-1])

     return result

token predictions (did not pass ✗):
ter)
    result.append(nu

token predictions with token healing (did not pass ✗):
iter )
    result.append(nu

byte predictions (passed ✓):
eter)
    result.append(nu


Listing 2: Code generation example with CodeLlama-7b. This one is interesting because of the
tokenization of “collatz” and the prefix starting with “colla”. “collatz” is tokenized as two
tokens “coll atz”. This makes the 1) token-level prediction incorrectly generate “zt” as the
continuation because “collazt” is tokenized as three tokens “col la zt”, which has a token
boundary at the end of the prefix, 2) token-healed predictions incorrectly generate “pse” because
at the token-level after backing up, “collapse” (a single token) is more likely, and 3) byte-level
predictions correctly generate “tz” because the probability at the byte-level correctly marginalizes
out the byte-level probability despite the context and many possible tokenizations.
# RandomSpanInfilling/HumanEval/123/1
def get_odd_collatz(n):
    """
    Given a positive integer n, return a sorted list that has the odd
    ,→  numbers in collatz sequence.

     The Collatz conjecture is a conjecture in mathematics that concerns a
     ,→  sequence defined
     as follows: start with any positive integer n. Then each term is
     ,→  obtained from the


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     previous term as follows: if the previous term is even, the next term
     ,→  is one half of
     the previous term. If the previous term is odd, the next term is 3
     ,→  times the previous
     term plus 1. The conjecture is that no matter what value of n, the
     ,→  sequence will always reach 1.

     Note:
         1. Collatz(1) is [1].
         2. returned list sorted in increasing order.

     For example:
     get_odd_collatz(5) returns [1, 5] # The collatz sequence for 5 is [5,
     ,→  16, 8, 4, 2, 1], so the odd numbers are only 1, and 5.
     """
     if n%2==0:
         odd_collatz = []
     else:
         odd_colla ⟨FILL-ME⟩ 1

          if n%2 == 1:
              odd_collatz.append(int(n))

     return sorted(odd_collatz)

token predictions (did not pass ✗):
zt = [n]

     while n != 1:
         if n%2 == 0:
             n = n/2
         else:
             n = 3*n +

token predictions with token healing (did not pass ✗):
pse = []
         odd_collatz = [n]
         while n != 1:
             if n%2 == 0:
                 n = n/2
             else:
                 n = 3*n +

byte predictions (passed ✓):
tz = [n]

     while n != 1:
         if n%2 == 0:
             n = n/2
         else:
             n = 3*n +



Listing 3: Code generation example with CodeLlama-7b. This one is interesting because of
the tokenization of “palindrome” and the prefix starting with “palindr”. “palindrome” is
tokenized as three tokens “pal ind rome”. This makes the 1) token-level prediction incorrectly
generate “one” as the continuation because “palindrone” is tokenized as four tokens “pal
ind r one”, which has a token boundary at the end of the prefix, 2) token-healed predictions
incorrectly generate “eome” and results in the three-token chunk “pal indre ome” because the
token healing did not successfully search backward enough, and 3) byte-level predictions correctly
generate “ome” because the probability at the byte-level correctly marginalizes out the byte-level
probability despite the context and many possible tokenizations.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


# RandomSpanInfilling/HumanEval/107/8
def even_odd_palindrome(n):
    """
    iven a positive integer n, return a tuple that has the number of even
    ,→  and odd
    integer palindromes that fall within the range(1, n), inclusive.

     Example 1:

          Input: 3
          Output: (1, 2)
          Explanation:
          Integer palindrome are 1, 2, 3. one of them is even, and two of
          ,→  them are odd.

     Example 2:

          Input: 12
          Output: (4, 6)
          Explanation:
          Integer palindrome are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11. four of
          ,→  them are even, and 6 of them are odd.

     Note:
         1. 1 <= n <= 10ˆ3
         2. returned tuple has the number of even and odd integer
         ,→  palindromes respectively.
     """
     def is_palindr ⟨FILL-ME⟩ odd_palindrome_count = 0

     for i in range(1, n+1):
         if i%2 == 1 and is_palindrome(i):
                 odd_palindrome_count += 1
         elif i%2 == 0 and is_palindrome(i):
             even_palindrome_count += 1
     return (even_palindrome_count, odd_palindrome_count)

token predictions (did not pass ✗):
one(n):
        return str(n) == str(n)[::-1]

     def is_palindrome(n):
         return is_palindrone(n) and n >= 10

     even_palindrome_count = 0


token predictions with token healing (did not pass ✗):
eome(n):
         return str(n) == str(n)[::-1]

     even_palindrome_count = 0


byte predictions (passed ✓):
ome(n):
        return str(n) == str(n)[::-1]

     even_palindrome_count = 0


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    A NALYSIS OF T OKEN A LIGNMENT
Recently, Athiwaratkun et al. (2024) also proposed a similar method to mitigate the tokenization
bias issue. In this method, they start regenerating the last B tokens in the prompt by restricting
the next-token to be either a prefix of the prompt’s remaining string or cover it, i.e. the remaining
string is the prefix of the generated token. Although this appears to overlap with our Corollary 1, the
sampling procedure is biased and can produce invalid encodings due to the greedy masking process.
Consider the following example where we use the following vocabulary
{< >,<1>, <a>, < a>, < aa>} with MPE tokenizer. For a prompt string “ a” which
is tokenized as < a>, token alignment will regenerate from the beginning and force the generated
tokens to match the template “ a”. This is problematic when the first token generated is < >.
Given this token, tokenization bias occurs and the second token must not be <a> , since < a>
is a whole token. On the other hand, according to token alignment, the only possible next token
after < > is <a> , but < ><a> is an invalid encoding. The correct way to align is to by rejection
sampling without greedy masking. We can use also our method by generating bytes until seeing a
white space, then switch to token level generation. In this case, the prompt should exclude the last
whitespace, and the first generated token must start with a whitespace.


                                                  22
