Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U NDERSTANDING THE S TABILITY- BASED G ENERAL -
IZATION OF P ERSONALIZED F EDERATED L EARNING

 Yingqi Liu1,2 Qinglun Li3 Jie Tan4 Yifan Shi Li Shen1,2∗ Xiaochun Cao1
 1
   School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
 2
   Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), China
 3
   College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
 4
   Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, China
 liuyingqi1199@gmail.com; liqinglun@nudt.edu.cn; j.tanjie@outlook.com
 mathshenli@gmail.com; caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT
            Despite great achievements in algorithm design for Personalized Federated Learn-
            ing (PFL), research on the theoretical analysis of generalization is still in its early
            stages. Some theoretical results have investigated the generalization performance of
            personalized models under the problem setting and hypothesis in convex conditions,
            which can not reflect the real iteration performance during non-convex training. To
            further understand the real performance from a generalization perspective, we pro-
            pose the first algorithm-dependent generalization analysis with uniform stability for
            the typical PFL method, Partial Model Personalization, on smooth and non-convex
            objectives. Specifically, we decompose the generalization errors into aggregation
            errors and fine-tuning errors, then creatively establish a generalization analysis
            framework corresponding to the gradient estimation process of the personalized
            training. This framework builds up the bridge among PFL, FL and Pure Local Train-
            ing for personalized aims in heterogeneous scenarios, which clearly demonstrates
            the effectiveness of PFL from the generalization perspective. Moreover, we demon-
            strate the impact of trivial factors like learning steps, stepsizes and communication
            topologies and obtain the excess risk analysis with optimization errors for PFL.
            Promising experiments on CIFAR datasets also corroborate our theoretical insights.
            Our code can be seen in https://github.com/YingqiLiu1999/Understanding-the-
            Stability-based-Generalization-of-Personalized-Federated-Learning.


1       I NTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of data and model scales in Machine Learning, PFL effectively improves
local performance via flexible client cooperation with heterogeneous data. Although the studies of
algorithm design has made considerable progress in PFL, their theoretical analysis is still scarce. Due
to the data and training limitations in the real world, theoretical analysis of FL/PFL usually includes
two aspects: optimization properties and generalization properties. In this work, we mainly focus on
the generalization properties of PFL, which come from the overfitting gap between the training and
testing datasets.
Currently, the existing generalization analysis for PFL is mainly obtained in three ways: 1) high-
probability generalization bounds with concentration inequalities based on the PAC hypothesis
complexity like VC dimension complexity (Deng et al., 2020; Marfoq et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2024),
Rademacher complexity (Mansour et al., 2020); 2) information-theoretical distances between the
output hypothesis and the prior from PAC-Bayes generalization (Achituve et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022); 3) the privacy-preserving ability of the change in output hypothesis when the algorithm
is exposed to attacks (Dai et al., 2022b). Most upper bounds above only depend on the problem
setting and hypothesis in the convex condition, which can not apply to the commonly used non-
convex functions such as neural networks and can not reflect the real iteration performance during
personalized training. In other words, they are weak at evaluating the effectiveness of algorithm
    ∗
        Corresponding Author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Main results on the upper generalization bounds of PFL. m is total nodes number, T is training
rounds, η is local learning stepsize, K is local learning step, n is the selected nodes number and λ is about
communication topology, σ is data hetegeneity and NC representation non-convex condition.

 Tpye            Reference         Algorithm        Analysis Tools        m   T    η   K    n/λ    σ    NC
             Hardt et al. (2016)     SGD          Uniform Stability       ✓   ✓    ✓    ×   ×      ×     ✓
             Chen et al. (2021)     FedAvg        Uniform Stability       ✓   ✓    ✓    ✓   ✓      ✓     ×
  SGD,
             Sun et al. (2024b)     FedAvg       On-average Stability     ✓   ✓    ×    ✓   ✓      ✓     ✓
   FL
             Sun et al. (2021)      D-SGD         Uniform Stability       ✓   ✓    ✓    ×   ✓      ×     ✓
             Zhu et al. (2022)      D-SGD        On-average Stability     ✓   ✓    ✓    ×   ✓      ×     ✓
            Deng et al. (2020)      C-PFL      VC Dimension Complexity    ✓   ×    ×    ×   ×      ×     ×
           Mansour et al. (2020)    C-PFL       Rademacher Complexity     ✓   ×    ×    ×   ×      ×     ×
  PFL       Zhang et al. (2022)     C-PFL       PAC-Bayes Complexity      ✓   ×    ×    ×   ×      ×     ×
                  Ours              C-PFL          Uniform Stability      ✓   ✓    ✓    ✓   ✓      ✓     ✓
                  Ours              D-PFL          Uniform Stability      ✓   ✓    ✓    ✓   ✓      ✓     ✓


design and hyperparameter selection while building the relationship between global collaboration and
local fine-tuning. Despite the optimization design above, the upper generalization bound of PFL has
a great significance with both communication topology and data heterogeneity. This insight offers a
deeper understanding of the fundamental nature of PFL. To this end, we aim to establish a framework
for algorithm-dependent generalization analysis in PFL, which is designed to align closely with the
training process and provide a clear and community-accessible foundation for further research.
Overall, we present the first algorithm-dependent generalization for the typical PFL method Partial
Model Personalization with uniform stability in non-convex conditions and evaluate the excess risk
for both Centralized PFL (C-PFL) and Decentralized PFL (D-PFL). Intuitively, each shared and
personalized update may introduce a specific impact on the generalization errors. Therefore, we
decompose the generalization errors into aggregation errors and fine-tuning errors, then establish a
generalization analysis framework corresponding to the gradient estimation process of the person-
alized training. From our analysis, some results can be concluded that larger learning steps, larger
learning rates, and denser network connections will hurt the generalization performance for both
C-PFL and D-PFL, meaning that better testing performance is the trade-off between communication
cost and computational efficiency. Besides, with different aggregation modes in the shared variables,
we demonstrate that C-PFL generalizes better than D-PFL, which aligns with the conclusion of the
generalized FL (Sun et al., 2023c). Moreover, with the analysis of data heterogeneity, we can clearly
see how PFL outperforms FL and Pure Local Training in the perspective of generalization. Combined
with the convergence analysis, we obtain the excess risk and find that personalized performance is
the trade-off between optimization and generalization.
We list our analysis with the existing bounds of SGD/D-SGD and PFL methods in Table 1. From
comparisons, our results innovatively achieve the biased gradient estimation from multi-local up-
dates and analyze the generalization interaction between personalized and shared variables during
aggregation and local training. In summary, our main contributions are as follows:

         • New framework of generalization analysis for PFL under non-convex conditions. We
           build up the first algorithm-dependent generalization analysis framework for PFL with the
           biased gradient from multi-local updates. It is consistent with the personalized training
           progress and bridges PFL, FL and Pure Local Training with the clever heterogeneity analysis,
           which reveals the effectiveness of PFL for personalized aims. We also extend it to the
           decentralized scenarios with different communication topologies.

         • New results for upper generalization bounds and excess risks for PFL. Our algorithm-
           dependent results achieve comparable bounds and reflect the iteration nature, effectiveness of
           algorithm design as well as the hyperparameters selection of PFL. Then combined with the
           optimization errors, we obtain the excess risk analysis and find that the better performance
           is the trade-off between optimization and generalization.

         • Massive experiments verify theoretical findings. Our experiments on CIFAR datasets
           with different models under non-convex conditions strongly support our theoretical insights.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK
Generalization for PFL. PFL is proposed to find the greatest personalized models for each client
(related work in Appendix A). Generalization analysis represents the performance in the unseen data
of a well-train model, which is defined as the difference between the population risk and empirical risk.
Various statistical methods have been introduced into PFL, including methods based on PAC-based
analysis, Differential Privacy analysis, and PAC-Bayes analysis. For PAC-based analysis, Deng et al.
(2020) derives the VC dimension complexity bound of a mixture of local and global models, and
finds the optimal mixing parameter. Mansour et al. (2020) derives the Rademacher complexity bound
of the clusters, data interpolation, and model interpolation. Chen et al. (2021) analyzed the stability
and excess risk of both FL and local SGD under different data heterogeneity, but failed to extend
them to the non-convex condition. For Differential Privacy analysis, Dai et al. (2022a) assumes that
the algorithm satisfies (ε, δ)-differentially private condition and proposes the lower generalization
bound with the noisy perturbation. For PAC-Bayes analysis, Zhang et al. (2022) gives an upper bound
of averaged generalization error on the Bayesian variational inference method and illustrates that the
convergence rate of the generalization error is minimax optimal up to a logarithmic factor.
Stability for generalization. The stability-based methods measure the sensitivity of the data
perturbation of an algorithm via uniform stability (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Hardt et al., 2016),
Bayes stability (Li et al., 2019), model stability (Lei & Ying, 2020; Liu et al., 2017), on-average
stability (Lei et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024b; Kuzborskij & Lampert, 2018), and so on. More
information can be seen from the introduction in Lei et al. (2023). For the generalization bounds in FL,
Lei et al. (2023) develop the stability analysis for minibatch SGD and local SGD for convex, strongly
convex and nonconvex problems. Sun et al. (2024b) show that the generalization performances of
FedAvg, FedProx and Scaffold are closely related to the data heterogeneity and the convergence
behaviors when training. Sun et al. (2023c) discuss the better generalization performance between
the Central FL and Decentralized FL. In decentralized training, Zhu et al. (2022) extend the stability-
based generalization to D-SGD and discuss the topology effect of it. Zhu et al. (2024) refine the
stability analysis for the minimax problem in a decentralized manner.
Nowadays, almost all upper generalization bounds of PFL based on the complexity theory ignore
the impact of algorithm design and the iteration nature. Therefore, we try to propose the stability-
based generalization analysis to answer how algorithm design and hyperparameter selection impact
the generalization capacity. Meanwhile, we extend the non-trivial analysis to D-PFL with various
communication network topologies. Extensive experiments also corroborate our theoretical findings.

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we first propose the problem setup for C-PFL and D-PFL. Then we present the uniform
stability for generalization error and combine it with convergence error to obtain the excess risk.

3.1   P ROBLEM S ETUP

Personalized Federated Learning. Compared to typical FL methods, PFL focuses on the average
minimization with the personalized models rather than the consensus one. Partial Model Personaliza-
tion is one of the most significant strategies in PFL, which decouples the model as the personalized
variables to satisfy the individual requirements and the shared variables to leverage the collective
knowledge. We consider the typical setting with m clients, where each client i owns the local training
data ξi and it satisfies the data distribution Di . For each client, the model parameter wi ∈ Rd are
partitioned into two parts: the shared variables u ∈ Rdu and the personalized variables vi ∈ Rdi
for i = 1, . . . , m. To simplify the presentation, we denote V = (v1 , . . . , vm ) ∈ Rd1 +...+dm . So the
full model on client i is denoted as wi = (u, vi ). fi (such as cross-entropy function) denote the loss
function for each client, ξi is the specific data for client i. The Population Risk Minimization F of
PFL is defined as follows:
                                    m
                                1 X
         min F (u, V ) :=              Fi (u, vi ) , where Fi (u, vi ) = Eξi ∼Di fi (u, vi ; ξi ) .     (1)
         u,V                   m i=1
From engineering purposes, we set the feature extraction layers (close to the input) as the shared
variables u and the linear classification layers (close to the output) as the personalized variables vi as


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arivazhagan et al. (2019); Collins et al. (2021); Pillutla et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2024). Meanwhile,
we alternately update the shared variables and personalized variables to distinguish the generalization
effects between them explicitly. Algorithm 1 illustrates the specific process. We set ∇u as stochastic
gradients of the shared variables u and ∇v as stochastic gradients of the personalized variables vi ,
respectively. Personalized variables vi first perform the local updating with the shared variables u
fixed in Line 2, then the shared variables u update with the personalized variables vi fixed in Line 5.
C-PFL and D-PFL. We consider both C-PFL Algorithm 1: Local updating for PFL.
and D-PFL in Algorithm 2. For C-PFL, the
only central server first distributes the shared Input :Local stepst K, local          learning rate ηu and ηv ,
            t                                                 initialize ui,0 = ut , and vi,0 t
                                                                                                  = vit .
variables u to the n selected clients in Line
                                                    Output :For each client, locally update ut+1 , v t+1 .
3, then aggregates the updated shared vari- 1 for local update round k = 0, 1, ..., K −i 1 do i
                                                                                                  v
ables ut+1
        i    to ut+1 from the selected clients 2        t
                                                       vi,k+1    ← vi,kt
                                                                           − ηv ∇v fi (uti,0 , vi,k
                                                                                                t       t
                                                                                                    , ξi,k ).
in Line 7. Different from the general FL, 3 end
partial model personalization only aggregates 4 for local update round k = 0, 1, ..., Ku − 1 do
the shared variables ui in the central server, 5       uti,k+1 ← uti,k − ηu ∇u fi (uti,k , vi,K   t        t
                                                                                                        , ξi,k ).
                                                                                                      v
while keeping the personal variables vi on the 6 end
client side. We focus on the case of the av- 7 ut+1 ← ut , v t+1 ← v t .
                                                     i          i,Ku     i        i,Kv
eraged aggregation, which means αi = 1/n.
For D-PFL, it allows clients to communicate Algorithm 2: C-PFL and D-PFL.
with their neighbors in a peer-to-peer man- Input :Total communication rounds T , number of
ner without the central server. The commu-                    selected clients n, initial the shared and
nication can be modeled as an undirected                      personal variables u0 , v0 = {vi0 }n       i=0 .
connected graph G = (N , V, W ), where Output :Personal solution uT and vT = {viT }ni=0 .
N = {1, 2, . . . , m} is the set of all clients, 1 C-PFL:
V ⊆ N × N is the set of communication 2 for communication round                   t = 0 to T − 1 do
channels, and the gossip/mixing matrix W 3             Sample clients |S t | = n uniformly randomly and
present as below records whether the com-               distribute the shared variables ut .
munication connects or not between any two 4           for client i ∈ S t in parallel do
clients. Set Gi as the neighbors set for each 5              ut+1
                                                               i   , vit+1 ← Local updating (uti , vit )
                                                  6    end
client in the undirected graph.
                                                       ut+1 ← n1 i∈st ut+1
                                                                      P
                                                  7                             i   .
Definition 1 (The gossip/mixing matrix 8 end
(Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009)). The gossip ma- 9 D-PFL:
trix W = [wi,j ] ∈ [0, 1]m×m is assumed to 10 for communication round t = 0 to T − 1 do
have these properties: (i) (Graph) If i ̸= j 11        for client i ∈ [m] in parallel do
and (i, j) ∈/ V, wi,j = 0, otherwise, wi,j > 12              ut+1
                                                               i   , vit+1 ← Local updating (uti , vit )
                                  ⊤                    end
0; (ii) (Symmetry) W = W ; (iii) (Null           13
space property) null{I − W} = span{1}; 14              Receive shared variables ut+1    i     with matrix W :
(iv) (Spectral property) I ⪰ W ≻ −I. Un-                ut+1                          t+1
                                                                     P
                                                           i,0   ←             w    u
                                                                         l∈G(i) i,l i     .
der these properties, the eigenvalues of W 15 end
satisfies 1 = λ1 (W) > λ2 (W) ≥ · · · ≥
λm (W) > −1. λ := max{|λ2 (W)|, |λm (W))|} and 1 − λ ∈ (0, 1] is a spectral gap of W
measuring the speed of communication parameters converge to their average value (Sun et al., 2022).

3.2    S TABILITY AND E XCESS R ISK

Generalization Stability. Recalling the unseen data distribution Di in the population risk function
in Formula (1), we select the sample ξi from the local datasets Si and estimate the expectation to
represent the real distribution. The training process is rewritten as the Empirical Risk Minimization:
                                 m
                              1 X                                        1 X
       min f (u, V ) :=             fi (u, vi ) , where fi (u, vi ) =           [fi (u, vi ; ξi )] . (2)
        u,V                  m i=1                                       S
                                                                                 ξi ∈Si
Assuming the joint datasets of local dataset Si as S, we consider a solution A(S) of a specific
algorithm A trained on S, the generalization error between the population risk in (1) and empirical
risk in (2) can be defined as εG = ES,A [F (A(S)) − f (A(S))] = E[F (u, V ) − f (u, V )]. This joint
impact caused by both the algorithm A and the datasets S may cause a bad performance from a
well-trained model on the testing dataset, which is called overfitting. Motivated by the previous
studies in Hardt et al. (2016), we use the uniform stability bound to explore the generalization
performance of PFL.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 2. (Uniform Stability) Considering a new joint dataset S,e which differs from the vanilla
dataset S at most one data sample z. The ε-uniformly stability for algorithm A is defined as below:
                                  sup E[f (u, V ; zj ) − f (e
                                                            u, Ve ; zj )] ≤ ϵ.                             (3)
                                zj ∼{Di }

The generalization error can be bound by ϵG ≤ ϵ (Hardt et al., 2016), if the algorithm A satisfies the
ε-uniformly stability.

Excess Risk. Considering (u∗ , V ∗ ) as the optimal model that can be achieved by the algorithm A on
the dataset S, the real test performance E[F (A(S))] can be measured by the excess risk as follows:
                       EE = E[F (A(S))] − E[f (u∗ , V ∗ )]
                          ≤ E[F (u, V ) − f (u, V )] + E[f (u, V ) − f (u∗ , V ∗ )] .                      (4)
                            |         {z           } |             {z             }
                                 EG : generalization error       EO : optimization error
                                          ∗     ∗
Actually, if the optimal parameter (u , V ) could fit the personalized datasets well, the loss function
E[f (u∗ , V ∗ )] will tend to zero when the training time is large enough. Therefore, the real risk
of the well-trained model (u, V ) on the test datasets can be bounded by the generalization and
optimization error. EG represents the performance risk of (u, V ) between the training datasets and
testing datasets, while EO represents the empirical risk between the theoretical optimum (u∗ , V ∗ )
and the obtained one (u, V ). Utill now, most existing studies about PFL focus on the optimization
error εO of general C-PFL and D-PFL, but there is still little work to discuss their generalization
nature. To further understand the optimization progress of the algorithm design and the iteration
nature of personalization, we provide a comprehensive analysis of their excess risks.

3.3   BASIC A SSUMPTIONS

Assumption 1 (Smoothness). For each client i = {1, . . . , m}, the function F is continuously
differentiable. There exist constants Lu , Lv , Luv , Lvu such that for each client i = {1, . . . , m}:

       • ∇u fi (ui , vi ) is Lu –Lipschitz with respect to ui and Luv –Lipschitz with respect to vi
      • ∇v fi (ui , vi ) is Lv –Lipschitz with respect to vi and Lvu –Lipschitz with respect to ui .
Assumption 2 (Bounded Variance). The stochastic gradients in both C-PFL and D-PFL have
bounded variance. That is to say, for all ui and vi , there exist constants σu and σv such that:
                                                                         2
                                                                            ≤ σu2 ,

                             E ∇u fi (ui , vi ; ξi ) − ∇u fi (ui , vi )                              (5)
                                                                         2
                                                                            ≤ σv2 .

                              E ∇v fi (ui , vi ; ξi ) − ∇v fi (ui , vi )                             (6)
Assumption 3 (Partial Gradient Diversity). There exists a constant δu2 that reflects the data
heterogeneous degree:
                                                                 2
                              ∥∇u fi (u, vi ) − ∇u fi (u, V )        ≤ δu2 , ∀u, V.
                                           e ∈ Rd which are well trained by an ϵ-uniformly
Assumption 4 (G-Lipschitz). For A (S) , A(S)
stable algorithm A on dataset S and S,
                                    e the personalized objective f (u, V ) satisfies G-Lipschitz
continuity between them:
                             ∥f (A(S)) − f (A(S))∥
                                              e ≤ G∥A(S) − A(S)∥.
                                                             e                                             (7)

Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 are mild and commonly used in the convergence analysis of FL and PFL (Liu
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023a; Shi et al., 2023d; Pillutla et al., 2022;
Sun et al., 2022; Reddi et al., 2021; Li et al., 2025). Assumption 4 is a variant of the vanilla Lipschitz
continuity assumption, which is widely used in the uniform stability analysis (Elisseeff et al., 2005;
Hardt et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023c; 2024a; Li et al., 2024a;b).

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we present the generalization analysis and the excess risk analysis for both C-PFL and
D-PFL. We state the main theoretical results and discussions as follows.


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1    S TABILITY AND E XCESS R ISK FOR C ENTRALIZED P ERSONALIZATION

Theorem 1 (Stability of C-PFL). Under Assumption 1∼ 4, let the active ratio
                                                                         per communication
round be n/m, and assume the learning rates satisfy ηu = O tKu1+k = tKµuu+k and ηv =

O tKv1+k = tKµvv+k . They decay per iteration τ = tK + k, where µu and µv are the specific
constants and satisfy µu ≤ L1u and µv ≤ L1v . Let U = supu,vi ,z f (u, vi ; z), then the generalization
bound of C-PFL satisfies:
           h                                          i
         E ∥f (uT , V T ; zj ) − f (e
                                    uT , Ve T ; zj )∥
                              µ L                                µ L                                    (8)
                     T Ku u u 2G(σu + δu )

                                                            T Kv v v

          nU τ0                                                          Luv T Ku µu Lu 2Gσv
        ≤       +                                       +             1+    (    )            .
           mS          τ0                 mSLu               τ0          Lu   τ0         mSLv

To simplify subsequent analysis, we assume µL = max{µu Lu , µv Lv } and K = max{Ku , Kv }. By
               h                       i 1          µL
                       +δu )Lv +σv Lu ) 1+µL
selecting τ0 = 2G((σunU  L u Lv              (T K) 1+µL , we can minimize the bound with τ0 :
                                                                             1
       h
             T   T            T     T
                                           i   4   G((σu + δu )Lv + σv Lu ) 1+µL           µL
      E ∥f (u , V ; zj ) − f (e
                              u , V ; zj )∥ ≤
                                  e                                              (nU T K) 1+µL . (9)
                                              mS           Lu Lv
Remark 1 (Influencal factors of C-PFL). From the stability-based results above, severe data
heterogeneity (larger gradient diversity δu ), more selected clients n and more local epochs Ku and
Kv increase the time of training on only different samples, which leads to a larger generalization gap
and worse generalization performance. In contrast, the generalization gap can be alleviated with
more total clients m and the number of samples S involved.
Remark 2 (Special cases of C-PFL). If we remove all personal variables            vi , the problem  (2)
                                                                                         µu Lu
degenerates to the classical FL problem FedAvg. The stability reduces to O (nKu T ) 1+µu Lu /m by
                                                                                               µL

removing the Kv and σv in the result, which is compatible with the upper bound O (nKT ) 1+µL /m
of the stability of central FL algorithm FedAvg (Sun et al., 2023c) with multiple local update. That
is to say, the upper bound of the stability is only related to the training paradigm, no matter
whether training for the consensus model or the personalized models. This finding builds the bridge
between the stability  of FL and PFL. If we remove all shared variables u, the stability of C-PFL
                                   µv Lv
can be reduced to O (nKv T ) 1+µv Lv /mS , which is the stability bound of the whole FL system
with partial participation ratio n/m and local updates Kv . For further consideration,
                                                                                      we set full
                                                                                                 µL
participation n/m = 1 and only one local update Kv = 1, our results can degrade to O T 1+µL /S
on each client, which is aligned with the vanilla SGD in Hardt et al. (2016).

 Personalization performs better than no per-
sonalization and Pure Local Training. Con- Table 2: Comparison with FL, PFL, Pure
sidering the impact of data heterogeneity, we Local Training.
list the comparison of generalization bounds for
FL, C-PFL, and Pure Local Training in Table            Algorithm           Generalization Bound
2. When the data heterogeneity is more severe,
                                                                          nU τ0

                                                                                     TK
                                                                                           µL
                                                                                               2G(σ+δg )

PFL significantly improves generalization capabil-         FL        O     mS
                                                                                 +    τ0         mSL
ities from no personalized methods by eliminating                                         µu Lu
                                                                                                2G(σu +δu )
                                                                    O nU  τ0
                                                                              + TτK0u
the influence of the gradient diversity and outper-       PFL
                                                                         mS
                                                                                 µv Lv
                                                                                                   mSLu

forms Pure Local Training through collaboration                           T K
                                                                                       (1 + Lu ) 2Gσ
                                                                                              L
                                                                              v                uv      v

                                                                      + τ0                          SLv
with other clients. Specifically, for the consensus                                          µL
model w in FL, we assume that the global gradi-          Local           O USτ0 + TτK     0
                                                                                                 2Gσ
                                                                                                  SL
ent diversity mainly from heterogeneity satisfies
 1
    P  m                          2      2
m      i=1 ∥∇Fi (wi ) − ∇F (w)∥ ≤ δg . Correspondingly, for the personalized model (u, vi ), the
                                                     1
                                                       Pm                                       2     2
heterogeneity from the shared variables δu satisfy m      i=1 ∥∇u Fi (u, vi ) − ∇u F (u, V )∥ ≤ δu
shown in the Assumption 3. When the data distribution is non-iid between each client (δg , δu ̸= 0),
PFL performs better than FL since the gradient diversities satisfy δu2 ≤ δg2 during personalized
training. As for the generalization performance of Pure Local Training, though it is not affected by the


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


gradient diversities from data heterogeneity, the upper bound may be larger without the collaboration
among m clients, which is consistent with the empirical experience. This analysis builds up the bridge
among FL, PFL and Pure Local Training, which first demonstrates the effectiveness and necessity of
personalized design from the generalization perspective.
Remark 3 (Comparisons with generalization bounds of C-PFL). The generalization bounds compared
in Table 4 in Appendix B calculate the complexity of the PAC problem in infinite space as the
generalization error. Although considering the nature of the learning problem, they cannot analyze
the impact of algorithm design and personalized iterative nature. Therefore, we highlight our
contributions as follows: 1) conduct the generalization analysis in the non-convex condition, which is
based on the more realistic assumptions adapted to the neural networks; 2) analyze the effectiveness
of algorithm design and hyperparameters selection; 3) illustrate the error propagation between model
aggregation and local training with the iteration nature.
Corollary 1 (Excess risk of C-PFL.). Assuming that the number of dataset  samples S is fixed
                                                                             √
and combining with the convergence bounds of εO ≤ E f (wT ) − f (w⋆ ) = O 1/ T proposed
in
   Pillutla et al. (2022), the excess risk of C-PFL satisfies that EE ≤ E[F (A(S))] − E[f (w∗ )] =
       √                µL

O 1/ T + (nKT ) 1+µL /m .
Remark 4 (Influential factors of the excess risks for C-PFL). Assuming that the smoothness
constants L, the gradient variance σu and σv , the gradient diversity δu , and the total client number
m are fixed in a specific analysis, the excess risk of C-PFL is decided by the number of active clients
n, the local intervals Ku and Kv , the total communication rounds T . Therefore, we can adjust the
hyperparameters n, Ku , Kv and T to optimize the testing performance during training. The preferred
choice of the number of active clients n and the local intervals Ku and Kv are the same as that in the
stability analysis, but increasing the communication rounds T leads to better convergence but worse
generalization performance due to the training overfitting. That is to say, the better performance for
C-PFL is the trade-off between optimization and generalization.

4.2   S TABILITY AND E XCESS R ISK FOR D ECENTRALIZED P ERSONALIZATION

In this section, we first provide the stability analysis of PFL with the peer-to-peer communication in
the non-convex objectives. Then we combine its convergence performance to obtain the excess risk.
Theorem 2 (Stability for D-PFL). Under Assumption 1∼ 4, let clients communicate
                                                                                     with each
other in a peer-to-peer manner, and assume the learning rates satisfy ηu = O tKu +k = tKµuu+k
                                                                               1

and ηv = O tKv1+k = tKµvv+k . They decay per iteration τ = tK + k, where µu and µv are the
specific constants and they satisfy µu ≤ L1u and µv ≤ L1v . Let U = supu,vi ,z f (u, vi ; z), then the
generalization bound of D-PFL satisfies:
                                                                             √              µ L
   h                                          i   U τ0   2(σu + δu )G 1 + 6 mκλ       T Ku u u
  E ∥f (uT , V T ; zj ) − f (e
                             uT , Ve T ; zj )∥ ≤       +                                         +
                                                   S         SLu            m          τ0
                                                   √                     µ L                 µ L   (10)
                                                 12 mκλ σv Luv T Ku v v

                                                                                2σv G T Kv v v

                                                                              +                  .
                                                    mSLv Lu         τ0           SLv    τ0
              α α     1           2α           2α

where κλ =    e   λ(ln λ1 α + (1−α)eλ ln 1 + λ ln 1   and λ are the widely used coefficient to measure
                         )               λ        λ
different communication connections.
To simplify subsequent analysis, we assume µL = max{µu Lu , µv Lv } and K = max{Ku , Kv }. By
                                    √                      √     i 1          µL
                 2G(σu +δu )L2v (1+6 mκλ )+2Gσv Lu Luv (m+6 mκλ ) 1+µL
               h
selecting τ0 =                        U mLu L2v                        (T K) 1+µL , we can minimize
the upper generalization bound:
              h                                          i
            E ∥f (uT , V T ; zj ) − f (e
                                       uT , Ve T ; zj )∥
                                                                 √           1                     (11)
                                       √

             4 (σu + δu )G                            σv G      6 mκλ Luv 1+µL          µL
           ≤                   (1 + 6 mκλ ) +              (1 +          )     (U T K) 1+µL .
             S     Lu m                                Lv          mLu



                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Fully-connected          Exponential              Grid                 Ring

                     Figure 1: Illustration of various network topologies in DFL.


Remark 5 (Influential factors of the decentralized stability). The stability of D-PFL is impacted
by the number of samples S, total clients m, total iterations T Ku and T Kv , data heterogeneity δu
as well in the analysis of C-PFL. It is worth noting that it is also decided by the communication
topologies κλ in decentralized FL.Table 3 below and Figure 1 show the different topological diagrams
and their properties.
                 α                     2α
For κλ = αe            1
                   λ(ln λ1 α + (1−α)eλ ln 1 +
                           )                 λ
  2α
     1 , when   λ →   1,  the  upper  bound   for Table 3: κλ and Spectral Gap 1 − λ of communication
λ ln λ
                                                  topologies(Sun et al., 2023c; Zhu et al., 2024).
κλ is mainly decided by O 1/(λ ln λ1 ) .

And when λ → 0, the upper bound  for                 Network Topology          κλ         Spectral Gap 1 − λ
                                             α
κλ is mainly decided by O 1/(λ ln λ1 ) .
                                                      Fully-connected           0                   1
From the analysis above, we can clearly see             Disconnected            1                   0
that denser communication topology with                     Ring            O(m2 )            ≈ 16π 2 /3m2
a smaller κλ leads to better generalization                 Grid           O(mlnm )         O(1/mlog2 (m))
performance in D-PFL. Therefore, the fully              Exponential         O(lnm)          2/(1 + log2 (m))
connected topology achieves the best gener-
alization performance of shared variables and is compatible with the central ones.
Remark 6 (Special cases of D-PFL). If we remove all personalized variables vi , the problem (2)
degenerates to the classical DFL algorithm       DFedAvg. By removing all personal constants in the proof,
                                                 √               1            µu Lu
the stability of D-PFL reduces to O (1 + 6 mκλ /m) 1+µu Lu (Ku T ) 1+µu Lu , which is compatible
with the
         upper√bound of the 1stability of µLdecentralized
                                                          federated learning DFedAvg in Sun et al. (2023c)
of O (1 + 6 mκλ /m)          1+µL
                                  (KT )   1+µL
                                                 . The degradation analysis of the shared variables u is
the same as in C-PFL.
Remark 7 (Comparisons with generalization bounds of D-PFL). The mere generalization analysis
of D-PFL can be seen for Dis-PFL in Dai et al. (2022b), which acquires a generalization lower
bound through the lens of differential privacy with the inspiration in He et al. (2021). It describes the
relationship between the remaining model and generalization performance at each iteration point
and suggests that a more sparse network leads to better generalization performance. However, it
lacks of an understanding of the algorithm design, the impacts with different training parameters as
well as the communication topologies in decentralized scenarios.
Corollary 2 (Excess risk of decentralized partial model personalization). Assum-
ing that the number of dataset samples S is fixed  and combining  with the conver-
                                                                                  √
gence rates of εO ≤ E f (wT ) − f (w⋆ )                     = O 1/(1 − λ)2 T               provided in Shi
et  al. (2023a), the excess risk of D-PFL satisfies  EE              ≤ E[F (A(S))] − E[f (w∗ )] =
               √          √           1        µL
O 1/(1 − λ)2 T + (1 + 6 mκλ /m) 1+µL (KT ) 1+µL .
Remark 8 (Influential factors of the decentralized excess risks). Our analysis shows that the
excess risk of D-PFL is highly influenced by the number of the local interval Ku and Kv , the total
communication rounds T , the total clients m, the smoothness constants L, the gradient variance
σu/v , the data heterogeneity δu , and the communication topologies λ and κλ . Assuming that the
total client number m is fixed under the specific algorithm and data distribution (with the fixed
smoothness constants L, the gradient variance σ and the data heterogeneity δu ), we can adjust the
communication networks λ and kλ , local interval Ku and Kv to optimize the testing performance.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  1
A denser connection (smaller κλ and smaller 1−λ      ) means better convergence performance and
generalization performance, but it brings more communication cost. The better choice for local
intervals Ku and Kv are the same as that in stability analysis. And the better testing performance of
D-PFL is a trade-off between the convergence errors and the generalization errors.
Remark 9 (Comparisions between the C-PFL and D-PFL). From the comparison between
Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, we can clearly see that C-PFL always converges and generalizes better
than D-PFL in theoretical analysis. The centralized one largely reduces the propagation of the
generalization error, which benefits from the regular averaging on a global server for a better
consensus of the shared variables and leads to better generalization. However, to achieve a more
reliable performance, the number of active clients n in C-PFL must satisfy at least a polynomial order
of m. Also, the communication burden on the central server becomes a big challenge in the training
process. It means that the high communication costs are unavoidable when the whole federated
system m gets larger. This conclusion is also consistent with the generalization analysis of the typical
FL and DFL in Sun et al. (2023c). Therefore, the suitable choice between C-PFL and D-PFL or the
choice of different communication topologies in real scenarios is a trade-off among communication
ability, communication cost and personalized performance.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to verify the theoretical findings. We first introduce
the typical setting for experiments, then present the empirical results and corresponding analysis.

5.1   E MPIRICAL S ETUP

We conduct the experiments on CIFAR-10 datasets (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) in the Dirichlet distribu-
tion (Non-IID α = 0.3) with ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) and CIFAR-100 datasets in the Pathological
distribution (Non-IID c = 20) with VGG-11 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) for C-PFL and D-PFL.
Experiments on CIFAR-100 are in Appendix C.2. To verify the impacts of the key hyperparameters,
we follow Hardt et al. (2016) and study the parameter distance when disturbing only one data in
Figure 2a, the generalization gap of the difference between training and testing error in Figure 2b.
We explore the impact of the four factors: 1) Local Learning Epochs, 2) Local Learning Rates, 3)
Client Fraction / Communication topology, 4) Total Client Number. We keep the same sets for the
other factors for fairness. More implementations can be seen in Appendix C.

5.2   E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS

Both less local learning epochs and lower learning rates lead to better generalization perfor-
mance, but they affect the convergence speed more seriously. We discuss this phenomenon in the
first two columns for Learning Epoch and Learning Rate in Figure 2a-2b. Increasing local learning
epochs and learning rates means amplifying the model distance when learning on different samples.
It brings about a larger generalization error and more severe fluctuation.
More client participation and denser network connections in each communication round enlarge
the generalization gap, but they speed up the convergence rate to the same extent. We discuss
this phenomenon in the third column for Client Selection and Communication Topology in Figure
2a-2b. Increasing the fraction of client selection and choosing denser connection topologies means
more frequency in learning unique samples, which enlarges the generalization gap between the two
models with the disturbed datasets. This is aligned with our theoretical findings in Theorem 1, 2.
Thus, there is a trade-off between communication costs and personalized performance in real life.
A larger total participation of clients and a smaller number of local training samples increase
the generalization error and reduce the convergence speed simultaneously. We discuss this
phenomenon in the fourth column in Figure 2a-2b. Since the total data number on the dataset remains
the same, bigger participation clients mean fewer training samples per one. The generalization gaps
get worse with the number of clients increasing in Figure 2b.
C-PFL outperforms D-PFL in both generalization and convergence when their upper communi-
cation bandwidths are at the same level. We discuss this difference in the comparisons of each line
in Figure 2a-2b. Maintaining the maximum communication capacity of the busiest node, the central


                                                   9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Local Epoch                                                    Learning Rate                                       800
                                                                                                                                                                           Client Fraction                                    1600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Total Client Number
                   700         Epoch = 1                                       1000
                                                                                              Lr = 0.01                                                                                                                                     Client Num = 10
                               Epoch = 2                                                      Lr = 0.05                                                   700                                                                 1400          Client Num = 20


     Weight Distance


                                                                 Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                          Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Weight Distance
                   600         Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                                                                                        1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Client Num = 40

C-PFL
                                                                                   800                                                                    600
                   500
                               Epoch = 4                                                      Lr = 0.2                                                                                                                                      Client Num = 100
                               Epoch = 5                                                                                                                  500                                                                 1000
                   400                                                             600
                                                                                                                                                          400                                                                    800
                   300                                                             400                                                                                                                                           600
                                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                                                                             Fraction = 0.1
                   200
                                                                                   200                                                                    200                                Fraction = 0.2                      400
                   100                                                                                                                                                                       Fraction = 0.5                      200
                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                             Fraction = 1
                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                           0   50      100   150    200   250   300                       0   50          100   150   200   250         300                       0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                               Commincation round T                                           Commincation round T                                                     Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T
                                  Local Epoch                                                    Learning Rate                                                        Communication Topology                                                 Total Client Number
                                                                                                                                                          700
                   700         Epoch = 1                                       1000           Lr = 0.01                                                                                                                       1400          Client Num = 10
                               Epoch = 2                                                      Lr = 0.05                                                                                                                                     Client Num = 20
     Weight Distance


                                                                 Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                          Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Weight Distance
                   600                                                                                                                                    600
                               Epoch = 3                                           800        Lr = 0.1                                                                                                                        1200          Client Num = 40
D-PFL


                   500         Epoch = 4                                                      Lr = 0.2                                                    500                                                                 1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Client Num = 100
                               Epoch = 5                                           600
                   400                                                                                                                                    400                                                                    800
                   300                                                             400                                                                    300                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                                                             Ring Topology
                   200
                                                                                   200                                                                    200                                Grid Topology                       400

                   100                                                                                                                                                                       Exp Topology                        200
                                                                                                                                                          100                                Full Topology
                                                                                     0
                           0   50      100   150    200   250   300                       0   50          100   150   200   250         300                       0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                               Commincation round T                                           Commincation round T                                                     Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T
                                                          (a) Disturbed loss distance of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-10.
                  0.40
                                       Local Epoch                                                    Learning Rate                                                        Client Fraction                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Total Client Number
                               Epoch = 1                                           0.40
                                                                                                                                                         0.40
                  0.35         Epoch = 2                                                                                                                 0.35
                               Epoch = 3                                           0.35                                                                                                                                          0.4
   Loss Distance


                                                                  Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                          Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Loss Distance
                  0.30
C-PFL


                               Epoch = 4                                           0.30
                                                                                                                                                         0.30
                  0.25         Epoch = 5                                                                                                                 0.25                                                                    0.3
                                                                                   0.25
                  0.20
                                                                                                                                                         0.20
                                                                                   0.20
                  0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                   0.15                                     Lr = 0.01                                                        Fraction = 0.1                                                          Client Num = 10
                  0.10
                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                            Lr = 0.05                    0.10                                Fraction = 0.2                      0.1                                 Client Num = 20
                  0.05                                                                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                         Fraction = 0.5                                                          Client Num = 40
                                                                                   0.05                                     Lr = 0.2                     0.05                                Fraction = 1                                                            Client Num = 100
                  0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                           0   50      100   150    200   250   300                       0   50          100   150   200   250         300                       0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                               Commincation round T                                           Commincation round T                                                     Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T
                                  Local Epoch                                                    Learning Rate                                                        Communication Topology                                                 Total Client Number
                  0.40         Epoch = 1                                           0.45                                                                                                                                          0.5
                               Epoch = 2                                           0.40
                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                  0.35         Epoch = 3
   Loss Distance


                                                                  Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                              Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Loss Distance
D-PFL


                                                                                                                                                            0.5                                                                  0.4
                  0.30         Epoch = 4                                           0.35

                  0.25
                               Epoch = 5                                           0.30                                                                     0.4                                                                  0.3
                  0.20                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                            0.3
                  0.15                                                             0.20                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                            Lr = 0.01                                                        Ring Topology                                                           Client Num = 10
                  0.10                                                             0.15                                     Lr = 0.05                       0.2                              Grid Topology                                                           Client Num = 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                  0.05                                                             0.10                                     Lr = 0.1                                                         Exp Topology                                                            Client Num = 40
                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                            Lr = 0.2                                                         Full Topology                                                           Client Num = 100
                  0.00                                                             0.05                                                                                                                                          0.0
                           0   50      100   150    200   250   300                       0   50          100   150   200   250         300                       0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                               Commincation round T                                           Commincation round T                                                     Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T
                                                   (b) Testing and training loss distance of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-10.

                                    Figure 2: Empirical results of C-PFL (first line) and D-PFL (second line) on CIFAR-10.



 server in C-PFL mitigates the inconsistencies driven by the updates on different samples, consistent
 with our theoretical results.



 6                     C ONCLUSION

 In this paper, we develop the first algorithm-dependent generalization analysis and the excess risk
 analysis for PFL in both centralized and decentralized scenarios under non-convex conditions. It
 builds up the bridge among PFL, FL and Pure Local Training, and demonstrates the effectiveness
 of the personalized design from the generalization perspective. Compared with the previous works,
 this analysis reveals the impact of algorithm design and hyperparameter selection on the iteration
 properties. Combined with the convergence errors, we obtain the excess risk analysis for PFL. Various
 experiments verify our theoretical findings.
 Limitation. There are numerous avenues for future works: 1) Improve the generalization bounds
 for PFL with the more advanced stability methods; 2) Discuss the lower bound and tightness of the
 generalization of PFL to obtain the optimal training strategies for personalized training.
 Acknowledgment: This work is supported by the STI 2030 Major Projects (No. 2021ZD0201405),
 Shenzhen Basic Research Project (Natural Science Foundation) Basic Research Key Project (NO.
 JCYJ20241202124430041), Open Research Fund from Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial In-
 telligence and Digital Economy (SZ) (NO. GML-KF-24-23), CCF-Baidu Open fund (NO. CCF-
 Baidu202413), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023B0303000010),
 Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (KJZD20240903095700001), National Natural Science
 Foundation of China (No. 62402499).


                                                                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Durmus Alp Emre Acar, Yue Zhao, Ramon Matas, Matthew Mattina, Paul Whatmough, and Venkatesh
  Saligrama. Federated learning based on dynamic regularization. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Idan Achituve, Aviv Shamsian, Aviv Navon, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. Personalized federated
  learning with gaussian processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8392–
  8406, 2021.
Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan, Vinay Aggarwal, Aaditya Kumar Singh, and Sunav Choudhary. Feder-
 ated learning with personalization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818, 2019.
Olivier Bousquet and André Elisseeff. Stability and generalization. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 2:499–526, 2002.
Hong-You Chen and Wei-Lun Chao. On bridging generic and personalized federated learning for
  image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00778, 2021.
Shuxiao Chen, Qinqing Zheng, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. A theorem of the alternative for personalized
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01901, 2021.
Yiming Chen, Liyuan Cao, Kun Yuan, and Zaiwen Wen. Sharper convergence guarantees for federated
  learning with partial model personalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17409, 2023.
Liam Collins, Hamed Hassani, Aryan Mokhtari, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Exploiting shared represen-
  tations for personalized federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2089–2099. PMLR, 2021.
Rong Dai, Li Shen, Fengxiang He, Xinmei Tian, and Dacheng Tao. Dispfl: Towards communication-
  efficient personalized federated learning via decentralized sparse training. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, ICML, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4587–4604.
  PMLR, 2022a.
Rong Dai, Li Shen, Fengxiang He, Xinmei Tian, and Dacheng Tao. Dispfl: Towards communication-
  efficient personalized federated learning via decentralized sparse training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00187, 2022b.
Yuyang Deng, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Adaptive personalized federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13461, 2020.
Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. Heterofl: Computation and communication efficient
  federated learning for heterogeneous clients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01264, 2020.
Andre Elisseeff, Theodoros Evgeniou, Massimiliano Pontil, and Leslie Pack Kaelbing. Stability of
  randomized learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(1), 2005.
Mengchen Fan, Keren Li, Tianyun Zhang, Qing Tian, and Baocheng Geng. Pfeddst: Personalized
 federated learning with decentralized selection training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07750, 2025.
Avishek Ghosh, Jichan Chung, Dong Yin, and Kannan Ramchandran. An efficient framework for
  clustered federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19586–
  19597, 2020.
Moritz Hardt, Ben Recht, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic
 gradient descent. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1225–1234. PMLR, 2016.
Fengxiang He, Bohan Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Tighter generalization bounds for iterative dif-
  ferentially private learning algorithms. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
  2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yutao Huang, Lingyang Chu, Zirui Zhou, Lanjun Wang, Jiangchuan Liu, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang.
  Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7865–7873, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Ilja Kuzborskij and Christoph Lampert. Data-dependent stability of stochastic gradient descent. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2815–2824. PMLR, 2018.
Yunwen Lei and Yiming Ying. Fine-grained analysis of stability and generalization for stochastic
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5809–5819. PMLR, 2020.
Yunwen Lei, Zhenhuan Yang, Tianbao Yang, and Yiming Ying. Stability and generalization of
  stochastic gradient methods for minimax problems. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 6175–6186. PMLR, 2021.
Yunwen Lei, Tao Sun, and Mingrui Liu. Stability and generalization for minibatch sgd and local sgd.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01139, 2023.
Daliang Li and Junpu Wang. Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03581, 2019.
Jian Li, Xuanyuan Luo, and Mingda Qiao. On generalization error bounds of noisy gradient methods
   for non-convex learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00621, 2019.
Qinglun Li, Li Shen, Guanghao Li, Quanjun Yin, and Dacheng Tao. Dfedadmm: Dual constraints con-
  trolled model inconsistency for decentralized federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08290,
  2023a.
Qinglun Li, Miao Zhang, Nan Yin, Quanjun Yin, and Li Shen. Asymmetrically decentralized
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05093, 2023b.
Qinglun Li, Miao Zhang, Yingqi Liu, Quanjun Yin, Li Shen, and Xiaochun Cao. Boosting
  the performance of decentralized federated learning via catalyst acceleration. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.07272, 2024a.
Qinglun Li, Miao Zhang, Mengzhu Wang, Quanjun Yin, and Li Shen. Oledfl: Unleashing the
  potential of decentralized federated learning via opposite lookahead enhancement. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.06482, 2024b.
Qinglun Li, Miao Zhang, Tao Sun, Quanjun Yin, and Li Shen. Dfedgfm: Pursuing global consistency
  for decentralized federated learning via global flatness and global momentum. Neural Networks,
  184:107084, 2025.
Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can decentralized
  algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5330–5340, 2017.
Paul Pu Liang, Terrance Liu, Liu Ziyin, Nicholas B Allen, Randy P Auerbach, David Brent, Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Think locally, act globally: Federated learning with
  local and global representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01523, 2020.
Tao Lin, Lingjing Kong, Sebastian U Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Ensemble distillation for robust model
  fusion in federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2351–2363,
  2020.
Tongliang Liu, Gábor Lugosi, Gergely Neu, and Dacheng Tao. Algorithmic stability and hypothesis
  complexity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2159–2167. PMLR, 2017.
Yingqi Liu, Yifan Shi, Qinglun Li, Baoyuan Wu, Xueqian Wang, and Li Shen. Decentralized directed
  collaboration for personalized federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23168–23178, 2024.
Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Jae Ro, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Three approaches for
  personalization with applications to federated learning. Computer Science, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Othmane Marfoq, Giovanni Neglia, Richard Vidal, and Laetitia Kameni. Personalized federated
  learning through local memorization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  15070–15092. PMLR, 2022.
Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimization.
  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(1):48–61, 2009.
Jaehoon Oh, Sangmook Kim, and Se-Young Yun. Fedbabu: Towards enhanced representation for
  federated image classificatiwon. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06042, 2021.
Krishna Pillutla, Kshitiz Malik, Abdel-Rahman Mohamed, Mike Rabbat, Maziar Sanjabi, and Lin
  Xiao. Federated learning with partial model personalization. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 17716–17758. PMLR, 2022.
Sashank J. Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečný,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and Hugh Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=LkFG3lB13U5.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, 22(3):400–407, 1951.
Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. Clustered federated learning: Model-
  agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy constraints. IEEE transactions on neural
  networks and learning systems, 32(8):3710–3722, 2020.
Yifan Shi, Yingqi Liu, Yan Sun, Zihao Lin, Li Shen, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Towards
  more suitable personalization in federated learning via decentralized partial model training. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.15157, 2023a.
Yifan Shi, Yingqi Liu, Kang Wei, Li Shen, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Make landscape flatter
  in differentially private federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11242, 2023b.
Yifan Shi, Li Shen, Kang Wei, Yan Sun, Bo Yuan, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Improving the
  model consistency of decentralized federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04083, 2023c.
Yifan Shi, Kang Wei, Li Shen, Yingqi Liu, Xueqian Wang, Bo Yuan, and Dacheng Tao. Towards
  the flatter landscape and better generalization in federated learning under client-level differential
  privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00873, 2023d.
Neta Shoham, Tomer Avidor, Aviv Keren, Nadav Israel, Daniel Benditkis, Liron Mor-Yosef,
  and Itai Zeitak. Overcoming forgetting in federated learning on non-iid data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.07796, 2019.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Tao Sun, Dongsheng Li, and Bao Wang. Stability and generalization of decentralized stochastic
  gradient descent. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp.
  9756–9764, 2021.
Tao Sun, Dongsheng Li, and Bao Wang. Decentralized federated averaging. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Yan Sun, Li Shen, Shixiang Chen, Liang Ding, and Dacheng Tao. Dynamic regularized sharpness
  aware minimization in federated learning: Approaching global consistency and smooth landscape.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 32991–33013. PMLR, 2023a.
Yan Sun, Li Shen, Tiansheng Huang, Liang Ding, and Dacheng Tao. Fedspeed: Larger local interval,
  less communication round, and higher generalization accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10429,
  2023b.
Yan Sun, Li Shen, and Dacheng Tao. Which mode is better for federated learning? centralized or
  decentralized. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03461, 2023c.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yan Sun, Li Shen, and Dacheng Tao. Understanding how consistency works in federated learning via
  stage-wise relaxed initialization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Zhenyu Sun, Xiaochun Niu, and Ermin Wei. Understanding generalization of federated learning
  via stability: Heterogeneity matters. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 676–684. PMLR, 2024b.
Alysa Ziying Tan, Han Yu, Lizhen Cui, and Qiang Yang. Towards personalized federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2022.
Peng Wang, Li Shen, Zerui Tao, Shuaida He, and Dacheng Tao. Generalization analysis of stochastic
  weight averaging with general sampling. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning.
Chulin Xie, De-An Huang, Wenda Chu, Daguang Xu, Chaowei Xiao, Bo Li, and Anima Anandkumar.
  Perada: Parameter-efficient federated learning personalization with generalization guarantees.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  23838–23848, 2024.
Xu Zhang, Yinchuan Li, Wenpeng Li, Kaiyang Guo, and Yunfeng Shao. Personalized federated
  learning via variational bayesian inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  26293–26310. PMLR, 2022.
Pan Zhou, Hanshu Yan, Xiaotong Yuan, Jiashi Feng, and Shuicheng Yan. Towards understanding why
  lookahead generalizes better than sgd and beyond. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:27290–27304, 2021.
Miaoxi Zhu, Li Shen, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Stability and generalization of the decentralized
 stochastic gradient descent ascent algorithm. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 36, 2024.
Tongtian Zhu, Fengxiang He, Lan Zhang, Zhengyang Niu, Mingli Song, and Dacheng Tao. Topology-
  aware generalization of decentralized sgd. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML, pp. 27479–27503. PMLR, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this part, we provide the supplementary materials to prove the main theorem.

         • Appendix A: Related Work about PFL.
         • Appendix B: Detailed Comparisons of Generalization.
         • Appendix C: Implementation Details and Results for Experiments.
         • Appendix D: Generalization Bounds for C-PFL and D-PFL.


A      R ELATED W ORK ABOUT PFL.

Personalized Federated Learning. FL aims to improve model performance through collaboration
among users (Sun et al., 2023b;a; Shi et al., 2023b;d). PFL aims to produce the optimal personal-
ized models for each client via model decoupling (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Collins et al., 2021),
knowledge distillation (Li & Wang, 2019; Lin et al., 2020), multi-task learning (Huang et al., 2021;
Shoham et al., 2019), model interpolation (Deng et al., 2020; Diao et al., 2020) and clustering
(Ghosh et al., 2020; Sattler et al., 2020). More details can be referred to the PFL survey (Tan et al.,
2022). Among them, the model decoupling method Partial Model Personalization, which divides the
model into shared variables and personal variables, has proved to achieve better performance than
full model personalization with fewer shared parameters. LG-FedAvg (Liang et al., 2020) relieves
the data variance and device variance with jointly learning compact local representations on each
device and a global model across all devices. FedPer (Arivazhagan et al., 2019), FedRep (Collins
et al., 2021) and FedBABU (Oh et al., 2021) set the feature extractor as the shared variable and
the linear classifiers as the personal variables. They are different from the optimization progress
between the shared representation and the private linear parts. Fed-RoD (Chen & Chao, 2021) trains
a global full model and many private classifiers with empirical risk minimization and balanced risk
minimization. Most theoretical analyses for Partial Model Personalization mainly focus on their
convergence performance. FedSim & FedAlt (Pillutla et al., 2022) provide the convergence analyses
in the general non-convex setting, while FedAvg-P & Scaffold-P (Chen et al., 2023) achieve linear
speedup respecting the number of the local steps. DFedSGPSM Li et al. (2023b) investigates the
convergence of DFL combined with SAM under non-convex conditions. DFedPGP (Liu et al., 2024)
presents the decentralized convergence bound in non-convex conditions under the directed graph
and PFedDST (Fan et al., 2025) proposes the selection method for this directed cooperation, while
DFedMDC & DFedSMDC (Shi et al., 2023a) focus on the convergence with the undirected network
following (Sun et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023c; Li et al., 2023a; 2024a).


B      D ETAILED COMPARISON OF GENERALIZATION .

                       Table 4: Main results on the upper generalization bounds of PFL.

          Algorithm                                  Generalization Bound                               T   K   η   n   m

                                            2       ∗
                                                                                p
            APFL,             O 2 (1 − αi ) (L̂D (h̄ ) + B D − Di 1 + C (d + log(1/δ))/N )
                                                                                                                        ✓
       (Deng et al., 2020)
                                                        p
                              + O 2αi2 (LDi (h∗i ) + 2C (d + log(1/δ))/Si + GλH (Si ))
                                          q                                           q
          MAPPER,
                                                                q
                                                                                         log δ1

                                                  dc     em        dl p      em
                                     O 2L         m log dc +       m log dl       +2                                    ✓
     (Mansour et al., 2020)                                                                m
          pFedBayes,

                                                                2β
                                                            − 2β+d      2δ ′
                                                   O C2 m           log (m)                                             ✓
      (Zhang et al., 2022)
    FedAvg & LocalTraining,
                                                 O N1 + R2

                                                                   & O(m/N )                            ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓
       (Chen et al., 2021)
                                             h                    i 1                 µL

                                                       Lv +σv Lu ) 1+µL
         C-PFL (Ours)                   O N4 G(σuL        L
                                                        u v
                                                                         (nU   T  K) 1+µL
                                                                                                        ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓



Compared to the above generalization bounds for PFL, the proposed analysis has made the following
progress: 1) conduct the generalization analysis in the non-convex condition, which is based on the
more realistic assumptions adapted to the neural networks; 2) analyze the impacts of the algorithm
design and the hyperparameters selection of the number of samples S, the number of selected clients
n, total clients m, total iterations T Ku and T Kv and the local learning rates ηu and ηv ; 3) illustrate


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the error propagation process between model aggregation and local training with the iteration nature,
which provides a reference for the choice of early stopping points when training.
APFL is a typical PFL method based on model interpolation, which aims to find the optimal
combination of the global model and the local model with the adaptive parameter αi to achieve a
better client-specific model. It derives the generalization bound of a mixture of local and global
models with the analysis of VC dimension complexity. Si , i = 1, 2, ..., n is the number of training
data at ith user, N = m1 + ... + mn is the total number of all data, Si to be the local training set drawn
                          R
from Di , D − Di 1 = Ξ P(x,y)∼D − P(x,y)∼Di dxdy, is the difference between distributions
             Pn
D = (1/n) i=1 Di and Di , and h∗i = arg minh∈H LDi (h).
MAPPER is also a model interpolation method combining local and global models to pursue the
better personalized results. It derives the generalization bound with the analysis of Rademacher
complexity. Hc is the hypotheses class for the central model, and Hl is the hypotheses class for the
local models. dc is the pseudo-dimension of Hc and dl is the pseudo-dimension of Hl . This bound
only depends on the average number of samples and not the minimum number of samples.
pFedBayes is a novel PFL method via Bayesian variational inference. Each client uses the aggre-
gated global distribution as prior distribution and updates its personal distribution by balancing the
construction error over its personal data and the KL divergence with aggregated global distribution.
It derives the generalization bound with the PAC-Bayes analysis. δ ′ > δ > 1, and C1 , C2 > 0 are
constants related to Hölder smooth β, the intrinsic dimension of data d, the number of hidden layers
L, the widths of neural network are equalwidth M , the balance parameter ζ between personalization
and global aggregation, and sample size of each client n.
FedAvg and LocalTraining are the most typical methods for FL and PFL. Though the gener-
alization analysis in (Chen et al., 2021) is not designed based on the PFL definition and not in
the non-convex condition, it concludes a surprising theorem that there exists a threshold of data
heterogeneity to decide whether FedAvg or LocalTraining could achieve the minimax optimal for
PFL. It derives the generalization bound for LocalTraining with uniform stability and the gen-
eralization bound for FedAvg with federated stability under strongly convex conditions. m rep-
resenets the client index, and N = n1 + + nm denotes the total number of training samples.
                                (i)
R2 := minw∈W i∈[m] ni ∥w⋆ − w∥2 /N measures the level of heterogeneity among clients
                  P

(here ∥∥ denotes the Euclidean distance). Compared with this analysis, we demonstrate how PFL
outperforms FL and Pure Local Training from the perspective of data heterogeneity, show how
hyperparameter selection affects the generalization bounds and discuss the theoretical performance
under the more commonly used non-convex conditions.


C     A PPENDIX FOR EXPERIMENTS .

C.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS FOR EXPERIMENTS .

According to Definition 2, we construct distributed neighboring dataset S = {S1 , ..., Sm } and
Se = {Se1 , ..., Sem }, where each corresponding local dataset pair (Si , Sei ) only differs on one randomly
selected data sample. Then we deploy the same initial model (u, V ) with its local dataset pair (Si , Sei )
to the local client i. To focus on the effect of the essential factors, the regularization methods such
as weight decay, data augmentations and dropout are ignored to prevent unnecessary impacts (Zhu
et al., 2024; Lei et al., 2021; Wang et al.). We keep the same experiment setting for all methods and
perform 300 communication rounds. The number of client sizes is 20. The client sampling radio is
0.2 in C-PFL, while each client communicates with 4 neighbors in D-PFL accordingly. The batch
size is 128 and the number of local epochs is 5. We set SGD (Robbins & Monro, 1951) as the base
local optimizer with a learning rate η = 0.1. We ran each experiment 3 times with different random
seeds and reported the mean accuracy with standard deviation for each method.

C.2    M ORE E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS OF S TABILITY ON CIFAR-100.

We explore the impact of the four factors on CIFAR-100 in Figure 3 and 4: 1) Local Learning
Epochs, 2) Local Learning Rates, 3) Client Fraction / Communication Topology, and 4) Total Client


                                                    16
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Local Epoch                                   1400
                                                                                                              Learning Rate                                     1200
                                                                                                                                                                                    Client Fraction                                                       Total Client Number
                 1000                                                                                 Lr = 0.01                                                                                                                                      Client Num = 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                        1200          Lr = 0.05                                                                                                                                      Client Num = 20



   Weight Distance


                                                                         Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                                 Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weight Distance
                                                                                                                                                                1000
                                                                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                                                                                                       Client Num = 50

C-PFL
                     800                                                                1000          Lr = 0.2                                                     800                                                                 1500          Client Num = 100
                     600                                                                   800
                                                                                                                                                                   600
                                                                                           600                                                                                                                                         1000
                     400                                    Epoch = 1
                                                            Epoch = 2                      400                                                                     400                                Fraction = 0.1
                     200
                                                            Epoch = 3                                                                                                                                 Fraction = 0.2                      500
                                                            Epoch = 4                      200                                                                     200                                Fraction = 0.5
                                                            Epoch = 5                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fraction = 1
                        0                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                             0    50      100   150   200    250        300                       0   50          100   150         200   250   300                        0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                                  Commincation round T                                                Commincation round T                                                      Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T
                                     Local Epoch                                                         Learning Rate                                                         Communication Topology                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Total Client Number
                                                                                        1200
                                                                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                    900                                                                               Client Num = 10
                     800                                                                              Lr = 0.05                                                                                                                        1750          Client Num = 20
     Weight Distance


                                                                         Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                                   Weight Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weight Distance
                                                                                        1000                                                                       800
                                                                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                                                                                         1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Client Num = 50
D-PFL


                                                                                           800
                                                                                                      Lr = 0.2                                                     700                                                                               Client Num = 100
                     600                                                                                                                                                                                                               1250
                                                                                                                                                                   600
                                                                                           600                                                                     500                                                                 1000
                     400
                                                            Epoch = 1                                                                                              400                                                                    750
                                                            Epoch = 2                      400                                                                                                        Ring Topology
                     200                                    Epoch = 3                                                                                              300                                Grid Topology                       500
                                                            Epoch = 4                      200
                                                                                                                                                                   200                                Exp Topology                        250
                                                            Epoch = 5                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Full Topology
                        0                                                                     0
                             0    50      100   150   200    250        300                       0   50          100   150         200   250   300                        0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                                  Commincation round T                                                Commincation round T                                                      Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T

                                                             Figure 3: Loss distance of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-100.
                                          Local Epoch                                                         Learning Rate                                                         Client Fraction                                                       Total Client Number
                       1.2
                                  Epoch = 1                                                1.2
                                                                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                      1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2
                       1.0
                                  Epoch = 2                                                           Lr = 0.05
                                  Epoch = 3                                                           Lr = 0.1
      Loss Distance


                                                                              Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                                      Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Loss Distance
                                                                                           1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                  1.0
C-PFL


                       0.8
                                  Epoch = 4                                                           Lr = 0.2
                                  Epoch = 5                                                0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                  0.8
                       0.6
                                                                                           0.6                                                                       0.6                                                                  0.6
                       0.4                                                                 0.4                                                                       0.4                              Fraction = 0.1                      0.4                                 Client Num = 10
                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fraction = 0.2                                                          Client Num = 20
                                                                                           0.2                                                                       0.2                              Fraction = 0.5                      0.2                                 Client Num = 50
                       0.0                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fraction = 1                                                            Client Num = 100
                                                                                                                                                                     0.0                                                                  0.0
                             0    50      100   150   200    250        300                       0   50          100   150         200   250   300                        0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                                  Commincation round T                                                Commincation round T                                                      Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T
                                     Local Epoch                                                         Learning Rate                                                         Communication Topology                                     1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Total Client Number
                       1.2        Epoch = 1                                                1.4
                                                                                                                                                                     1.4
                                  Epoch = 2                                                                                                                                                                                               1.2
                                                                                           1.2
                                  Epoch = 3
      Loss Distance


                                                                              Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                                      Loss Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Loss Distance
                       1.0                                                                                                                                           1.2
D-PFL


                                  Epoch = 4                                                1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                       0.8        Epoch = 5                                                                             Lr = 0.01                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                           0.8                          Lr = 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                       0.6
                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                        Lr = 0.1                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                        Lr = 0.2                                     0.6
                       0.4
                                                                                           0.4                                                                                                        Ring Topology                       0.4                                 Client Num = 10
                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                              Grid Topology                                                           Client Num = 20
                       0.2                                                                 0.2                                                                                                        Exp Topology                        0.2                                 Client Num = 50
                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                       0.0                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Full Topology                                                           Client Num = 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                             0    50      100   150   200    250        300                       0   50          100   150         200   250   300                        0   50   100   150   200        250         300                       0   50      100        150   200     250        300
                                  Commincation round T                                                Commincation round T                                                      Commincation round T                                                 Commincation round T

                                                      Figure 4: Training loss distance of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-100.



 Number. The empirical results on CIFAR-100 also verify that 1) Both less local learning epochs and
 lower learning rates lead to better generalization performance, but they affect the convergence speed
 more seriously; 2) More client participation and denser network connection in each communication
 round enlarge the generalization gap, but they speed up the convergence rate to the same extent;
 3) A larger total participation clients and a smaller number of local training samples increase the
 generalization error and reduce the convergence speed simultaneously; 4) C-PFL outperforms D-PFL
 in both generalization performance and convergence performance when their upper communication
 bandwidths are at the same level.


 C.3                              M ORE E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS OF T EST ACCURACY AND T RAIN L OSS ON CIFAR.

 We explore the impact of the four factors in testing accuracy on CIFAR-10 in Figure 5 and CIFAR-100
 in Figure 7, and training loss on CIFAR-10 in Figure 6 and CIFAR-100 in Figure 8. The four factors
 are the same as above. Testing accuracies correspond to the analysis of excess risk, effected by both
 convergence error and generalization error. Training loss corresponds to the analysis of convergence
 error, reflecting optimization properties.


 D                               G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS FOR C-PFL AND D-PFL.

 In this section, we introduce our proof of the generalization bounds in the main context. We first
 introduce the general lemmas for both C-PFL and D-PFL. Then we prove the uniform stability to
 measure the generalization error for them. At the beginning of our proof, we list the important
 variables used in the study as follows.


                                                                                                                                                17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Local Epoch                                   1.000
                                                                                                  Learning Rate                                  1.00
                                                                                                                                                                 Client Fraction                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Total Client Number
                   1.0
                                                                                0.975                                                            0.98
                   0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                0.9


    Test Accuracy


                                                                  Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                  Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Test Accuracy
                                                                                0.950                                                            0.96


C-PFL
                   0.8                                                          0.925                                                            0.94                                                                 0.8
                   0.7                                                          0.900
                                                                                                                                                 0.92

                   0.6
                                                     Epoch = 1                  0.875                                                                                                                                 0.7
                                                     Epoch = 2                                                      Lr = 0.01                    0.90                              Fraction = 0.1                                                   Client Num = 10
                   0.5
                                                     Epoch = 3                  0.850                               Lr = 0.05                    0.88
                                                                                                                                                                                   Fraction = 0.2                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Client Num = 20
                                                     Epoch = 4                  0.825                               Lr = 0.1                                                       Fraction = 0.5                                                   Client Num = 40
                   0.4                               Epoch = 5                                                      Lr = 0.2                     0.86                              Fraction = 1                                                     Client Num = 100
                                                                                0.800                                                                                                                                 0.5
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T
                                Local Epoch                                       0.92
                                                                                                Learning Rate                                               Communication Topology                                               Total Client Number
               0.90                                                                                                                            0.900                                                                  0.9
                                                                                  0.90
               0.85                                                                                                                            0.875
   Test Accuracy


                                                                   Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Test Accuracy
                                                                                  0.88
D-PFL


               0.80                                                                                                                            0.850                                                                  0.8
                                                                                  0.86
               0.75                                                                                                                            0.825
                                                                                  0.84
               0.70                                                                                                                            0.800                                                                  0.7
               0.65
                                                     Epoch = 1                    0.82
                                                     Epoch = 2                                                      Lr = 0.01                  0.775                               Ring Topology                                                    Client Num = 10
                                                                                  0.80
               0.60                                  Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.05                  0.750                               Grid Topology                      0.6                           Client Num = 20
               0.55                                  Epoch = 4                    0.78                              Lr = 0.1                   0.725
                                                                                                                                                                                   Exp Topology                                                     Client Num = 40
                                                     Epoch = 5                    0.76                              Lr = 0.2                                                       Full Topology                                                    Client Num = 100
               0.50                                                                                                                            0.700                                                                  0.5
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T

                                                    Figure 5: Testing Accuracy of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-10.
                                  Local Epoch                                      0.6
                                                                                                  Learning Rate                                  0.40
                                                                                                                                                                 Client Fraction                                                     Total Client Number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.75
                                                     Epoch = 1                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                      Fraction = 0.1                                                   Client Num = 10
                                                                                                                                                 0.35
               1.50                                  Epoch = 2                     0.5                              Lr = 0.05                                                      Fraction = 0.2                    1.50                           Client Num = 20
               1.25
                                                     Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.1                     0.30                              Fraction = 0.5                                                   Client Num = 40
C-PFL


                                                     Epoch = 4                                                      Lr = 0.2                                                       Fraction = 1                      1.25                           Client Num = 100
   Train Loss


                                                                       Train Loss


                                                                                                                                  Train Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Train Loss
                                                                                   0.4
               1.00                                  Epoch = 5                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.00
                                                                                   0.3                                                           0.20
               0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.75
                                                                                                                                                 0.15
               0.50                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.50
                                                                                                                                                 0.10
               0.25                                                                0.1                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                                                 0.05
               0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                   0.0                                                           0.00
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T
                                Local Epoch                                        0.6
                                                                                                Learning Rate                                    0.40
                                                                                                                                                            Communication Topology                                               Total Client Number
                   1.2
                                                     Epoch = 1                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                      Ring Topology                      1.4                           Client Num = 10
                                                                                                                                                 0.35
                                                     Epoch = 2                     0.5                              Lr = 0.05                                                      Grid Topology                                                    Client Num = 20
                   1.0                               Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.1                     0.30                              Exp Topology                       1.2                           Client Num = 40
D-PFL


                                                     Epoch = 4                                                      Lr = 0.2                                                       Full Topology                                                    Client Num = 100
    Train Loss


                                                                       Train Loss


                                                                                                                                  Train Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Train Loss
                                                                                   0.4                                                                                                                                1.0
                   0.8                               Epoch = 5                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                   0.3                                                           0.20
                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                 0.15
                   0.4                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.10
                   0.2                                                             0.1                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                   0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                   0.0                                                           0.00
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T

                                                        Figure 6: Training loss of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-10.
                                  Local Epoch                                                     Learning Rate                                                  Client Fraction                                                     Total Client Number
                   0.7                                                             0.7                                                            0.7                                                                 0.7
    Test Accuracy


                                                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                      Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Test Accuracy

                   0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6
C-PFL


                                                                                   0.6                                                            0.6

                   0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                   0.5                                                            0.5
                   0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                     Epoch = 1                     0.4                                                            0.4
                   0.3                               Epoch = 2                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                      Fraction = 0.1                     0.3                           Client Num = 10
                                                     Epoch = 3                     0.3                              Lr = 0.05                     0.3                              Fraction = 0.2                                                   Client Num = 20
                   0.2                               Epoch = 4                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                       Fraction = 0.5                     0.2                           Client Num = 50
                                                     Epoch = 5                     0.2                              Lr = 0.2                      0.2                              Fraction = 1                                                     Client Num = 100
                   0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T
                                Local Epoch                                                     Learning Rate                                    0.75
                                                                                                                                                            Communication Topology                                               Total Client Number
                   0.7                                                             0.7                                                                                                                                0.7
                                                                                                                                                 0.70
    Test Accuracy


                                                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                  Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Test Accuracy


                   0.6                                                                                                                           0.65
D-PFL


                                                                                   0.6                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                 0.60
                   0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                   0.5                                                           0.55
                   0.4                               Epoch = 1                                                                                   0.50                                                                 0.4
                                                     Epoch = 2                     0.4                              Lr = 0.01                    0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                   Ring Topology                                                    Client Num = 10
                   0.3                               Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.05                                                      Grid Topology                      0.3                           Client Num = 20
                                                     Epoch = 4                     0.3                              Lr = 0.1                     0.40                              Exp Topology                                                     Client Num = 50
                   0.2                               Epoch = 5                                                      Lr = 0.2                     0.35                              Full Topology                      0.2                           Client Num = 100
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T

                                                    Figure 7: Testing Accuracy of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-100.
                                  Local Epoch                                      3.5
                                                                                                  Learning Rate                                   3.5
                                                                                                                                                                 Client Fraction                                                     Total Client Number
                   3.5
                                                     Epoch = 1                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                      Fraction = 0.1                     3.5                           Client Num = 10
                   3.0                               Epoch = 2                     3.0                              Lr = 0.05                     3.0                              Fraction = 0.2                     3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Client Num = 20
                                                     Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                       Fraction = 0.5                                                   Client Num = 50
C-PFL


                   2.5                               Epoch = 4                     2.5                              Lr = 0.2                      2.5                              Fraction = 1                                                     Client Num = 100
    Train Loss


                                                                       Train Loss


                                                                                                                                      Train Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Train Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5
                   2.0
                                                     Epoch = 5                     2.0                                                            2.0                                                                 2.0
                   1.5                                                             1.5                                                            1.5                                                                 1.5
                   1.0                                                             1.0                                                            1.0                                                                 1.0

                   0.5                                                             0.5                                                            0.5                                                                 0.5

                   0.0                                                             0.0                                                            0.0                                                                 0.0
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T
                   3.0
                                Local Epoch                                                     Learning Rate                                               Communication Topology                                               Total Client Number
                                                     Epoch = 1                                                      Lr = 0.01                                                      Ring Topology                      3.0                           Client Num = 10
                   2.5
                                                     Epoch = 2                     2.5                              Lr = 0.05                     2.0                              Grid Topology                                                    Client Num = 20
                                                     Epoch = 3                                                      Lr = 0.1                                                       Exp Topology                       2.5                           Client Num = 50
D-PFL


                                                     Epoch = 4                     2.0                              Lr = 0.2                                                       Full Topology                                                    Client Num = 100
    Train Loss


                                                                       Train Loss


                                                                                                                                      Train Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Train Loss


                   2.0                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                     Epoch = 5                                                                                                                                                        2.0
                   1.5                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                  1.0                                                                 1.5

                   1.0                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                   0.5                                                             0.5                                                                                                                                0.5

                   0.0                                                             0.0                                                            0.0                                                                 0.0
                         0   50   100   150   200     250        300                     0   50   100   150   200   250         300                     0   50   100   150   200        250         300                     0   50      100   150   200     250        300
                             Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                            Commincation round T                                               Commincation round T

                                                      Figure 8: Training loss of C-PFL and D-PFL on CIFAR-100.

                                                                                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 5: Some abbreviations of the used terms in the proofs.

                                Notation                           Description
                           t
                          wi,k  = (uti,k , vi,k
                                             t
                                                )         parameters at k-th iteration
                              t       t     t
                            wP= (u , V )                parameters in round t with set S
                     ∆tu,k = i∈ [m] E∥ut − u
                                           et ∥        stability difference of variables u
                     ∆v,k = i∈ [m] E∥vi − veit ∥
                       t                t
                             P
                                                       stability difference of variables vi
                                F                           initial function value gap



D.1    P RELIMINARY L EMMAS

Lemma 1 (Mixing Matrix for Decentralized FL, Lemma 4, Lian et al. (2017)). For any t ∈ Z+ ,
the mixing matrix W ∈ Rn satisfies ∥Wt − P∥op ≤ λt , where λ := max{|λ2 |, |λn (W )|} and for a
matrix A, we denote its spectral norm as ∥A∥op . Furthermore, 1 := [1, 1, . . . , 1]⊤ ∈ Rm and

                                                    11⊤
                                             P :=       ∈ Rn×n .
                                                     n
Lemma 2 (Stability for C-PFL). We follow the definition in (Hardt et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2021)
to upper bound the uniform stability term for the shared and personalized variables u and vi after
round T in the central FL paradigm. The updated progress of the shared variables u is like the
vanilla FedAvg, where the local updates and server aggregation are conducted alternately. The
updated progress of the personalized variables vi is like the SGD with multiple local updates. Let
function f (wi ) satisfies Assumption 4, the models wiT = A(S) and w
                                                                   eiT = A(S)e are generated after
T training rounds by the centralized method, we can bound their objective difference as:

                        E∥f (wiT ; z) − f (w
                                           eiT ; z)∥
                         nU τ0
                               + GE ∥wiT − w      eiT ∥ | ξ

                       ≤                                                                                   (12)
                          mS
                         nU τ0
                               + GE ∥uT − u      eT ∥ | ξ + GE ∥viT − veiT ∥ | ξ

                       ≤
                          mS

where U = supwi ,z f (wi ; z) = supu,vi ,z f (u, vi ; z) < +∞ is the upper bound of the loss and
τ0 = t0 K + k0 is a specific index of the total iterations.


Proof. Let I represent the index of the first time to sample the perturbation sample zei∗ ,j ∗ on the
dataset Sei∗ . When t0 K + k0 < I, ∆tk00 = 0. Then we define

                              P (ξ c ) = P (∆tk00 > 0) ≤ P (I ≤ t0 K + k0 ).

Expanding the probability we have:

        E∥f (wiT ; z) − f (w
                           eiT ; z)∥
       = P ({ξ}) E ∥f (wiT ; z) − f (w  eiT ; z)∥ | ξ + P ({ξ c }) E ∥f (wiT ; z) − f (w
                                                                                       eiT ; z)∥ | ξ c


       ≤ E ∥f (wiT ; z) − f (weiT ; z)∥ | ξ + P ({ξ c }) sup f (wi ; z)

                                                           wi ,z

       ≤ GE ∥wiT − w
                   eiT ∥ | ξ + U P ({ξ c })


       ≤ GE ∥uT − u
                  eT ∥ | ξ + GE ∥viT − veiT ∥ | ξ + U P ({ξ c }).



Before the j ⋆ -th data on i⋆ -th client is sampled, the iterative states are identical on both S and S.e
When the dataset Sei∗ is selected, the perturbation sample zei∗ ,j ∗ can be selected with probability 1/S.
Define χ as the event sampling dataset Si⋆ and the observation moment τ0 = t0 K + k0 . Then we


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


have:
            P ({ξ c }) ≤ P (I ≤ t0 K + k0 )
               0 −1 K−1
              tX    X                           k0
                                                X
          ≤               P (I = tK + k; χ) +         P (I = t0 K + k; χ)
              t=0 k=0                           k=0
               0 −1 K−1
              tX    XX                                         k0 X
                                                               X
          =                    P (I = tK + k | χ)P (χ) +               P (I = t0 K + k | χ) P (χ)
              t=0 k=0      χ                                   k=0 χ
                    0 −1 K−1
                   tX                              k0
                                                                            !
            n            X                         X
          =                     P (I = tK + k) +         P (I = t0 K + k)
            m      t=0 k=0                         k=0
            n(t0 K + k0 )
          =
                 mS
            nτ0
          =     .
            mS
The random active clients with the probability of n/m in the second equality.
Lemma 3 (Stability for D-PFL). We follow the definition in (Hardt et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2021)
to upper bound the uniform stability term for the shared and personalized variables u and vi after
round T in the decentralized FL paradigm. Let function f (wi ) satisfies Assumption 4, the models
wiT = A(S) and w eiT = A(S)e are generated after T training rounds by the decentralized method, we
can bound their objective difference as:
                           E∥f (wiT ; z) − f (w
                                              eiT ; z)∥
                            U τ0
                                 + GE ∥wiT − w     eiT ∥ | ξ

                          ≤                                                                         (13)
                             S
                            U τ0
                                 + GE ∥uTi − u    eTi ∥ | ξ + GE ∥viT − veiT ∥ | ξ

                          ≤
                             S

Proof. For the D-PFL, the most part is the same as the proof for the central algorithms except the
probability P (χ) = 1 in a Decentralized Federated Learning setup (because all clients will participate
in the training). We bound their objective difference as:

                                                X                   U τ0
                E ∥f (wT ; z) − f (w
                                   eT ; z)∥ ≤ G      T      T

                                                 E ∥wi,K −w
                                                          ei,K ∥|ξ +     .                          (14)
                                                                     S
                                                       i∈[m]


Lemma 4 (Upper Bound of    PAggregation      Gaps). According to Algorithm 2, thePaggregation of
C-PFL is ut+1
          i,0 =  u t+1
                       = 1
                         n   i∈S t ut
                                    i,Ku , and the aggregation of D-PFL is ut+1
                                                                            i,0 =
                                                                                             t
                                                                                   j∈Ai aij ui,Ku .
On both setups, we can upper bound the aggregation gaps by:


                                              ∆t+1    t
                                               u,0 ≤ ∆u,Ku ,
                                                                                                    (15)
                                              ∆t+1    t
                                               v,0 = ∆v,Kv .


Proof. For the personal variable vi , they are always kept locally without aggregation, which means
      t       t+1                                   t        t       t+1     t+1
that vi,K = vi,0  . So it is obvious to see that vi,K   − vei,K  = vi,0  − vei,0 , which proves that
  t+1      t
∆v,0 = ∆v,K . Then we prove the inequation for the shared variables u. We discuss it in central and
decentralized mode respectively.


(1) C-PFL setup (Acar et al., 2021).


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In centralized federated learning, we select a subset S t in each communication round t. Thus we
have:
                         X                         X
                ∆t+1
                  u,0 =       E∥ut+1     et+1
                                   i,0 − u i,0 ∥ =      E∥ut+1 − u et+1 ∥
                               i∈[m]                      i∈[m]
                    X    1 X t+1                      X       1 X t
                                          et+1                                eti,Ku ∥

              =       E∥          ui − u   i      ∥=       E∥         ui,Ku − u
                         n                                    n
                i∈[m]      i∈S t                     i∈[m]      i∈S t
                          "                        #
                 X 1        X                           X 1 n X
              ≤         E        ∥uti,Ku − u
                                           eti,Ku ∥ =                  E∥uti,Ku − ueti,Ku ∥
                      n        t
                                                            nm
                   i∈[m]         i∈S                          i∈[m]       i∈[m]
                X 1 X                       X
              =       E∥uti,Ku − u
                                 eti,Ku ∥ =   E∥uti,Ku − u
                                                         eti,Ku ∥ = ∆tu,Ku .
                  m
                   i∈[m]      i∈[m]                          i∈[m]


(2) D-PFL setup (Sun et al., 2023c).
In decentralized federated learning, we aggregate the models in each neighborhood. Thus we have:
                          X                        X       X
                ∆t+1           E∥ut+1    et+1                   wij utj,Ku − u
                                                                             etj,Ku ∥

                   u,0 =           i,0 − ui,0 ∥ =      E∥
                               i∈[m]                      i∈[m]       j∈Wi
                    X X                                       X X
               ≤                 wij E∥utj,Ku − u
                                                etj,Ku ∥ =                wji E∥utj,Ku − u
                                                                                         etj,Ku ∥
                   i∈[m] j∈Wi                                j∈[m] i∈Wi
                    X
               ≤            E∥utj,Ku − u
                                       etj,Ku ∥ = ∆tu,Ku .
                   j∈[m]

The last equality adopts the symmetry of the adjacent matrix W = W⊤ .
Lemma 5 (Decentralized Topologies Bounds of λ). For 0 < λ < 1 and 0 < α < 1, we have the
following inequality:
                                        t−1
                                        X    λt−s−1     κλ
                                                     α ≤ α,                         (16)
                                        s=0
                                            (s +  1)     t
                α                  2α           2α
where κλ = αe          1
                   λ(ln λ1 α + (1−α)eλ ln 1 + λ ln 1 .
                          )               λ        λ



Proof. According to the accumulation, we have:
                 t−1                          t−1                            Z s=t
                 X   λt−s−1          t−1
                                              X   λt−s−1         t−1              λt−s−1
                                 α =λ    +                   α ≤λ    +                   ds
                 s=0
                       (s + 1)           s=1
                                              (s + 1)                         s=1   sα
                                         Z s= 2t t−s−1             Z s=t t−s−1
                                  t−1            λ                          λ
                                =λ    +              α
                                                           ds +                       ds
                                          s=1       s                s= 2t    sα
                                                Z s= 2t                 α Z s=t
                                  t−1      t
                                             −1           1            2
                                ≤λ    +λ  2
                                                          α
                                                             ds +                      λt−s−1 ds
                                                 s=1     s              t       s= 2t
                                                           1−α    α −1
                                  t−1      t
                                             −1   1        t                2      λ
                                ≤λ    +λ  2                           +                   .
                                                1−α 2                       t      ln λ1

                                          t                        2α
Thus we have LHS ≤ t1α λt−1 tα + λ 2 −1 (1−α)2      t
                                                       1−α +          1
                                                                 λ ln λ
                                                                           . The first term can be bounded
                 α α      1                                                             t
                                                                                        2 −1 t ≤
                                                                                                       2
     t−1 α

as λ t ≤ e            λ(ln λ1 α and the second term can be bounded as λ                                   1 , which
                             )                                                                      eλ ln λ
                                                     α                          α              α
indicates the selection of the constant κλ = αe              1                2               2

                                                               1 α + (1−α)eλ ln 1 + λ ln 1 . Furthermore,
                                                        λ(ln λ  )                     λ           λ
                                                    √            √
                                                                                                              √
             1                          1          2 2             2
if 0 < α ≤ 2 < 1, we have κλ ≤ λ ln 1 α + eλ ln 1 + λ ln 1 ≤ max λ ,                 1     √1
                                                                                                     + (2+e)   1
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                   =
                                      ( λ)              λ           λ                    λ ln λ 1        eλ ln λ

O max λ1 , √1 1 + λ ln1 1 with respect to the constant λ.
                λ    ln λ              λ


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2     G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS FOR C-PFL

Lemma 6 (Selecting the Same Sample). Under the Assumption 1 and Assumption 4, the gradi-
                                                                   t
ent for the shared and personalized variables satisfy gu,i,k            = ∇u Fi (uti,k , vi,K t
                                                                                                v
                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                  ; z) and gv,i,k     =
         t t                                          t          t      t              t          t          t
∇v Fi (ui , vi,k ; z), the local updates satisfy ui,k+1 = ui,k − γgu,i,k and vi,k+1 = vi,k − γgv,i,k . We
use E[∇u Fi (uti,k , vi,K
                        t
                           v
                             ; z)] = ∇u fi (uti,k , vi,K
                                                     t
                                                        v
                                                          ; z) and E[∇v Fi (uti , vi,k
                                                                                   t
                                                                                       ; z)] = ∇v fi (uti , vi,k
                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                 ; z). If
we sample the same data z (not the zi⋆ ,j ⋆ ) in dataset S and S at k iteration on round t, we have:
                                                                      e


               E∥uti,k+1 − u
                           eti,k+1 ∥ ≤ (1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti,k − u
                                                             eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,K
                                                                                 t
                                                                                    v
                                                                                          t
                                                                                      − vei,K v
                                                                                                ∥,
                  t         t                        t       t
                                                                                                                              (17)
               E∥vi,k+1 − vei,k+1 ∥ ≤ (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vi,k − vei,k ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − u
                                                                                    eti ∥.


Proof. We first conduct the local update for the personalized variables. The update progress in each
round t is as follows:
                             t         t            t       t          t         t
                          E∥vi,k+1 − vei,k+1 ∥ = E∥vi,k − vei,k − ηv (gv,i,k − gev,i,k )∥
                             t       t
                        ≤ E∥vi,k − vei,k ∥ + ηv E∥∇v fi (uti , vi,k
                                                                t
                                                                                  uti , vei,k
                                                                    ; z) − ∇v fi (e       t
                                                                                              ; z)∥
                                         t       t
                        ≤ (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vi,k − vei,k ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − u
                                                                        eti ∥.

The alternative update progress for the shared variables is based on the updated vit+1 = vi,K
                                                                                          t+1
                                                                                             v
                                                                                               :

                      E∥uti,k+1 − u
                                  eti,k+1 ∥
                   = E∥uti,k − u
                               eti,k − ηu (gu,i,k
                                            t         t
                                                  − geu,i,k )∥
                   ≤ E∥uti,k − u
                               eti,k ∥ + ηu E∥∇u fi (uti,k , vi,K
                                                              t
                                                                  v
                                                                                  uti,k , vei,K
                                                                    ; z) − ∇u fi (e         t
                                                                                                ; z)∥
                   ≤ (1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti,k − u
                                           eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,K
                                                               t
                                                                  v
                                                                        t
                                                                    − vei,Kv
                                                                             ∥.



                                                                 t
Lemma 7 (Selecting the Different Sample). Assume gu,i,k               = ∇u Fi (uti,k , vi,K
                                                                                        t
                                                                                           v
                                                                                                         t
                                                                                              ; z) and gev,i,k =
        t t                                         t        t       t          t           t        t
∇v Fi (e
       ui , vei,k ; ze), the local updates satisfy ui,k+1 = ui,k − γgu,i,k and vi,k+1 = vi,k − γgv,i,k .If we
sample the different data samples zi⋆ ,j ⋆ and zei⋆ ,j ⋆ (simplified to z and ze), we have:

   E∥uti,k+1 − u
               eti,k+1 ∥ ≤ (1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti,k − u
                                                 eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,K
                                                                     t
                                                                        v
                                                                              t
                                                                          − vei,Kv
                                                                                   ∥ + 2ηu (σu + δu ),
      t         t                        t       t
   E∥vi,k+1 − vei,k+1 ∥ ≤ (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vi,k − vei,k ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − u
                                                                        eti ∥ + 2ηv σv .
                                                                                                                              (18)


Proof. We first conduct the local update for the personalized variables. The update progress in each
round t is as follows:

    E∥vit⋆ ,k+1 − veit⋆ ,k+1 ∥
  = E∥vit⋆ ,k − veit⋆ ,k − ηv (gv,i
                                t
                                   ⋆ ,k − g
                                            t
                                          ev,i⋆ ,k )∥


  ≤ E∥vit⋆ ,k − veit⋆ ,k ∥ + ηv E∥∇v fi⋆ (uti⋆ , vit⋆ ,k , z) − ∇v fi⋆ (e
                                                                        uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k ze)∥
  ≤ E∥vit⋆ ,k − veit⋆ ,k ∥ + ηv E∥∇v fi⋆ (uti⋆ , vit⋆ ,k , z) − ∇v fi⋆ (e
                                                                        uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k , z)∥
                     uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k , z) − ∇v fi⋆ (e
      + ηv E∥∇v fi⋆ (e                              uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k , ze)∥
  ≤ (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vit⋆ ,k − veit⋆ ,k ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − u
                                                        eti ∥
                     uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k , z) − ∇v fi⋆ (e
      + ηv E∥∇v Fi⋆ (e                              uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k ) − ∇v fi⋆ (e
                                                                                uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k , ze) + ∇v fi⋆ (e
                                                                                                                uti⋆ , veit⋆ ,k )∥
                     t      t
  ≤ (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vi,k  − vei,k ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − u
                                                   eti ∥ + 2ηv σv .
                                    q             q
                                             2                      2
                                                                      p
The last inequality adopts E [x] = (E [x]) = E [x2 ] − E [x − E [x]] ≤ E [x2 ].


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The alternative update progress for the shared variables is based on the updated vit+1 = vi,K
                                                                                          t+1
                                                                                             v
                                                                                               :

  E∥uti⋆ ,k+1 − u
                eti⋆ ,k+1 ∥
= E∥uti⋆ ,k − u
              eti⋆ ,k − ηu (gu,i
                             t
                                ⋆ ,k − g
                                         t
                                       eu,i⋆ ,k )∥


≤ E∥uti⋆ ,k − u
              eti⋆ ,k ∥ + ηu E∥∇u fi⋆ (uti⋆ ,k , vit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                         uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , ze)∥
≤ E∥uti⋆ ,k − u
              eti⋆ ,k ∥ + ηu E∥∇u fi⋆ (uti⋆ ,k , vit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                         uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z)∥
                  uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
   + ηu E∥∇u fi⋆ (e                                  uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , ze)∥
≤ (1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti⋆ ,k − u
                          eti⋆ ,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,k
                                                t       t
                                                    − vei,Kv
                                                             ∥
                  uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
   + ηu E∥∇u fi⋆ (e                                  uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv ) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                                     uti⋆ ,Kv , veit⋆ ,Kv , ze) + ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                                                                          uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv )∥
≤ (1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti,k − u
                        eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,K
                                            t
                                               v
                                                     t
                                                 − vei,Kv
                                                          ∥ + 2ηu (σu + δu ).


Lemma 8 (Recursion in local update). Since ∆tk = ∆tu,k + ∆tv,k , according to the Lemma 6 and 7,
we can bound the recursion in the local training:

                                                         2σv    Lvu ∆tu,0
                         ∆tv,k+1 ≤ (1 + ηv Lv ) (∆tv,k +     +            ).
                                                         SLv       Lv
                                                         2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆tv,Kv
                         ∆tu,k+1 ≤ (1 + ηu Lu ) (∆tu,k +            +           ).
                                                            SLu              Lu


Proof. In each iteration, the specific j ⋆ -th data sample in the Si⋆ and Sei⋆ is uniformly selected with
the probability of 1/S. In other datasets Si , all the data samples are the same. Thus we have the
recursion for the personalized variables:
                               X
                   ∆tv,k+1 =               t         t
                                                           ∥ + E ∥vit⋆ ,k+1 − veit⋆ ,k+1 ∥

                                   E ∥vi,k+1     − vei,k+1
                                       i̸=i⋆
                                         X                                    X
                                                    t       t
                      ≤ (1 + ηv Lv )             E∥vi,k − vei,k ∥ + ηv Lvu            E∥uti − u
                                                                                              eti ∥
                                         i̸=i⋆                                i̸=i⋆

                                 1                      t       t
                                                                    ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − ueti ∥

                        + 1−          (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vi,k    − vei,k
                                 S
                           1                  t       t
                                                          ∥ + ηv Lvu E∥uti − u eti ∥ + 2ηv σv

                        +     (1 + ηv Lv )E∥vi,k  − vei,k
                           S
                                                             2ηv σv
                      = (1 + ηv Lv ) ∆tv,k + ηv Lvu ∆tu,0 +           .
                                                                 S
Similarly, for the shared variables, we have the progress in each round t:

                               X
              ∆tu,k+1 =             E ∥uti,k+1 − u
                                                 eti,k+1 ∥ + E ∥uti⋆ ,k+1 − u
                                                                            eti⋆ ,k+1 ∥


                            i̸=i⋆
                               X                                     X
           ≤ (1 + ηu Lu )              E∥uti,k − u
                                                 eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv               t
                                                                             E∥vi,Kv
                                                                                         t
                                                                                     − vei,K v
                                                                                               ∥
                               i̸=i⋆                                 i̸=i⋆

                           1
              + 1−                 [(1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti,k − u
                                                          eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,K
                                                                              t         t
                                                                                    − vei,K  ∥]
                           S                                                      v        v


                1
              +   [(1 + ηu Lu )E∥uti,k − u
                                         eti,k ∥ + ηu Luv E∥vi,K
                                                             t        t
                                                                  − vei,K   ∥ + 2ηu (σu + δu )]
                S                                               v         v

                                                    2ηu (σu + δu )
           = (1 + ηu Lu ) ∆tu,k + ηu Luv ∆tv,Kv +                  .
                                                           S


                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we can bound the recursion formulation as:

                2σv    Lvu ∆tu                         2σv    Lvu ∆tu,0
      ∆tv,k+1 +      +         ≤ (1 + ηv Lv ) (∆tv,k +     +            ),
                SLv       Lv                           SLv       Lv
                2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆tv,Kv                          2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆tv,Kv
      ∆tu,k+1 +            +            ≤ (1 + ηu Lu ) (∆tu,k +            +           ).
                   SLu           Lu                                SLu         Lu

Zoom out the variables on the left-hand side, then we finish the proof.


Main Proof for Theorem 1 According to the Lemma 4 and 8, it is easy to bound the local stability
term. We still obverse it when the event ξ happens, and we have ∆tk00 = 0. Therefore, we unwind
                                                                  µu
the recurrence formulation from T, K to t0 , k0 . Let ηu = µτu = tK+k                    µv
                                                                       and ηv = µτv = tK+k  are
                                                                     1            1
decayed as the communication round t and iteration k where µu ≤ Lu and µv ≤ Lv are specific
constants, we have:
                                                                                       !
                                        TY
                                         Kv
                                                                               Lvu ∆Tu,0

                T                                 µv L v        T     2σ v
              ∆v,Kv ≤                        1+            ∆v,0 +        +
                                                    τ                SLv           Lv
                           τ =(T −1)Kv +1
                                                
                                                                                −1
                      TYKv
                                                                                   !
                                                                      Lvu ∆Tu,K

                                        µ v Lv          T −1   2σ v              v
             ≤                    1+             ∆
                                                        v,Kv +      +
                                           τ                   SLv         Lv
                 τ =(T −1)Kv +1

                                                                    Lvu ∆tu,k
               "     TYKv                      #                                !
                                                                           0
                                       µv Lv         t0      2σv              0
             ≤                   1+                ∆v,k0 +        +
                                         τ                   SLv       Lv
                τ =t0 K+k0 +1
               "     TYKv
                                        #                                                         (19)
                                  µv Lv       2σv
             ≤                 e( τ )
                                             SLv
                    τ =t0 K+k0 +1
                                                       2σv
                           P
                            T Kv               1
                    µv Lv
             =e                  τ =t0 K+k0 +1 τ

                                                       SLv
                                               2σv

                                   T Kv
                    µ L ln
             ≤e v v              t0 K+k0

                                               SLv
                             µv Lv
                     T Kv               2σv
             ≤                              .
                      τ0                SLv

Similarly, for the shared variables, we have the progress in round T :
                                                                                       !
                      TY
                       Ku
                                                           2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆Tv,Kv

   T                                 µ  L
                                      u u          T
 ∆u,Ku ≤                        1+               ∆u,0 +                   +
                                       τ                        SLu               Lu
               τ =(T −1)Ku +1
                                                                                                   
          TYKu                                                                TYKu
                                                                                                        L ∆T

                            µu Lu   ∆T −1 +       2(σ u + δ u )                              µu Lu    uv v,Kv
≤                    1+                   u,Ku                    +                    1 +
                              τ                       SLu                                       τ          Lu
    τ =(T −1)Ku +1                                                       τ =(T −1)Ku +1
  "      TYKu                     #                          "          TYKu                   #
                                                                                                  Luv ∆Tv,Kv

                          µu Lu         t0     2(σu + δu )                              µu Lu
≤                    1+               ∆k0 +                   +                     1+
                            τ                     SLu                                     τ           Lu
    τ =t0 K+k0 +1                                                  τ =t0 K+k0 +1
  "      TYKu
                          #                              !
                     µu       2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆Tv,Kv
≤                  e( τ )                  +
                                  SLu             Lu
    τ =t0 K+k0 +1



                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Expand the first item, then we have:
                                                                            !
                                                     2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆Tv,Kv
                                        P
                                         T Ku          1
                            µ L
                  ∆Tu,Ku ≤ e u u         τ =t0 K+k0 +1 τ
                                                                +
                                                        SLu          Lu
                                                               !
                                      2(σu + δu ) Luv ∆Tv,Kv

                             T Ku
                    µ L ln
                 ≤ e u u t0 K+k0                  +
                                         SLu            Lu
                           µ L                                µ L       !
                     T Ku u u 2(σu + δu ) Luv T Kv v v 2σv

                 ≤                              +
                      τ0               SLu        Lu     τ0         SLv
                           µu Lu                        µu Lu        µ L
                     T Ku         2(σu + δu )     T Ku          T Kv v v 2Luv σv
                 ≤                            +                                  .
                      τ0             SLu           τ0            τ0       SLv Lu

We can
      see
          that
               the bound
                       of the local stability term for the shared variables in C-PFL has an extra
             µu            µv
term TτK0 u       T Kv
                   τ0
                          2Luv σv
                          SLv Lu . This is the alignment error caused by the alternative update for
the personalized and shared variables, which is related to the smoothness of Lu , Lv , Luv , the local
epochs Ku , Kv and the variance bound σv .
Therefore, we get the combination of ∆Tu,K and ∆Tv,K as ∆TK :
                                               µu Lu                                 µv Lv
                                       T Ku            2(σu + δu )           T Kv                 Luv T Ku µu Lu       2σv
  ∆TK = ∆Tu,Kv + ∆Tv,Ku ≤                                          +                           1+    (    )                .
                                        τ0                SLu                 τ0                  Lu τ0                SLv

According to the Lemma 2, the first term in the stability (condition is omitted for abbreviation) can
be bound as:

          E∥wiT +1 − weiT +1 ∥
              1 X T             T
                                         1   X
                                                    T      T

         = E∥         wi,K − w ei,K   ∥ = E∥       wi,K −wei,K   ∥
              n                          n
                i∈S t                        i∈S t
           1 X          T        T
                                          1 n X         T        T

         ≤ E        ∥ wi,K   −wei,K   ∥=     E      ∥ wi,K −w  ei,K   ∥
           n      t
                                          nm
                  i∈S                                          i∈[m]
           1 X     T      T       1
                               ∥ = ∆TK

         =     E∥ wi,K −w
                        ei,K
           m                      m
                 i∈[m]
                         µu Lu                                 µv Lv
                 T Ku            2(σu + δu )           T Kv                 Luv T Ku µu Lu             2σv
         ≤                                   +                           1+    (    )                      .
                  τ0               mSLu                 τ0                  Lu τ0                     mSLv

Therefore, we can upper bound the stability in C-PFL as:

    E∥f (wiT +1 ; z) − f (w eiT +1 ; z)∥
                                 nU τ0
   ≤ GE∥wiT +1 − w   eiT +1 ∥ +
                                   mS
             µ L                                      µ L
       T Ku u u 2G(σu + δu ) nU τ0

                                                 T Kv v v

                                                               Luv T Ku µu Lu 2Gσv
   ≤                                    +    +              1+    (    )            .
        τ0                mSLu            mS      τ0           Lu τ0           mSLv

Obviously, we can select a proper event ξ with a proper τ0 to minimize the upper bound. For
                                h                       i 1          µL
                                        +δu )Lv +σv Lu ) 1+µL
τ ∈ [1, T K], by selecting τ0 = 2G((σunU   L u Lv             (T K) 1+µL , we can minimize the bound
as:
                                                                                 1
    h
           T    T             T eT
                                         i       4 G((σu + δu )Lv + σv Lu ) 1+µL                µL
   E ∥f (u , V ; zj ) − f (eu , V ; zj )∥ ≤                                           (nU T K) 1+µL .
                                               mS              Lu Lv

                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3    G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS FOR D-PFL

Lemma 9 (Bounded the local gradients). When (t, k) < (t0 , k0 ), the sampled data is always the
same between the different datasets, which shows Γtk = 0. When t = t0 , only those updates at k ≥ k0
are different. When t > t0 , all the local gradients difference during local K iterations are non-zero.
Thus we can first explore the upper bound of the stages with full K iterations when t > t0 . Let the
data sample z be the same random data sample and z/e       z be a different sample pair for abbreviation,
when t ≥ t0 , we have: If we sample the same data z (not the zi⋆ ,j ⋆ ) in dataset C and Ce at k iteration
on round t, we have:
                                                 µu Lu
                                                τ           2µu (σu + δu )
                              E∥ηu Γtu,k ∥ ≤                               .                          (20)
                                                τ0               τS

Proof. According to the Lemma 4 and 8, we can also bound the local stability term for the personal
variables. Let the learning rate ηv = µτv = tKµvv+k is decayed as the communication round t and
iteration k where µv is a specific constant, we have:
                                                     µv Lv
                                    t     2σv        τ       2σv
                                  ∆v,k +        ≤                .                            (21)
                                          SLv       τ0      SLv
                                 h                                                               i⊤
For shared variables, let Γtu,k = gu,0,k
                                   t         t
                                         − geu,0,k    t
                                                   , gu,1,k     t
                                                            − geu,1,k            t
                                                                      , · · · , gu,m,k     t
                                                                                       − geu,m,k    , we have:

                                                                                        ⊤
 E∥ηu Γtu,k ∥ = E∥ηu gu,0,k
                       t           t        t         t                t         t
                               − geu,0,k , gu,1,k − geu,1,k , · · · , gu,m,k − geu,m,k    ∥
     X
               t       t
≤ ηu      E∥gu,i,k − geu,i,k ∥
       i∈[m]
       X
≤ ηu           E∥∇u fi (uti,k , vi,K
                                 t
                                     v
                                                     uti,k , vei,K
                                       , z) − ∇u fi (e         t
                                                                  v
                                                                    , z)∥
       i̸=i⋆
     (S − 1)ηu
   +           E∥∇u fi⋆ (uti⋆ ,k , vit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e     uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z)∥
         S
     ηu
  + E∥∇u fi⋆ (uti⋆ ,k , vit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e  uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z) + ∇u fi⋆ (e    uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                                                                              uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , ze)∥
     SX
           Lu E∥uti,k − u
                        eti,k ∥ + Luv E∥vi,K   t         t

≤ ηu                                             v
                                                   − vei,K     v
                                                                 ∥
       i̸=i⋆
     (S − 1)ηu
   +           (Lu E∥uti,k − u       eti,k ∥ + Luv E∥vi,Kt             t
                                                                  − vei,K    ∥)
         S                                                     v           v

     ηu
         Lu E∥uti,k − u  eti,k ∥ + Luv E∥vi,K   t          t

  +                                                   − vei,K      ∥
     S                                              v            v

     ηu
                  uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , z) − ∇u fi⋆ (euti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv )) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                                       uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv , ze) − ∇u fi⋆ (e
                                                                                                                           uti⋆ ,k , veit⋆ ,Kv ) ∥

  + E∥(∇fi⋆ (e
     S
      X                                                                   2ηu σu
≤ ηu      (Lu E∥uti,k − u    eti,k ∥ + Luv E∥vi,K t          t
                                                       − vei,K     ∥) +
                                                                              S
       i∈[m]

                        Luv ∆tv,K   2σu
= ηu Lu (∆tu,k +                  +     ).
                          Lu        SLu
According to the Lemma 4, 8 and Eq.(21), we bound the gradient difference as:
                                                            !
                    t                t
                                           Luv ∆tv,K    2σu
              E∥ηu Γu,k ∥ ≤ ηu Lu ∆u,k +              +
                                              Lu        SLu
                               µu Lu                               µv Lv
                               τ       2µu (σu + δu )     Luv       τ         2µu σv
                          ≤                           +                              .
                              τ0            τS            Lu       τ0          τS
where τ = tK + k.



                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 10 (Bounded the local gradients). When (t, k) < (t0 , k0 ), the sampled data is always the
same between the different datasets, which shows Γtk = 0. When t = t0 , only those updates at k ≥ k0
are different. When t > t0 , all the local gradients difference during local Ku iterations are non-zero.
Thus we can first explore the upper bound of the stages with full Ku iterations when t > t0 . Let the
data sample z be the same random data sample and z/e             z be a different sample pair for abbreviation
              h                                                    i⊤
and Φtu,k = ut0,k − u et0,k , ut1,k − u
                                      et1,k , · · · , utm,k − u
                                                              etm,k . When t ≥ t0 , we have:
                                                            µu Lu                                                          µv Lv
                           4µu (σu + δu )κλ           Ku                    1              Luv 4µu σv κλ             Ku               1
  E∥ (I − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤                                                   1−µu Lu
                                                                                  +(          )                                             ,
                                  S                   τ0              t                    Lu     S                  τ0            t1−µv Lv
                                                                                                                                (22)
                                                              µu Lu                                                          µv Lv
                      2µu (σu + δu )λκλ                Ku                       1     Luv 2µu σv κλ                    Ku                 1
E∥ (W − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤                                                              +(    )                                                      .
                                     S                 τ0                 t1−µu Lu    Lu     S                         τ0              t1−µv Lv
                                                                                                                                (23)

Proof. In the decentralized method, the aggregation performs after K local updates which demon-
strates that the initial state of each round is Ut0 = WUt−1
                                                          Ku . It also works on their difference
Φtu,0 = WΦt−1 u,Ku . Therefore, we  have:
                                           u −1
                                          KX                                           u −1
                                                                                      KX
                     Φtu,Ku = Φtu,0 −             ηu Γtu,k = WΦt−1
                                                               u,Ku −                         ηu Γtu,k .
                                          k=0                                          k=0
                                                              1
Then we prove the recurrence between adjacent rounds. Let P = m 11⊤ ∈ Rm×m and I ∈ Rm×m
is the identity matrix, due to the double stochastic property of the adjacent matrix W, we have:
                                              WP = PW = P.
Thus,
                                                           u −1
                                                          KX
(I − P) Φtu,Ku = (I − P) WΦt−1
                           u,Ku − (I − P)                          ηu Γtu,k
                                                           k=0
                                                                                                                                 u −1
                                    K−1
                                                      !                                                                         KX
                                                                                                                                                    !
                                    X
                 =    WΦt−1
                        u,Ku −            ηu Γtu,k        − PWΦt−1       t−1
                                                               u,Ku + PWΦu,Ku − P                            WΦt−1
                                                                                                               u,Ku −                    ηu Γtu,k       .
                                    k=0                                                                                          k=0

By taking the expectation of the norm on both sides, we have:
                                                       u −1
                                                      KX                                                    u −1
                                                                                                           KX
        E∥ (I − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤ E∥WΦt−1
                                  u,Ku −                        ηu Γtu,k − PWΦt−1
                                                                              u,Ku ∥ + E∥                          ηu Γtu,k ∥
                                                       k=0                                                 k=0
                                                                                      u −1
                                                                                     KX
                              ≤ E∥WΦt−1       t−1
                                    u,Ku − PWΦu,Ku ∥ + 2E∥                                    ηu Γtu,k ∥
                                                                                      k=0
                                                                                        u −1
                                                                                       KX
                              = E∥ (W − P) (I − P) Φt−1
                                                    u,Ku ∥ + 2E∥                               ηu Γtu,k ∥
                                                                                        k=0
                                                                            u −1
                                                                           KX
                              ≤ λE∥ (I − P) Φt−1
                                             u,Ku ∥ + 2E∥                           ηu Γtu,k ∥.
                                                                           k=0

The equality adopts (W − P) (I − P) = W − P − WP + PP = W − PW. We know the fact
that Φtu,k = 0 where (t, k) ∈ (t0 , k0 ). Thus unwinding the above inequality we have:
                                                                                     t
                                                                                     X                u −1
                                                                                                     KX
                                                       0 −1
          E∥ (I − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤ λt−t0 +1 E∥ (I − P) Φtu,K u
                                                            ∥+2                            λt−s E∥           ηu Γsu,k ∥
                                                                                    s=t0              k=0
                                      t
                                      X                    u −1
                                                          KX
                                 =2          λt−s E∥              ηu Γsu,k ∥.
                                      s=t0                k=0



                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To maintain the term of W, we have:


                                                                                          u −1
                                                                                         KX
               (W − P) Φtu,Ku = (W − P) WΦt−1
                                          u,Ku − (W − P)                                          ηu Γtu,k
                                                                                           k=0
                                                                                                     u −1
                                                                                                    KX
                                            = (W − P) (W − P) Φt−1
                                                               u,Ku − (W − P)                                 ηu Γtu,k .
                                                                                                    k=0



The second equality adopts (W − P) (W − P) = (W − P) W − WP + PP = (W − P) W.
Therefore we have the following recursive formula:


                                                                                                              K−1
                                                                                                              X
       E∥ (W − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤ E∥ (W − P) (W − P) Φt−1
                                                 u,Ku ∥ + E∥ (W − P)                                                  ηu Γtu,k ∥
                                                                                                               k=0
                                                                                     K−1
                                                                                     X
                                       ≤ λE∥ (W − P) Φt−1
                                                      u,Ku ∥ + λE∥                         ηu Γtu,k ∥.
                                                                                     k=0



The same as above, we can unwind this recurrence formulation from t to t0 as:

                                                                                         t
                                                                                         X                     u −1
                                                                                                              KX
                                                    0 −1
       E∥ (W − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤ λt−t0 +1 E∥ (W − P) Φtu,K u
                                                         ∥+                                  λ   t−s+1
                                                                                                         E∥           ηu Γsu,k ∥
                                                                                      s=t0                    k=0
                                             t
                                             X                  u −1
                                                               KX
                                       =           λt−s+1 E∥           ηu Γsu,k ∥.
                                            s=t0               k=0


Unwinding the summation on k and adopting Lemma 5, we have:


    t
    X                 u −1
                     KX
           λt−s E∥             ηu Γsu,k ∥
    s=t0             k=0
    t
    X              u −1
                  KX
≤          λt−s           E∥ηu Γsu,k ∥
    s=t0          k=0
                           t            u −1
                                       KX                              t   Ku −1 µv Lv
    2µu (σu + δu ) X                           τ µu Lu    Luv 2µu σv X t−s X    τ
≤                               λt−s                   +(    ) µv Lv     λ
       Sτ0µu Lu         s=t0            k=0
                                                  τ       Lu Sτ0     s=t
                                                                                  τ
                                                                                     0           k=0
                          t             u −1
                                       KX              µu Lu               KXu −1        t
                                                                                         µ L
    2µu (σu + δu )        X                    (sKu )
                                                 Luv 2µu σv                       (sKu ) v v
                                                                                         X
≤                               λt−s                  )        +(    λ t−s
    Sτ0µu Lu    s=t0     k=0
                                                  Lu Sτ0µv Lv s=t
                                                  sKu
                                                                   0        k=0
                                                                                     sKu
                      µu Lu X t                                       µ L      t
                                    λt−s         Luv 2µu σv Ku v v X λt−s

  2µu (σu + δu ) Ku
=                                          +   (     )
        S         τ0        s=t0
                                  s1−µu Lu       Lu      S      τ0          s=t0
                                                                                  s1−µv Lv
                      µ L t−1                                                   µ L t−1
  2µu (σu + δu ) Ku u u X               λt−s−1                                                    λt−s−1

                                                          Luv 2µu σv Ku v v X

≤                                           1−µu Lu
                                                      + (    )                                        1−µv Lv
        S         τ0        s=t0 −1 (s + 1)
                                                          Lu      S        τ0         s=t0 −1 (s + 1)
                         µ L                                          µ L
  2µu (σu + δu )κλ Ku u u

                                              Luv 2µu σv κλ Ku v v

                                    1                                             1
≤                                        +  (      )                                   .
         S           τ0         t1−µu Lu      Lu        S        τ0           t1−µv Lv

                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, we get an upper bound on the aggregation gap which is related to the spectrum gap:

                                        t
                                        X                      u −1
                                                              KX
        E∥ (I − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤ 2                λ   t−s
                                                         E∥            ηu Γsu,k ∥
                                        s=t0                  k=0
                                         µu Lu                                                        µv Lv
            4µu (σu + δu )κλ       Ku                     1              Luv 4µu σv κλ          Ku                1
       ≤                                                1−µu Lu
                                                                +(          )                                            ,
                   S               τ0               t                    Lu     S               τ0            t1−µv Lv
                                        t
                                        X                         K−1
                                                                  X
        E∥ (W − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ ≤                  λt−s+1 E∥                 ηu Γsu,k ∥
                                        s=t0                      k=0
                                           µu Lu                                                        µv Lv
         2µu (σu + δu )λκλ          Ku                        1     Luv 2µu σv κλ                 Ku               1
       ≤                                                         +(    )                                                 .
                 S                  τ0                  t1−µu Lu    Lu     S                      τ0            t1−µv Lv

The first inequality provides the upper bound between the difference between the averaged state and
the vanilla state, and the second inequality provides the upper bound between the aggregated state
and the averaged state.



Main Proof for Theorem 2 According to the Lemma 4 and 8, it is easy to bound the local stability.
We obverse it when the event ξ happens, and we have ∆tk00 = 0. Therefore, we unwind the recurrence
formulation from T, K to t0 , k0 . Let ηu = µτu = tK+k
                                                   µu
                                                         and ηv = µτv = tK+k
                                                                           µv
                                                                               are decayed as the
communication round t and iteration k where µu ≤ L1u and µv ≤ L1v are specific constants, we have:

    X
            E∥ut+1    et+1
               i,Ku − ui,Ku ∥
    i∈[m]

    X                        K−1
                              X
            E∥ ut+1    t+1
                                 ηkt gu,i,k
                                      t         t

=               i,0 − u
                      ei,0  −               − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                           k=0
                                                                  u −1
    X                                                            KX
            E∥ ut+1    t+1      t       t         t       t                t         t

=               i,0 − u
                      ei,0   − ui,Ku
                                     − u
                                       ei,Ku
                                               + ui,K − u
                                                        e i,Ku
                                                                −      ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                                                                                   k=0

    X                                                                     u −1
                                                                         KX
       E∥ ut+1    t+1      t       t               t       t                       t         t

≤          i,0 − u
                 ei,0   − ui,Ku − u
                                  ei,Ku   ∥ + E∥ u i,Ku − u
                                                          ei,Ku   ∥ + E∥       ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k  ∥
    i∈[m]                                                                                                  k=0

    X                              X                      u −1
                                                         KX
            E∥ uti,Ku − u
                        eti,Ku ∥ +                                    t         t

≤                                    E∥                           ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                               i∈[m]            k=0
                                                 
           1 X
               ∥ ut+1   et+1   − uti,Ku − u
                                          eti,Ku ∥

    + mE         i,0 − ui,0
           m
                 i∈[m]

    X                              X     u −1
                                        KX
            E∥ uti,Ku − u
                        eti,Ku ∥ +                t         t

≤                                    E∥       ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                               i∈[m]            k=0
        v
        u1 X
        u                      t
    + mEt    ∥ ut+1
                i,0 − u
                      et+1
                       i,0  − ui,Ku − u
                                      et
                                       i,Ku ∥
                                              2
          m
                  i∈[m]

                                                              u −1
                                                             KX
    X                             √                     X
                        eti,Ku ∥ + mE∥Φt+1
            E∥ uti,Ku − u                      t                       t         t

=                                      u,0 − Φ u,Ku ∥ +   E∥       ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                                                                       i∈[m]       k=0


                                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let Φt+1     t
     u,0 = WΦu,Ku , we have:
    X
             E∥ut+1    et+1
                i,Ku − ui,Ku ∥
    i∈[m]
                                                                 u −1
                                                                KX
    X                             √                        X
                        eti,Ku ∥ + mE∥WΦtu,Ku − Φtu,Ku ∥ +
            E∥ uti,Ku − u                                                 t         t

≤                                                            E∥       ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                                                                          i∈[m]          k=0

    X                              X                      u −1
                                                         KX
            E∥ uti,Ku − u
                        eti,Ku ∥ +                                   t         t

≤                                    E∥                          ηu gu,i,k − geu,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                                   i∈[m]        k=0
        √                                    √
    +       mE∥ (W − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ +               mE∥ (P − I) Φtu,Ku ∥.

       t+1    t
Since vi,0 = vi,K v
                    for the private variables, then we have the recursion:


                                                                    v −1
    X
                t+1       t+1
                                         X
                                                     t+1     t+1
                                                                   KX
                                                                         ηkt gv,i,k
                                                                              t         t

             E∥vi,K v
                      − vei,Kv
                               ∥=                E∥ vi,0 − vei,0  −                 − gev,i,k   ∥
    i∈[m]                               i∈[m]                                k=0
                                                                                      v −1
                                                 "                                   KX
                                                                                                                     #
                                         X
                                                      t        t                                 t         t

                                  ≤               E∥ vi,Kv
                                                           − vei,Kv
                                                                    ∥ + E∥                   ηv gv,i,k − gev,i,k ∥
                                        i∈[m]                                         k=0

                                         X                               X     v −1
                                                                              KX
                                                     t        t                         t         t

                                  ≤              E∥ vi,Kv
                                                          − v
                                                            e i,Kv   ∥ +   E∥       ηu gv,i,k − gev,i,k   ∥.
                                        i∈[m]                                 i∈[m]         k=0


Therefore, we can bound this by two terms in one complete communication round. One is the process
of local multi-times SGD iterations, and the other is the aggregation step. For the local training
process, we can continue to use Lemma 7, 8, and 9. Let τ = tK + k as above, we have:


               2(σu + δu )
  ∆tu,Ku +
                   SLu
  "K −1
                                                         u −1
                         #                         "KY                       #
      u
      Y
                               t     2(σu + δu )                     µu Lu                2(σu + δu )
≤          (1 + ηu Lu ) ∆u,0 +                    =             1+               ∆tu,0 +
                                        SLu                            τ                     SLu
     k=0                                                k=0
  "K−1            #
     Y µu Lu                   2(σu + δu )         PKu −1 1              2(σu + δu )
≤         e τ         ∆tu,0 +                = eµL k=0 τ ∆tu,0 +
                                  SLu                                        SLu
     k=0
                                                       µu Lu
    µu Lu ln( t+1 )    t      2(σu + δu )        t+1               t      2(σu + δu )
≤e             t     ∆u,0 +                  =                  ∆u,0 +
                                  SLu             t                          SLu
             µu Lu
                                 √

     t+1                                                                                2(σu + δu )
≤                     ∆t−1
                        u,Ku  +    m(E∥ (W   − P) Φ t
                                                    u,Ku  ∥  + E∥ (P  −  I) Φ t
                                                                              u,Ku ∥) +
        t                                                                                  SLu
             µu Lu                                              µu Lu
                                                 √

     t+1                         2(σu + δu )            t+1
                      ∆t−1                                             E∥ (W − P) Φtu,Ku ∥ + E∥ (P − I) Φtu,Ku ∥

≤                        u,Ku +                + m
        t                           SLu                    t
             µ L                                  √                              µ L           µ L
     t+1 u u

                                                 6 mµu (σu + δu )κλ Ku u u t + 1 u u

                                 2(σu + δu )                                                             1
≤                     ∆t−1
                         u,Ku +                +
        t                           SLu                     S               τ0             t          t1−µu Lu
  |                      {z                   } |                               {z                           }
                      local updates                                                          aggregation gaps
                 √                          µv Lv               µv Lv
       Luv 6 mµu σv κλ                Ku                 t+1               1
    +(    )                                                                      .
       Lu     S                       τ0                  t             t1−µv Lv
     |                                      {z                                 }
                                      aggregation gaps



                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The last adopts the Eq.(22) and (23), and the fact λ ≤ 1. Obviously, in the decentralized federated
learning setup, the first term still comes from the updates of the local training. The second term
comes from the aggregation gaps, which is related to the spectrum gap λ.
For the private variables, since we do not exchange them with neighbors, we have:

                                          "K −1                      #
                                            v
                                 2σv        Y                                        2σv
                        ∆tv,Kv +     ≤               (1 + ηv Lv )         ∆tv,0 +
                                 SLv                                                 SLv
                                               k=0
                                          "K −1                 #
                                            v
                                            Y            µv Lv                2σv
                                       =           1+                ∆tv,0 +
                                                           τ                  SLv
                                           k=0
                                         "K −1           #
                                            v
                                           Y       µv Lv              2σv
                                       ≤         e τ         ∆tv,0 +
                                                                     SLv
                                           k=0

                                                P v −1 1
                                          µv Lv K              t      2σv
                                       =e         k=0    τ   ∆v,0 +
                                                                      SLv

                                                   t+1
                                          µv Lv ln( t )      t      2σ v
                                       ≤e                  ∆v,0 +
                                                                    SLv
                                                   µv Lv
                                           t+1                       2σv
                                       =                    ∆tv,0 +         .
                                              t                      SLv

Unwinding this from t0 to T , we have:
         2(σu + δu )
∆Tu,Ku +
            SLu
                µ L              √                      µ L   T          µ L
           T Ku u u 2(σu + δu ) 6 mµu (σu + δu )κλ Ku u u X

                                                                     t+1 u u     1
       ≤                       +                                               1−µu Lu
            τ0         SLu             S            τ0      t=t +1
                                                                      t      t
                                                                                                0
              √                   µ L   T          µ L
             6 mµu σv κλ Luv Ku v v X

                                               t+1 v v    1
           +                                            1−µv Lv
                 SLv          τ0      t=t +1
                                                t      t
                                                      0
                       µu Lu                     √                                         T
                                                                                     µu Lu X
               T Ku            2(σu + δu ) 12 mµu (σu + δu κλ                  Ku                     1
       ≤                                  +                                                         1−µu Lu
                τ0                SLu             S                            τ0          t=t +1
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                0
                         √                   µ L T
                Luv 12 mµu σv κλ          Ku v v X                1
           +(      )                                            1−µv Lv
                Lu      S                 τ0            t=t +1
                                                               t
                                                               0

                       µu Lu                     √                                    µu Lu             t=T
                                                                                               tµu Lu

               T Ku            2(σu + δu ) 12 mµu (σu + δu )κλ                  Ku
       ≤                                  +
                τ0                SLu              S                            τ0             µu Lu
                                                                                                        t=t0 +1
                         √                      µv Lv              t=T
                                           tµv Lv

            Luv 12 mµu σv κλ Ku
           +(   )
             Lu        S          τ0       µv Lv
                                                   t=t0 +1
                 µu Lu         √                                   µ L   √
           T Ku        2 (1 + 6 mκλ ) (σu + δu )      Luv     T Ku v v 12 mκλ σv
       ≤                                         +                               .
            τ0                   SLu                  Lu       τ0         SLv

The second inequality adopts the fact that 1 < t+1                                       1
                                                t ≤ 2 when t > 1 and the fact of 0 < µ < L .
For the personalized variables, unwinding this from t0 to T , we have:
                                                         µ L
                                 T      2σv        T Kv v v 2σv
                               ∆v,Kv +        ≤                      .
                                        SLv         τ0          SLv


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then the first term in the stability (conditions is omitted for abbreviation) can be bounded as:
                                  1 X
         E∥uT +1 − u  eT +1 ∥ ≤           E∥ uTi,Ku − u eTi,Ku ∥

                                  m
                                   i∈[m]
                       µu Lu      √                                 µ L   √
               T Ku      2 (1 + 6 mκλ ) (σu + δu )     Luv    T Ku v v 12 mκλ σv
       ≤                                           +                             ,
                τ0                mSLu                 Lu       τ0        mSLv
                                                                    µ L
             T +1     T +1     1 X        T        T
                                                              T Kv v v 2σv
         E∥v      − ve     ∥≤       E∥ vi,Ku − vei,Ku ∥ ≤                   .
                               m                               τ0       SLv
                                   i∈[m]


Therefore, we can upper bound the stability in decentralized federated learning as:
               E ∥f (wiT +1 ; z) − f (w eiT +1 ; z)∥


                                               U τ0
             ≤ GE ∥wiT +1 − w    eiT +1 ∥ | ξ +

                                                    S
                      T +1                                                 U τ0
                                eT +1 ∥ | ξ + GE ∥v T +1 − veT +1 ∥ | ξ +

             ≤ GE ∥u         −u
                                                                              S
                                         √                   µ L
                2(σu + δu )G 1 + 6 mκλ                 T Ku u u U τ0
             ≤                                                     +
                     SLu                m               τ0            S
                                      µv Lv √                                 µ L
                                              12 mκλ σv G 2σv G T Kv v v

                    Luv       T Kv
               +                                              +
                     Lu        τ0                  SLv           SLv     τ0
                                         √                   µu Lu                 µ L
                                                                     2σv G T Kv v v

                2(σu + δu )G 1 + 6 mκλ                 T Ku
             ≤                                                     +
                     SLu                m               τ0            SLv     τ0
                     √                          µv Lv
                   12 mκλ σv Luv T Ku                     U τ0
               +                                        +      .
                      mSLv Lu             τ0               S

The same as the centralized setup, we can select a proper event ξ with a proper τ0 to
minimize the error of the stability. To simplify subsequent analysis, we assume µL =
max{µu Lu , µv Lv } and K = max{Ku , Kv }. For τ ∈ [1, T K], by selecting τ0 =
       µL                       √                         √   i 1
             2G(σu +δu )L2v (1+6 mκλ )+2Gσv Lu Luv (m+6 mκλ ) 1+µL
           h
(T K) 1+µL                        U mLu Lv  2                       , we get the minimal generaliza-
tion bound for D-PFL:
             h                                          i
           E ∥f (uT , V T ; zj ) − f (e
                                      uT , Ve T ; zj )∥
                                                                        √              1
                                                       √

            4            µL     (σu + δu )G                  σv G      6 mκλ Luv 1+µL
         ≤ (U T K)      1+µL
                                              (1 + 6 mκλ ) +      (1 +              )      .
            S                      Lu m                       Lv           mLu


                                                  32
