Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T OWARDS U NDERSTANDING ROBUST M EMORIZATION
IN A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Adversarial training is a standard method to train neural networks to be robust to
         adversarial perturbation. However, in contrast with benign overﬁtting in the stan-
         dard deep learning setting, which means that over-parameterized neural networks
         surprisingly generalize well for unseen data, while adversarial training method
         is able to achieve low robust training error, there still exists a signiﬁcant robust
         generalization gap, which promotes us exploring what mechanism leads to robust
         overﬁtting during learning process. In this paper, we propose an implicit bias
         called robust memorization in adversarial training under the realistic data assump-
         tion. By function approximation theory, we prove that ReLU nets with efﬁcient
         size have the ability to achieve robust memorization, while robust generalization
         requires exponentially large models. Then, we demonstrate robust memorization
         in adversarial training from both empirical and theoretical perspectives. In partic-
         ular, we empirically investigate the dynamics of loss landscape over input, and we
         also provide theoretical analysis of robust memorization on data with linear sepa-
         rable assumption. Finally, we prove novel generalization bounds based on robust
         memorization, which further explains why deep neural networks have both high
         clean test accuracy and robust overﬁtting at the same time.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Although deep learning has made a remarkable success in many application ﬁelds, such as computer
vision (Voulodimos et al., 2018) and natural language process (Devlin et al., 2018), it is well-known
that only small but adversarial perturbations additional to the natural data can make well-trained
classiﬁers confused (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014), which promotes designing ad-
versarial robust learning algorithms. In practice, adversarial training methods (Madry et al., 2017;
Shafahi et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019) are widely used to improve the robustness of models by
regarding perturbed data as training data. However, while these robust learning algorithms are able
to achieve high robust training accuracy, it still leads to a non-negligible robust generalization gap
(Raghunathan et al., 2019), which is also called robust overﬁtting (Rice et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022).
To explain this puzzling phenomenon, a series of works have attempted to provide theoretical under-
standings from different perspectives. Despite these aforementioned works seem to provide a series
of convincing evidence from theoretical views in different settings, there still exists a gap between
theory and practice for at least two reasons.
First, although previous works have shown that adversarial robust generalization requires more data
and larger models (Schmidt et al., 2018; Li et al., 2022), it is unclear that what mechanism, during
adversarial training process, directly causes robust overﬁtting. In other words, we know there is no
robust generalization gap for a trivial model that only guesses labels totally randomly (e.g. deep
neural networks with random initialization), which implies that we should take learning process into
consideration to analyze robust generalization.
Second and most importantly, while some works (Tsipras et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019) point
out that achieving robustness may hurt clean test accuracy, in most of the cases, it is observed that
drop of robust test accuracy is much higher than drop of clean test accuracy in adversarial training
(Schmidt et al., 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2019) (see in Table 1). Namely, a weak version of benign
overﬁtting, which means that overparameterized deep neural networks can both ﬁt random data
powerfully and generalize well for unseen clean data, remains after adversarial training.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Table 1: Train and test performances on CIFAR-10 (Raghunathan et al., 2019)

                                                Clean training        Adversarial training
                          Robust test               3.5%                    45.8%
                          Robust train                −                     100%
                           Clean test              95.2%                    87.3%
                          Clean train               100%                    100%


Therefore, it is natural to ask the following question:

What happens, during adversarial learning process, resulting in both benign clean overﬁtting and
                        signiﬁcant robust overﬁtting at the same time?

In this paper, we provide a theoretical understanding of the adversarial training process by proposing
a novel implicit bias called robust memorization under the realistic data assumption, which explains
why adversarial training leads to both high clean test accuracy and robust generalization gap.
The fundamental data structure that we leverage is that data can be clean separated by a neural
network fclean with moderate size but this neural classiﬁer is non-robust on data with small margin,
which is consistent with the common practice that well-trained neural networks have good clean
performance but fail to classify perturbed data due to the close distance between small margin data
and decision boundary. The existence of small and large margin data for image classiﬁcation has
been empirically veriﬁed (Banburski et al., 2021). And we also assume that data is well-separated,
which means that there exists a robust classiﬁer in general (Yang et al., 2020). However, this robust
classiﬁer may be hard to approximate by neural networks (Li et al., 2022). In other words, clean
training often ﬁnds simple but non-robust solution, although robust classiﬁer always exists.
Speciﬁcally, we consider the underlying data distribution D where µ proportional data is with small
margin, which can be perturbed as adversarial example, and 1 − µ proportional data is with large
margin, which can be robustly classiﬁed by the neural network fclean . In adversarial training, we
access N instances S randomly drawn from D as training data. In fact, by applying concentra-
tion technique in high dimensional probability, we know that there roughly exist µN small margin
training data and (1 − µ)N large margin training data.
In order to answer the question that we ask, under the above realistic data assumption, we consider
the following classiﬁer,
                         X
       fadv (x) :=                  yi I{∥x − xi ∥p ≤ δ} + fclean (x)I        min         ∥x − xi ∥p > δ ,
                                                                         (xi ,yi )∈Ssmall
                   (xi ,yi )∈Ssmall                        |                        {z                  }
                   |                    {z             }               clean classiﬁer on other data
                   robust local indicators on small margin data

where Ssmall is the small margin part of training dataset, and δ denotes adversarial perturbation radius,
which is smaller than the separation between data in our setting.
Indeed, the classifer fadv satisﬁes all main characteristics of deep models outputted by adversarial
training (Proposition 3.2): First, adversarial training error with respect to fadv achieves zero; second,
fadv has a good clean performance because the classiﬁer is robust within the neighborhood of training
data with small margin and it performs as the same as the clean classiﬁer on other data; third,
although this classiﬁer has low robust training error, it is non-robust on other data since it only
robustly memorizes training data with small margin, which results in robust overﬁtting.
Inspired by the ideal model fadv , we then propose a conjecture that deep neural networks converge
to solution similar to fadv in adversarial training, which is a novel implicit bias of adversarial train-
ing, and we call it robust memorization, which provides a theoretical understanding of adversarial
training, including why solution found by adversarial training has both good clean generalization
and robust generalization gap.
Based on function approximation theory, we can prove that, for d−dimensional training dataset
S with N samples, ReLU networks with Õ(µN d + poly(d)) parameters are able to represent the
target functions fadv that we mention for robust memorization (Theorem 3.3 and Corollary 3.4).
However, we still prove a lower bound for the network size that is exponential in the data dimension


                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


d to make robust generalization (Theorem 3.5), and it manifests that robust classiﬁer has higher
representation complexity than the classiﬁer with robust memorization, which potentially explain
why adversarial training converges to robust memorization regime rather than ﬁnds robust classiﬁer
due to the inductive bias of low representation complexity.
To further demonstrate robust memorization in adversarial training, we empirically investigate the
dynamics of loss landscape over input during adversarial learning process. Concretely, for the loss
function L(f (x), y) over classiﬁer f and on data point (x, y), we verify whether fˆ outputted by
adversarial training is with robust memorization by certain measure — maximum gradient norm
within the neighborhood of training data input,
                               1 X
                                   N
                                      max ∥∇x L(f (xi + ξ), yi )∥q ,
                               N i=1 ∥ξ∥p ≤δ

where {(xi , yi )}N                                     1   1
                  i=1 denotes the training dataset, and p + q = 1.

This measure reﬂects the local ﬂatness of loss landscape over input on training dataset. In robust
memorization regime, the loss landscape will be very ﬂat within the adversarial training perturbation
radius but very sharp outside the neighborhood. Through numerical experiments, the dynamics of
the measure observed in different perturbation radius δ and different training epoch shows that the
behavior of models trained by adversarial training is very similar to robust memorization. More
details are presented in Section 4.
To further support our conjecture, we theoretically analyze the optimization process of adversarial
training under a simple linear separable data set. Our results (Theorem 5.1 and Theorem 5.2) show
that clean classiﬁcation on large margin data implies good clean performance on small margin data,
and ReLU networks with moderate size can robustly memorize small margin data efﬁciently. In
other words, we prove that after adversarial training, the network exactly learns the function we
described in Section 3.
Finally, motivated by robust memorization, we propose clean and robust generalization bounds. On
one hand, clean generalization bound (Theorem 6.2) shows that clean sample complexity is polyno-
mial in data dimension d. On the other hand, we derive a upper bound of robust generalization gap
(Theorem 6.3) that only relies on the number of samples and global ﬂatness of loss landscape over
input. Since adversarial training only promotes model robustly memorizing training data, the global
ﬂatness of landscape has no guarantee, and it is also veriﬁed by numerical results, which explains
why robust generalization gap is large although robust training error can be very low in adversarial
training,

2   R ELATED WORK
Adversarial Examples and Adversarial Training (AT). Szegedy et al. (2013) ﬁrst made an intrigu-
ing discovery: even state-of-the-art deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples.
Then, Goodfellow et al. (2014) proposes FGSM to seek adversarial examples, and it also introduce
the adversarial training framework to enhance the defence of models against adversarial perturba-
tions. Madry et al. (2017) designs PGD to make adversarial attack and uses it to improve adversarial
training, which can be viewed as the multi-step vision of FGSM. In general, FGSM-based AT and
PGD-based AT are commonly regarded as the standard methods for adversarial training.
Robust Generalization Gap (Robust Overﬁtting). One surprising behavior of deep learning is
that over-parameterized neural networks can generalize well, which is also called benign overﬁtting
that deep models have not only the powerful memorization but a good performance for unseen data
(Zhang et al., 2017; Belkin et al., 2019). However, in contrast to the standard (non-robust) gener-
alization, for the robust setting, Rice et al. (2020) empirically investigates robust performance of
models based on adversarial training methods, which are designed to improve adversarial robust-
ness (Szegedy et al., 2013; Madry et al., 2017), and the work shows that robust overﬁtting can be
observed on multiple datasets.
Theoretical Understanding of Robust Overﬁtting. Schmidt et al. (2018); Balaji et al. (2019);
Dan et al. (2020) study the sample complexity for adversarial robustness, and their works mani-
fest that adversarial robust generalization requires more data than the standard setting, which gives


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


an explanation of the robust generalization gap from the perspective of statistical learning theory.
And another line of works (Tsipras et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019) propose a principle called the
robustness-accuracy trade-off and have theoretically proven the principle in different setting, which
mainly explains the widely observed drop of robust test accuracy due to the trade-off between adver-
sarial robustness and clean test accuracy. Recently, Li et al. (2022) investigates the robust expressive
ability of neural networks, which demonstrates that, for the well-separated dataset, robust general-
ization requires exponentially large models, so the hardness of robust generalization may stem from
the expressive power of practical models.
Memorization in Adversarial Training. Dong et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2021) empirically and
theoretically explore the memorization effect in adversarial training for promoting a deeper under-
standing of model capacity, convergence, generalization, and especially robust overﬁtting of the
adversarially trained models. However, different from their works, the concept robust memorization
proposed in our paper focuses on both robust overﬁtting and high clean test accuracy, which means
that there is surprisingly no clean memorization or clean overﬁtting.

3    ROBUST MEMORIZATION IN ADVERSARIAL TRAINING
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce some preliminaries in our theoretical framework.
We consider a binary classiﬁcation task X → Y, where we use X ∈ [0, 1]d , Y = {−1, 1} to
denote the supporting set of all data input and ground-truth labels, respectively, and the data input
dimension is d. Let D be the underlying data distribution. We use clean 0 − 1 loss to evaluate clean
                              D (f ) := E(x,y)∼D [I{sgn(f (x)) ̸= y}].
performance of classiﬁer as Lclean
Then, we assume that data can be clean separated by a ReLU network with reasonable size (width
and depth). Speciﬁcally, we assume that there exists a ReLU network classiﬁer fclean such that
Lclean
 D (fclean ) = 0, where the clean classiﬁer is deﬁned as

                  fclean (x) := WL σ(WL−1 σ(. . . σ(W1 x + b1 ) . . . ) + bL−1 ) + bL ,
                mi ×mi−1
where Wi ∈ R             , bi ∈ Rmi , 1 ≤ i ≤ L, m0 = d, mL = 1, and we use σ(·) to denote ReLU
activation function, which is deﬁned as σ(·) = max{0, ·}. Besides, we consider that the width
max{m0 , m1 , · · · , mL } is O(d), and the depth L is constant.
To understand adversarial robustness by a geometry way, we then introduce a notion called decision
boundary. Formally, the decision boundary of a classiﬁer f is deﬁned as,
         DB(f ) := {x ∈ X | f (x) = 0, ∀ϵ > 0, ∃x′ , x′′ ∈ Bp (x, ϵ), s.t.f (x′ )f (x′′ ) < 0}.

Notice that this deﬁnition is different from that in Zhang et al. (2019), since it requires that the sign of
the neighborhood of the decision boundary can be changed, which helps us to establish the relative
between decision boundary and adversarial robust margin. We deﬁne lp adversarial margin over
classiﬁer f and data point (x, y) as min∥ξ∥p ≤δ yf (x + ξ), then we have the following proposition.
Proposition 3.1. (The equivalent between adversarial margin and distance from decision boundary)
Assume that the distance between data point and decision boundary is well-deﬁned, then it holds that,
               {x ∈ X | min yf (x + ξ) ≥ 0} = {x ∈ X | distp (x, DB(f )) ≥ δ},
                           ∥ξ∥p ≤δ

               {x ∈ X | min yf (x + ξ) < 0} = {x ∈ X | distp (x, DB(f )) < δ},
                           ∥ξ∥p ≤δ

where we use distp (·, C) to denote lp distance between point · and curve C.

Proposition 3.1 shows that the classiﬁer is robust on data with large distance from decision boundary,
and is non-robust on data with small distance from decision boundary. Thus, according distance from
decision boundary, we can divide all data into two classes, large margin data and small margin data.
Namely, the former is deﬁned as Xlarge = {x ∈ X | distp (x, DB(fclean )) ≥ δ}, and the latter is
deﬁned as Xsmall = {x ∈ X | distp (x, DB(fclean )) < δ}. We also consider P(x,y)∼D {x ∈ Xsmall } =
µ and P(x,y)∼D {x ∈ Xlarge } = 1 − µ, where 0 < µ < 1 is a proportional constant.
Another key notion of data in our setting is well-separated, which means that data is far from each
other although there exists small margin data. This property is widely observed in Yang et al.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2020), and it is clear that this assumption is foundation of robust classiﬁer. Formally, we consider
the supporting set X = A ∪ B ⊂ [0, 1]d , where two disjoint sets A, B denote positive class and
negative class, respectively. And we assume that distp (A, B) > R, where we use distp (·, ·) to
denote lp distance between two sets.

3.1   ROBUST MEMORIZATION UNDER THE REALISTIC DATA ASSUMPTION

In this subsection, we consider adversarial training with access to N −sample training dataset S =
{(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), · · · , (xN , yN )} i.i.d drawn from the data distribution D, we minimize 0 − 1
                                                            PN
adversarial robust training loss as Ladv,δ   S    (f ) := N1 i=1 max∥ξ∥p ≤δ I{sgn(f (xi + ξ)) ̸= yi },where
δ is the perturbation radius.
Indeed, we can also divide S into two sets, small margin training dataset and large margin training
dataset. Speciﬁcally, let Ssmall be the set {(xi , yi ) ∈ S | distp (xi , DB(fclean )) < δ}, and Slarge be
the set {(xi , yi ) ∈ S | distp (xi , DB(fclean )) ≥ δ}.
                                                                                         adv,δ
            robust performance of models, we  use 0 − 1 adversarial robust test loss as LD (f ) :=
To evaluate
E(x,y)∼D max∥ξ∥p ≤δ I{sgn(f (x + ξ)) ̸= y} . The ﬁnal goal of adversarial training is to ﬁnd good
solution with low robust test loss.
Now, we present the concept that we mainly discuss in this work, robust memorization. Concretely,
we consider the following classiﬁer
                     X
     fadv (x) :=            yi I{∥x − xi ∥p ≤ δ} + fclean (x)I    min     ∥x − xi ∥p > δ .
                                                                    (xi ,yi )∈Ssmall
                  (xi ,yi )∈Ssmall


Under the above realistic data assumption, we can derive the following result.
Proposition 3.2. Assume that data within the lp δ− neighborhood of training data has local con-
stant label (which means data within neighborhood of a certain data has the same label), then the
classiﬁer fadv has the following properties:

       • For adversarial robust training error, Ladv,δ
                                                 S     (fadv ) = 0;

       • For clean test error, Lclean
                                D (fadv ) = 0;

       • For adversarial robust test error, Ladv,δ
                                             D     (fadv ) = Ω Ladv,δ
                                                                D     (fclean ) .

This proposition shows that the classiﬁer fadv has the same behavior as deep models trained by
adversarial training. They have the common performance that they achieve low robust training error
and high clean test accuracy, but fail to robust classify the data population D.
Motivated by this, we conjecture that adversarial training can learn functions that are close to this
form, which is called robust memorization, an implicit bias of adversarial training. In the later sec-
tions, we formally analyze the properties of this function and adversarial training systematically
from different views, including representation complexity, empirical evidence and theoretical evi-
dence. Finally, based on robust memorization, we establish generalization guarantees to explain
good clean generalization and robust generalization gap.

3.2   O N THE REPRESENTATION COMPLEXITY OF ROBUST MEMORIZATION

Next, we study the representation complexity of robust memorization, which asks how many param-
eters are enough to express the robust memorization classiﬁer fadv via deep neural networks. In fact,
only Õ(µN d + poly(d)) weights are sufﬁcient for ReLU nets to uniformly approximate the target
function fadv , which is stated as the following theorem.
Theorem 3.3. Assume that the perturbation radius satisﬁes δ < R/2, then there exists a classiﬁer
fˆ represented by a ReLU net with at most
                                          Õ(µN d + poly(d))
parameters such that |fˆ − fadv | < ϵ for all x ∈ [0, 1]d .


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof sketch of Theorem 3.3 Although an exponentially large number of parameters is necessary
to approximate a smooth function in general (DeVore et al., 1989), some simple functions can be
approximate by neural networks more efﬁciently Telgarsky (2017). By leveraging this beneﬁt, we
use ReLU nets with few parameters to approximate the distance function di (x) := ∥x−xi ∥p , and we
notice that the exact indicator I(·) can be approximated by a soft indicator with two ReLU neurons.
Combined with these results, we can derive Theorem 3.3.
By applying the result of Theorem 3.3, we have the following corollary, and it manifests that a neural
network with Õ(µN d + poly(d)) weights can achieve robust memorization.
Corollary 3.4. Assume that the perturbation radius satisﬁes δ < R/2, then there exists a classiﬁer
fˆ represented by a ReLU net with Õ(µN d + poly(d)) parameters such that

       • For adversarial robust training error, Ladv,δ
                                                 S     (fˆ) = o(1);

       • For clean test error, Lclean ˆ
                                D (f ) = o(1);

       • For adversarial robust test error, Ladv,δ
                                             D     ( ˆ) = Ω Ladv,δ (fclean ) .
                                                     f       D

However, while the previous results have shown that achieving both low robust training error and
high clean test accuracy is representatively efﬁcient for ReLU nets, robust generalization still re-
quires exponentially large models even with our data assumption.
Theorem 3.5. Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1) be a small constant and Fn be the set of functions represented by
ReLU networks with at most n parameters. There exists a sequence Nd = exp(Ω(d)), d ≥ 1 and a
universal constant C1 > 0 such that the following holds: for any c ∈ (0, 1), there exists a underlying
data distribution D that satisﬁes all above data assumptions and is µ0 -balanced, such that for any
R > 2δ and robust radius cϵ, we have
                                   n                      o
                               inf Ladv,cϵ
                                       D   (f ) : f ∈ F Nd ≥ C 1 µ0 .

                                                                            o X and the distri-
where µ0 -balanced meansnthat there exists a uniform probability measure m0 on
                           D(E)
bution D satisﬁes that inf m0 (E) : E is Lebesgue measurable and m0 (E) > 0 ≥ µ0 .

In other words, the robust generalization error cannot be lower that a constant α = C1 µ0 unless the
ReLU network has size larger than exp(Ω(d)).
Therefore, we get the following representation complexity inequality,


    Representation Complexity: Clean
                               |     {z      } < Robust
                                     Classiﬁer   |       {z        } < Robust
                                                        Memorization   |      Classiﬁer} .
                                                                              {z
                                       poly(d)            Õ(µN d+poly(d))          exp(Ω(d))


This inequality shows that, while functions achieving robust memorization have mildly higher repre-
sentation complexity than clean classiﬁers, adversarial robustness requires excessively higher com-
plexity, which may lead to adversarial training converges to robust memorization regime.

4    ROBUST MEMORIZATION ON REAL IMAGE DATASETS
In this section, we demonstrate that, on real image datasets, adversarial training can learn classiﬁers
in robust memorization regime. Indeed, we need to study whether models trained by adversarial
training tend to memorize data points by approximating local robust indicators on training data.
Concretely, for training data (x, y), we use two measures, maximum gradient norm within the
neighborhood of training data, max∥ξ∥∞ ≤δ ∥∇x L(f (x + ξ), y)∥1 and maximum loss function value
change max∥ξ∥∞ ≤δ [L(f (x + ξ), y) − L(f (x), y)]. The former measures the δ−local ﬂatness on
(x, y), and the latter measures δ−local adversarial robustness on (x, y), which both describe the key
information of loss landscape over input.
Experiment Settings. In numerical experiments, we mainly focus on two common real-image
datasets, MNIST and CIFAR10. During adversarial training, we use cyclical learning rates and


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) MNIST: Grad          (b) MNIST: Change         (c) CIFAR10: Grad       (d) CIFAR10: Change

Figure 1: (a)(b): Robust Memorization on MNIST with Training l∞ Perturbation Radius ϵ = 0.1;
(c)(d): Robust Memorization on CIFAR10 with Training l∞ Perturbation Radius ϵ = 8/255.


    (a) MNIST: Train          (b) MNIST: Test         (c) CIFAR10: Train         (d) CIFAR10: Test

Figure 2: (a)(b): Learning Process on MNIST with Training l∞ Perturbation Radius ϵ = 0.1; (c)(d):
Learning Process on CIFAR10 with Training l∞ Perturbation Radius ϵ = 8/255.


mixed precision technique (Wong et al., 2020). On MNIST, we use a LeNet5 architecture and train
total 20 epochs. On CIFAR10, we use a Resnet9 architecture and train total 15 epochs.
Robust Memorization. To verify robust memorization in adversarial training, we ﬁrst use the
standard AT to train models by a ﬁxed perturbation radius ϵ0 , and then we compute empirical average
of maximum gradient norm and maximum loss change on training data within different perturbation
radius ϵ. We can see numerical results in Figure 1, and it shows that loss landscape has ﬂatness within
the training radius, but is very sharp outside, which practically demonstrates robust memorization
on real image datasets, including MNIST and CIFAR10.
Learning Process. We also focus on the dynamics of loss landscape over input during the adver-
sarial learning process. Thus, we compute empirical average of maximum gradient norm within
different perturbation radius ϵ and in different training epochs. The numerical results are plotted in
Figure 2. On both MNIST and CIFAR10, with epochs increasing, it is observed that the training
curve descents within training perturbation radius, which implies models learn the local robust indi-
cators to robustly memorize training data. However, while the test curve of MNIST has the similar
behavior to training, on CIFAR10, the test curve ascents within training radius instead, which poten-
tially explains why robust generalization gap on CIFAR10 is more signiﬁcant than that on MNIST.

5   T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF ADVERSARIAL TRAINING ON LINEAR
    SEPARABLE DATA

In this section, we theoretically demonstrate robust memorization by analyzing the convergence of
adversarial training on a certain synthetic dataset.
Speciﬁcally, we assume that data x ∈ Rd can be formalized as cyw∗ + ξ, where w∗ is the target
direction (∥w∗ ∥2 = 1), y ∈ {−1, +1} is the label, c is the norm scale that is α for large margin data
and is β for small margin data (β ≪ α), and ξ ∼ N (0, Id − w∗ w∗ T ) is a random Guassian noise
orthogonal to w∗ .
Indeed, this synthetic dataset captures the main characteristics of data assumption that we mention
in Section 3. On one hand, there exists a simple but non-robust classiﬁer fclean (x) = w∗T x that can
clean classify data but is non-robust for small margin data. On the other hand, due to the randomness
of noise, in the high-dimensional setting, small data is also well-separated.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                         Pm
We consider a mixed learner model as f (x) = w0 T x + i=1 ai ϕ(wi T x), where the neuron ϕ(t) =
σ(t − b), σ(·) is ReLU activation function and b is a threshold.
With N −sample training dataset S = Ssmall ∪ Slarge i.i.d. drawn from the underlying distribution D,
                                                         PN
we minimize the exponential loss as LSexp,adv,δ (f ) = N1 i=1 max∥δi ∥2 ≤δ exp(−yi f (xi + δi )).
By using the standard adversarial training algorithm, FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2014), we have the
following result.
Theorem 5.1. With large margin data Slarge as training data, we use FGSM to train the model f
when only w0 is activated and zero initialized, deriving a parameter iteration sequence {w0k }k=1,... .
                                                                          w0k
Then, with high probability over the sampled set, we have limk→∞         ∥w0k ∥2
                                                                                 − w∗ = o(1).
                                                                                     2

Theorem 5.1 shows that, under the linear separable data assumption, high clean test accuracy on large
margin data implies good clean performance on small margin data, which can help us understand
clean generalization better in adversarial training (see Theorem 6.2 in Section 6).
Theorem 5.2. By using a modiﬁed adversarial training algorithm on all training dataset S, we de-
rive a parameter sequence {θk = (wik )m    i=0 }k=1,... . Then, with high probability, for 0−1 adversarial
               0−1,adv,δ
training loss LS         , it holds that limk→∞ L0−1,adv,δ
                                                     S         (θk ) = 0.

In fact, the above theorems show that adversarial training method
                                                            P       on linear separable data will
converge to the normalized target solution, f (x) = w∗ T x + xi ∈Ssmall yi ϕ(ξiT x), which is exactly
the robust memorization function mentioned in Section 3.

6     G ENERALIZATION GUARANTEES BASED ON ROBUST MEMORIZATION
Standard generalization bound can not directly explain high clean test accuracy after adversarial
training. In general, standard generalization bound can be stated as the following form. With high
probability over random sampled training data, we have
                                                    r
                                                       Complexity(F )
                             LD (f ) ≤ LS (f ) +
                              clean        clean
                                                                       .
                                                              N
where N is the number of samples, and Complexity(F ) denotes a complexity measure of function
family F , such as VC dimension and Rademacher complexity.
However, this standard generalization bound can not explain high clean test accuracy after ad-
versarial training. In order to have enough capacity for achieving low robust training error (i.e.
minf ∈F Ladv,δ
           S    (f ) = 0), we need to set Complexity(F ) = O(N d) (due to Corollary 3.4 and the
relation between VC dimension and the number of parameters (Bartlett et al., 2019)), which causes
the above bound too loose to use.

6.1   I MPROVED GENERALIZATION BOUND ANALYSIS BASED ON ROBUST MEMORIZATION

Fortunately, we notice that the robust memorization function fadv has much lower complexity on all
large margin data (poly(d))) than the complexity on only sampled small large margin data (O(N d)).
Inspired by this, we can prove a novel generalization bound by leveraging it.
Assumption 6.1. We assume that, for any classiﬁer f outputted by adversarial  training under      the
realistic data assumption that we mention in Section 3, we have LDsmall (f ) = O LDlarge (f ) , where
                                                                    clean            clean

we use Dsmall , Dlarge to denote small margin part and large margin part in the population D.

This assumption has been theoretically veriﬁed in Section 5, which means that the clean test accuracy
on small margin data can be bounded by the clean test accuracy on large margin data. Indeed, it holds
for any homogeneous classiﬁer when we assume that small margin data also has small norm. We
leverage this property to prove the following clean generalization bound.
Theorem 6.2. Let D be the underlying distribution that satisﬁes all assumption in Section 3 and
Assumption 6.1. With access to N −sample training dataset S = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xN , yN )}
is i.i.d. drawn from D, there exists a modiﬁed adversarial training algorithm with perturbation


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  (a)                                        (b)

Figure 3: Left: Local and Global Flatness During Adversarial Training on CIFAR10; Right: The
Relation Between Robust Generalization Gap and Global Flatness on CIFAR10.


radius δ, Aδ : DN → FS , where FS denotes the hypothesis class, such that fˆ = Aδ (S)           qsatisﬁes
L adv,δ ˆ
    S  (f ) = 0, and it holds with probability high probability that L clean ˆ
                                                                            (f ) ≲ L
                                                                              D       S   (f ) + poly(d) .
                                                                                     clean ˆ
                                                                                                      N

This result implies that the sample complexity of adversarial training is polynomial in the data
dimension d, which provides a theoretical guarantee for benign overﬁtting in adversarial training.
However, we still prove the following theorems to illustrate the hardness of robust generalization.
In contrast to the clean generalization, we have an another robust generalization bound that mainly
depends on global ﬂatness of loss landscape over input.
Theorem 6.3. Let D be the underlying distribution with a smooth density function, and N −sample
training dataset S = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} is i.i.d. drawn from D. Then, it holds with
probability 1 − ∆ over sampled set S that,
                                                                                                    
                                        
                                                                                   C(D, L) 
                                                                                            
                         (f ) ≲ N − d+2 E(x,y)∼D
                                     1
    Ladv,δ
     D     (f ) − Ladv,δ
                   S                                     max ∥∇x L(f (x + ξ), y)∥1 + √      ,
                                                       ∥ξ∥∞ ≤δ                        ∆ 
                                            |                   {z                }
                                                            global ﬂatness

where C(D, L) is a constant that only depends on the distribution D and the loss function L(·, ·).

This robust generalization bound shows that robust generalization gap can be controlled by global
ﬂatness of loss landscape over input rather than local ﬂatness. And we also derive the lower bound
of robust generalization gap stated as follow.
Proposition 6.4. Let D be the underlying distribution with a smooth density function, then we have

                    Ladv,δ
                      D    (f ) − Lclean
                                   D (f ) = Ω δE(x,y)∼D [∥∇x L(f (x), y)∥1 ] .

Theorem 6.3 and Proposition 6.4 manifest that robust generalization gap is very related to global
ﬂatness. However, although adversarial training achieves good local ﬂatness via robust memoriza-
tion, models lack global ﬂatness, which leads to robust overﬁtting. This point is also veriﬁed by
numerical experiment on CIFAR10 (see results in Figure 3). First, global ﬂatness grows much faster
than local ﬂatness in practice. Second, with global ﬂatness increasing during training process, it
leads to a increase of robust generalization gap.

7       C ONCLUSION
This paper provides a theoretical understanding of adversarial training by proposing a implicit bias
called robust memorization. We ﬁrst explore the representation complexity of robust memorization
under the realistic data assumption. Then, we empirically demonstrate robust memorization on real-
image datasets. And we also theoretical analyze adversarial training in the linear separable data
setting. Finally, we prove generalization guarantees inspired by robust memorization, which can
explain why both good clean performance and robust overﬁtting happen in adversarial training.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Anthony, Peter L Bartlett, Peter L Bartlett, et al. Neural network learning: Theoretical
 foundations, volume 9. cambridge university press Cambridge, 1999.
Yogesh Balaji, Tom Goldstein, and Judy Hoffman. Instance adaptive adversarial training: Improved
  accuracy tradeoffs in neural nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08051, 2019.
Andrzej Banburski, Fernanda De La Torre, Nishka Pant, Ishana Shastri, and Tomaso Poggio. Distri-
  bution of classiﬁcation margins: Are all data equal? arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10199, 2021.
Peter L Bartlett, Nick Harvey, Christopher Liaw, and Abbas Mehrabian. Nearly-tight vc-dimension
  and pseudodimension bounds for piecewise linear neural networks. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 20(1):2285–2301, 2019.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-
 learning practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 116(32):15849–15854, 2019.
Chen Dan, Yuting Wei, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Sharp statistical guaratees for adversarially ro-
  bust gaussian classiﬁcation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2345–2355.
  PMLR, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Ronald A DeVore, Ralph Howard, and Charles Micchelli.         Optimal nonlinear approximation.
  Manuscripta mathematica, 63(4):469–478, 1989.
Yinpeng Dong, Ke Xu, Xiao Yang, Tianyu Pang, Zhijie Deng, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Exploring
  memorization in adversarial training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01606, 2021.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Binghui Li, Jikai Jin, Han Zhong, John E Hopcroft, and Liwei Wang. Why robust generalization
  in deep learning is difﬁcult: Perspective of expressive power. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13863,
  2022.
Yan Li, Ethan Fang, Huan Xu, and Tuo Zhao. Implicit bias of gradient descent based adversarial
  training on separable data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Guido F Montufar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of linear
  regions of deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Henning Petzka, Michael Kamp, Linara Adilova, Mario Boley, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Relative
  ﬂatness and generalization in the interpolation regime. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00939, 2020.
Aditi Raghunathan, Sang Michael Xie, Fanny Yang, John C Duchi, and Percy Liang. Adversarial
  training can hurt generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06032, 2019.
Leslie Rice, Eric Wong, and Zico Kolter. Overﬁtting in adversarially robust deep learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8093–8104. PMLR, 2020.
Ludwig Schmidt, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Kunal Talwar, and Aleksander Madry. Ad-
  versarially robust generalization requires more data. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 31, 2018.
Ali Shafahi, Mahyar Najibi, Mohammad Amin Ghiasi, Zheng Xu, John Dickerson, Christoph Studer,
  Larry S Davis, Gavin Taylor, and Tom Goldstein. Adversarial training for free! Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bernard W Silverman. Density estimation for statistics and data analysis. Routledge, 2018.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Matus Telgarsky. Neural networks and rational functions. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 3387–3393. PMLR, 2017.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12152, 2018.
Athanasios Voulodimos, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios Doulamis, and Eftychios Protopapadakis.
  Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review. Computational intelligence and neuroscience,
  2018, 2018.
Eric Wong, Leslie Rice, and J Zico Kolter. Fast is better than free: Revisiting adversarial training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.03994, 2020.
Han Xu, Xiaorui Liu, Wentao Wang, Wenbiao Ding, Zhongqin Wu, Zitao Liu, Anil Jain, and Jiliang
  Tang. Towards the memorization effect of neural networks in adversarial training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.04794, 2021.
Yao-Yuan Yang, Cyrus Rashtchian, Hongyang Zhang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Kamalika Chaud-
  huri. A closer look at accuracy vs. robustness. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:8588–8601, 2020.
Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep relu networks. Neural Networks, 94:
 103–114, 2017.
Chaojian Yu, Bo Han, Li Shen, Jun Yu, Chen Gong, Mingming Gong, and Tongliang Liu. Under-
  standing robust overﬁtting of adversarial training and beyond. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 25595–25610. PMLR, 2022.
C Zhang, S Bengio, M Hardt, B Recht, and O Vinyals. Understanding deep learning requires
  rethinking generalization. iclr. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03530, 2017.
Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Jiantao Jiao, Eric Xing, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Michael Jordan.
 Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and accuracy. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 7472–7482. PMLR, 2019.


                                                11
