Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L OCALIZED R ANDOMIZED S MOOTHING
FOR C OLLECTIVE ROBUSTNESS C ERTIFICATION

 Jan Schuchardt1вҲ—, Tom WollschlaМҲger1вҲ— , Aleksandar Bojchevski2 , Stephan GuМҲnnemann1
 {j.schuchardt,t.wollschlaeger,s.guennemann}@tum.de
 {bojchevski}@cispa.de
 1
   Technical University of Munich
 2
   CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security



                                              A BSTRACT

             Models for image segmentation, node classification and many other tasks map a
             single input to multiple labels. By perturbing this single shared input (e.g. the
             image) an adversary can manipulate several predictions (e.g. misclassify several
             pixels). Collective robustness certification is the task of provably bounding the
             number of robust predictions under this threat model. The only dedicated method
             that goes beyond certifying each output independently is limited to strictly local
             models, where each prediction is associated with a small receptive field. We pro-
             pose a more general collective robustness certificate for all types of models. We
             further show that this approach is beneficial for the larger class of softly local
             models, where each output is dependent on the entire input but assigns different
             levels of importance to different input regions (e.g. based on their proximity in
             the image). The certificate is based on our novel localized randomized smooth-
             ing approach, where the random perturbation strength for different input regions
             is proportional to their importance for the outputs. Localized smoothing Pareto-
             dominates existing certificates on both image segmentation and node classification
             tasks, simultaneously offering higher accuracy and stronger certificates.


1       I NTRODUCTION

There is a wide range of tasks that require models making multiple predictions based on a single
input. For example, semantic segmentation requires assigning a label to each pixel in an image.
When deploying such multi-output classifiers in practice, their robustness should be a key concern.
After all вҖ“ just like simple classifiers (Szegedy et al., 2014) вҖ“ they can fall victim to adversarial
attacks (Xie et al., 2017; ZuМҲgner & GuМҲnnemann, 2019; Belinkov & Bisk, 2018). Even without an
adversary, random noise or measuring errors can cause predictions to unexpectedly change.
We propose a novel method providing provable guarantees on how many predictions can be changed
by an adversary. As all outputs operate on the same input, they have to be attacked simultaneously
by choosing a single perturbed input, which can be more challenging for an adversary than attacking
them independently. We must account for this to obtain a proper collective robustness certificate.
The only dedicated collective certificate that goes beyond certifying each output indepen-
dently (Schuchardt et al., 2021) is only beneficial for models we call strictly local, where each
output depends on a small, pre-defined subset of the input. Multi-output classifiers , however, are
often only softly local. While all their predictions are in principle dependent on the entire input, each
output may assign different importance to different subsets. For example, convolutional networks
for image segmentation can have small effective receptive fields (Luo et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018),
i.e. primarily use a small region of the image in labeling each pixel. Many models for node classi-
fication are based on the homophily assumption that connected nodes are mostly of the same class.
Thus, they primarily use features from neighboring nodes. Transformers, which can in principle at-
tend to arbitrary parts of the input, may in practice learn вҖңsparseвҖқ attention maps, with the prediction
for each token being mostly determined by a few (not necessarily nearby) tokens (Shi et al., 2021).
    вҲ—
        equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Localized randomized smoothing applied to semantic segmentation. We assume that the
most relevant information for labeling a pixel is contained in other nearby pixels. We partition the
input image into multiple grid cells. For each grid cell, we sample noisy images from a different
anisotropic distribution that applies more noise to far-away, less relevant cells. Segmenting all noisy
images, cropping the result and computing the majority vote yields a local segmentation mask.
These per-cell segmentation masks can then be combined into a complete segmentation mask.
Softly local models pose a budget allocation problem for an adversary that tries to simultaneously
manipulate multiple predictions by crafting a single perturbed input. When each output is primarily
focused on a different part of the input, the attacker has to distribute their limited adversarial budget
and may be unable to attack all predictions at once.
We propose localized randomized smoothing, a novel method for the collective robustness certifi-
cation of softly local models that exploits this budget allocation problem. It is an extension of ran-
domized smoothing (LeМҒcuyer et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019), a versatile black-box
certification method which is based on constructing a smoothed classifier that returns the expected
prediction of a model under random perturbations of its input (more details in В§ 2). Randomized
smoothing is typically applied to single-output models with isotropic Gaussian noise. In localized
smoothing however, we smooth each output (or set of outputs) of a multi-output classifier using a dif-
ferent distribution that is anisotropic. This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the predicted segmentation
masks for each grid cell are smoothed using a different distribution. For instance, the distribution
for segmenting the top-right cell applies less noise to the top-right cell. The smoothing distribution
for segmenting the bottom-left cell applies significantly more noise to the top-right cell.
Given a specific output of a softly local model, using a low noise level for the most relevant parts
of the input lets us preserve a high prediction quality. Less relevant parts can be smoothed with a
higher noise level to guarantee more robustness. The resulting certificates (one per output) explicitly
quantify how robust each prediction is to perturbations of which part of the input. This information
about the smoothed modelвҖҷs locality can then be used to combine the per-prediction certificates into
a stronger collective certificate that accounts for the adversaryвҖҷs budget allocation problem.1
Our core contributions are:
      вҖў Localized randomized smoothing, a novel smoothing scheme for multi-output classifiers.
      вҖў An efficient anisotropic randomized smoothing certificate for discrete data.
      вҖў A collective certificate based on localized randomized smoothing.

2       BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Randomized smoothing. Randomized smoothing is a certification technique that can be used for
various threat models and tasks. For the sake of exposition, let us discuss a certificate for l2 per-
turbations (Cohen et al., 2019). Assume we have a D-dimensional input space RD , label set Y and
classifier g : RD вҶ’ Y. We can use isotropic Gaussian noise to construct the smoothed classifier
f = argmaxyвҲҲY PrzвҲјN (x,Пғ) [g(z) = y] that returns the most likely prediction of base classifier
g under the input distribution2 . Given an input x вҲҲ RD and smoothed prediction y = f (x), we
can then easily determine whether y is robust to all l2 perturbations of magnitude Пө, i.e. whether
вҲҖxвҖІ : ||xвҖІ вҲ’ x||2 вүӨ Пө : f (xвҖІ ) = y. Let q = PrzвҲјN (x,Пғ) [g(z) = y] be the probability of predicting
    1
        An implementation will be made available at https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/localized-smoothing.
    2
        In practice, all probabilities have to be estimated using Monte Carlo sampling (see discussion in В§ G).


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


label y. The prediction is certifiably robust if Пө < ПғОҰвҲ’1 (q) (Cohen et al., 2019). This result show-
cases a trade-off inherent to randomized smoothing: Increasing the noise level (Пғ) may strengthen
the certificate, but could also lower the accuracy of f or reduce q and thus weaken the certificate.
White-box certificates for multi-output classifiers. There are multiple recent methods for certify-
ing the robustness of multi-output models by analyzing their specific architecture and weights (for
example, see (Tran et al., 2021; ZuМҲgner & GuМҲnnemann, 2019; Bojchevski & GuМҲnnemann, 2019;
ZuМҲgner & GuМҲnnemann, 2020; Ko et al., 2019; Ryou et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2020; Bonaert et al.,
2021)). They are however not designed to certify collective robustness, i.e. determine whether mul-
tiple outputs can be simultaneously attacked using a single perturbed input. They can only determine
independently for each prediction whether or not it can be attacked.
Black-box certificates for multi-output classifiers. Most directly related to our work is the afore-
mentioned certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021), which is only beneficial for strictly local models
(i.e. models where each output has a small receptive field). In В§ I we show that, for randomly
smoothed models, their certificate is a special case of ours. SegCertify (Fischer et al., 2021) is a col-
lective certificate for segmentation. This method certifies each output independently using isotropic
smoothing (ignoring the budget allocation problem) and uses Holm correction (Holm, 1979) to ob-
tain tighter Monte Carlo estimates. It then counts the number of certifiably robust predictions and
tests whether it equals the number of predictions. In В§ H we demonstrate that our method can al-
ways provide guarantees that are at least as strong. Another method that can in principle be used to
certify collective robustness is center smoothing (Kumar & Goldstein, 2021). It bounds the change
of a vector-valued function w.r.t to a distance function. Using the l0 pseudo-norm, it can bound
how many predictions can be simultaneously changed. More recently, Chen et al. (2022) proposed a
collective certificate for bagging classifiers. Different from our work, they consider poisoning (train-
time) instead of evasion (test-time) attacks. Yatsura et al. (2022) prove robustness for segmentation,
but consider patch-based instead of в„“p -norm attacks and certify each prediction independently.
Anisotropic randomized smoothing. While only designed for single-output classifiers, two recent
certificates for anisotropic Gaussian and uniform smoothing (Fischer et al., 2020; Eiras et al., 2022)
can be used as a component of our collective certification approach: They can serve as per-prediction
certificates, which we can then combine into our stronger collective certificate (more details in В§ 3.2).

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   C OLLECTIVE T HREAT M ODEL

We assume a multi-output classifier f : XDin вҶ’ YDout , that maps Din -dimensional inputs to Dout
labels from label set Y. We further assume that this classifier f is the result of randomly smooth-
ing each output of a base classifier g. Given this multi-output classifier f , an input x вҲҲ XDin
and the corresponding predictions y = f (x), the objective of the adversary is to cause as many
predictionsPfrom a set of targeted indices T вҠҶ {1, . . . , Dout } to change. That is, their objective is
minxвҖІ вҲҲBx nвҲҲT I [fn (xвҖІ ) = yn ], where I is the indicator function and Bx вҠҶ XDin is the perturba-
tion model.  As is common in robustness certification, we assume a в„“p -norm perturbation model,
i.e. Bx = xвҖІ вҲҲ XDin | ||xвҖІ вҲ’ x||p вүӨ Пө with p, Пө вүҘ 0. Importantly, note that the minimization
operator is outside the sum, meaning the predictions have to be attacked using a single input.

3.2   A R ECIPE FOR C OLLECTIVE C ERTIFICATES

Before discussing localized randomized smoothing, we show how to combine arbitrary per-
prediction certificates into a collective certificate, a procedure that underlies both our method and
that of Schuchardt et al. (2021) and Fischer et al. (2021). The first step is to apply an arbitrary certifi-
cation procedure to each prediction y1 , . . . , yDout in order to obtain per-prediction base certificates.
Definition 3.1 (Base certificates). A base certificate for a prediction yn = fn (x) is a set H(n) вҠҶ
XDin of perturbed inputs s.t. вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H(n) : fn (xвҖІ ) = yn .
Using these base certificates, one can derive two bounds on the adversaryвҖҷs objective:
            X                                X h               i   X            h             i
                         вҖІ                           вҖІ     (n)                      вҖІ     (n)
       min
        вҖІ
                I [fn (x   ) = y n ] вүҘ  min
                                        вҖІ
                                                 I x   вҲҲ H       вүҘ      min
                                                                         вҖІ
                                                                              I   x   вҲҲ H       .       (1)
       x вҲҲBx                       (1.1) x вҲҲBx                      (1.2)         x вҲҲBx
               nвҲҲT                               nвҲҲT                        nвҲҲT


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eq. 1.1 follows from Theorem 3.1 (if a prediction is certifiably robust to xвҖІ , then fn (xвҖІ ) = yn ),
while Eq. 1.2 results from moving the min operator inside the summation.
Eq. 1.2 is the naДұМҲve collective certificate: It iterates over the predictions and counts how many
are certifiably robust to perturbation model Bx . Each summand involves a separate minimization
problem. Thus, the certificate neglects that the adversary has to choose a single perturbed input to
attack all outputs. SegCertify (Fischer et al., 2021) applies this to isotropic Gaussian smoothing.
While Eq. 1.1 is seemingly tighter than the naДұМҲve collective certificate, it may lead to identical
results. For example, let us consider the most common case where the base certificates guarantee
robustness within an lp ball, i.e. H(n) = xвҖІвҖІ | ||xвҖІвҖІ вҲ’ x||p вүӨ r(n) with certified radii r(n) . Then,
the optimal solution to both Eq. 1.1 and Eq. 1.2 is to choose an arbitrary xвҖІ with ||xвҖІ вҲ’ x|| = Пө:
                    X h                i X h               i X            h            i
                             вҖІ     (n)                 (n)                   вҖІ     (n)
               min
               вҖІ
                        I  x   вҲҲ H      =    I  Пө <  r      =      min
                                                                   вҖІ
                                                                        I   x  вҲҲ H       .
              x вҲҲBx                                                  x вҲҲBx
                      nвҲҲT                  nвҲҲT                 nвҲҲT

The main contribution of Schuchardt et al. (2021) is to notice that, by exploiting strict locality (i.e.
the outputs having small receptive fields), one can augment certificate Eq. 1.1 to make it tighter than
the naive collective certificate from Eq. 1.2. One must simply mask out all perturbations falling
outside a given receptive field when evaluating the corresponding base certificate:
                              X h                                              i
                                       (n)      вҖІ          (n)             (n)
                       min
                        вҖІ
                                  I  ПҲ      вҠҷ x   + (1 вҲ’ ПҲ     ) вҠҷ x   вҲҲ H       .
                       x вҲҲBx
                               nвҲҲT

Here, ПҲ (n) вҲҲ {0, 1}Din encodes the receptive field of fn and вҠҷ is the elementwise product. If two
                                                            T
outputs fn and fm have disjoint receptive fields (i.e. ПҲ (n) ПҲ (m) = 0), then the adversary has to
split up their limited adversarial budget and may be unable to attack both at once.

4   L OCALIZED R ANDOMIZED S MOOTHING
The core idea behind localized smoothing is that, rather than improving upon the naДұМҲve collective
certificate by using external knowledge about strict locality, we can use anisotropic randomized
smoothing to obtain base certificates that directly encode soft locality. Here, we explain our approach
in a domain-independent manner before turning to specific distributions and data-types in В§ 5.
In localized randomized smoothing, we associate base classifier outputs g1 , . . . , gDout with distinct
                                         (1)        (D )
anisotropic smoothing distributions ОЁx , . . . , ОЁx out that depend on input x. For example, they
could be Gaussian distributions with mean x and distinct covariance matrices вҖ“ like in Fig. 1, where
we use a different distribution for each grid cell. We use these distributions to construct the smoothed
                                                                                              (n)
classifier f , where each output fn (x) is the result of randomly smoothing gn (Z) with ОЁx .
To certify robustness for a vector of predictions y = f (x), we follow the procedure discussed in
В§ 3.2, i.e. compute base certificates H(1) , . . . , H(Dout) and solve Eq. 1.1. We do not make any
assumption about how the base certificates are computed. However, we require that they comply
with a common interface, which will later allow us combine them via linear programming:
Definition 4.1 (Base certificate interface). A base certificate H(n) вҠҶ XDin is compliant with our
base certificate interface for lp -norm perturbations if there is a w вҲҲ RD
                                                                         + and О·
                                                                          in     (n)
                                                                                     вҲҲ R+ such that
                                            Din
                                      (                                  )
                                                  (n)
                                            X
                            H(n) = xвҖІ           wd В· |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd |p < О· (n) .                      (2)
                                           d=1

               (n)
The weight wd quantifies how sensitive yn is to perturbations of input dimension d. It will be
smaller where the anisotropic smoothing distribution applies more noise. The radius О· (n) quantifies
the overall level of robustness. In В§ 5 we present different distributions and corresponding certificates
that comply with this interface. Inserting Eq. 2 into Eq. 1.1 results in the collective certificate
                                           "D                               #
                                             in
                                                 (n)
                                    X X
                                                         вҖІ       p      (n)
                              min
                              вҖІ
                                         I      wd В· |xd вҲ’ xd | < О·           .                       (3)
                            x вҲҲBx
                                     nвҲҲT   d=1


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eq. 3 showcases why locally smoothed models admit a collective certificate that is stronger than
naДұМҲvely certifying each output independently (i.e. Eq. 1.2). Because we use different distributions
for different outputs, any two outputs f (n) and f (m) will have distinct certificate weights w(n)
                                                                             T
and w(m) . If they are sensitive in different parts of the input, i.e. w(n) w(m) is small, then the
adversary has to split up their limited adversarial budget and may be unable to attack both at once.
                                                    T
One particularly simple example is the case w(n) w(m) = 0, where attacking predictions yn and
ym requires allocating adversarial budget to two entirely disjoint sets of input dimensions. In В§ I we
show that, with appropriately parameterized smoothing distributions, we can obtain base certificates
with w(n) = c В· ПҲ (n) , with indicator vector ПҲ (n) encoding the receptive field of output n. Hence,
the collective guarantees from (Schuchardt et al., 2021) are a special case of our certificate.


4.1   C OMPUTING THE C OLLECTIVE C ERTIFICATE

While Eq. 3 constitutes a valid certificate, it is not immediately clear how to evaluate it. However,
we notice that the perturbation set Bx imposes linear constraints on the elementwise differences
|xвҖІd вҲ’ xd |p , the values of the indicator functions are binary variables and that the base certificates
inside the indicator functions are characterized by linear inequalities. We can thus reformulate Eq. 3
as a mixed-integer linear program (MILP), which leads us to our main result (proof in В§ D):
Theorem 4.2. Given locally smoothed model f , input x вҲҲ X(Din ) , smoothed prediction y = f (x)
                                  , HDout complying with interface Eq. 2, the number of simultaneously
and base certificates H(1) , . . .X
robust predictions minxвҖІ вҲҲBx         I [fn (xвҖІ ) = yn ] is lower-bounded by
                                 nвҲҲT                   X
                                          min               tn                                     (4)
                                   D
                                bвҲҲR+ in ,tвҲҲ{0,1}Dout nвҲҲT

                         s.t.   вҲҖn : bT w(n) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ tn )О· (n) , sum{b} вүӨ Пөp .                         (5)

The vector b models the allocation of adversarial budget (i.e. the elementwise differences bd =
|xвҖІd вҲ’ xd |p ). The vector t serves the same role as the indicator functions from Eq. 3, i.e. it indicates
which predictions are certifiably robust. Eq. 5 ensures that b does not exceed the overall budget Пө
(i.e. xвҖІ вҲҲ Bx ) and that tn can only be set to 0 if bT w(n) вүҘ О· (n) , i.e. only when the base certificate
cannot guarantee robustness for prediction yn . This problem can be solved using any MILP solver.
Its optimal value provably bounds the number of simultaneously robust predictions.


4.2   I MPROVING E FFICIENCY

Solving large MILPs is expensive. In В§ E we show that partitioning the outputs into Nout subsets
sharing the same smoothing distribution and the inputs into Nin subsets sharing the same noise level
(for example like in Fig. 1, where we partition the image into a 2 Г— 3 grid), as well as quantizing the
base certificate parameters О· (n) into Nbin bins, reduces the number of variables and constraints from
Din +Dout and Dout +1 to Nin +Nout В·Nbins and Nout В·Nbins +1, respectively. We can thus control
the problem size independent of the dataвҖҷs dimensionality. We further derive a linear relaxation of
the MILP that can be efficiently solved while preserving the soundness of the certificate.


4.3   ACCURACY-ROBUSTNESS T RADEOFF

When discussing Eq. 3, we only explained why our collective certificate for locally smoothed models
is better than a naДұМҲve combination of localized smoothing base certificates. However, this does
not necessarily mean that our certificate is also stronger than naДұМҲvely certifying an isotropically
smoothed model. This is why we focus on soft locality. With isotropic smoothing, high certified
robustness requires using large noise levels, which degrade the modelвҖҷs prediction quality. Localized
smoothing, when applied to softly local models, can circumvent this issue. For each output, we can
use low noise levels for the most important parts of the input to retain high prediction quality. Our
LP-based collective certificate allows us to still provide strong collective robustness guarantees. We
investigate this improved accuracy-robustness trade-off in our experimental evaluation (see В§ 7).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5       BASE C ERTIFICATES
                                                                                                   (n)
To apply our collective certificate in practice, we require smoothing distributions ОЁx and cor-
responding per-prediction base certificates that comply with the interface from Theorem 3.1. As
base certificates for l2 and l1 perturbations we can reformulate existing anisotropic Gaussian (Fis-
cher et al., 2020; Kumar & Goldstein, 2021) and uniform (Kumar & Goldstein, 2021) smoothing
                                               (n)                                 (n)         (n)
certificates for single-output models: For ОЁx = N (x, diag(s(n) )) we have wd =  1/(sd )2
       (n)       вҲ’1         2                                            (n)           (n)
and О·      = (ОҰ (qn,yn )) with qn,yn = PrzвҲјОЁ(n) [gn (z) = y]. For ОЁx = U x, О»              we have
                                                   x
  (n)        (n)       (n)     вҲ’1
wd = 1/О»d and О· = ОҰ (qn,yn ). We prove the correctness of these reformulations in В§ F.
For l0 perturbations of binary data, we can use a distribution F(x, Оё) that flips xd with probability
Оёd вҲҲ [0, 1], i.e. Pr[zd Мё= xd ] = Оёd for z вҲј F(x, Оё). Existing methods (e.g. (Lee et al., 2019))
can be used to derive per-prediction certificates for this distribution, but have exponential runtime in
the number of unique values in Оё. Thus, they are not suitable for localized smoothing, which uses
different Оёd for different parts of the input. We therefore propose a novel, more efficient approach:
Variance-constrained certification, which smooths the base classifierвҖҷs softmax scores instead of its
predictions and then uses both their expected value and variance to certify robustness (proof in В§ F.3):
Theorem 5.1 (Variance-constrained certification). Given a function g : X вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| mapping
from discrete set X to scores from the (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-dimensional probability simplex, let f (x) =
argmaxyвҲҲY EzвҲјОЁx [g(z)y ] with smoothing distribution ОЁx and probability mass function ПҖx (z) =
PrzМғвҲјОЁx [zМғ = z].hGiven an input i x вҲҲ X and smoothed prediction y = f (x), let Вө = EzвҲјОЁx [g(z)y ]
                                    2
and О¶ = EzвҲјОЁx (g(z)y вҲ’ ОҪ)           with ОҪ вҲҲ R. Assuming ОҪ вүӨ Вө, then f (xвҖІ ) = y if
                            X ПҖxвҖІ (z)
                                                           1              1
                                      В· ПҖxвҖІ (z) < 1 +             2   Вө вҲ’     .                                (6)
                              ПҖx (z)                  О¶ вҲ’ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)         2
                            zвҲҲX


The l.h.s. of Eq. 6 is the expected ratio between the probability mass functions of the smoothing
distributions for the perturbed (ПҖxвҖІ ) and unperturbed (ПҖx ) input.3 It is equal to 1 if both densities are
the same, i.e. there is no adversarial perturbation, and greater than 1 otherwise. The r.h.s. of Eq. 6
depends on the expected softmax score Вө, a variable ОҪ вүӨ Вө and the expected squared difference О¶
between Вө and ОҪ. For ОҪ = Вө the parameter О¶ is the variance of the softmax score. A higher expected
value and a lower variance allow us to certify robustness for larger adversarial perturbations.
Applying Theorem 5.1 with flipping distribution F(x, Оё) to each of the D softmax vectors of our
modelвҖҷs outputs yields l0 -norm certificates for binary data that can be computed in linear time
(see В§ F.3.1). In В§ F.3.2, we also apply it to the sparsity-aware smoothing distribution (Bojchevski
et al., 2020), allowing us to differentiate between adversarial deletions and additions of bits. Theo-
rem 5.1 can also be generalized to continuous distributions (see В§ F.3.3). But, for fair comparison
with our baselines, we use the certificates of Eiras et al. (2022) as our base certificates for continuous
data. In practice, the smoothed classifier and the base certificates cannot be evaluted exactly. One
has to use Monte Carlo sampling to provide guarantees that hold with high probability (see В§ G).

6       L IMITATIONS
A limitation of our approach is that it assumes soft locality. It can be applied to arbitrary models,
but may not necessarily result in better certificates than isotropic smoothing (recall В§ 4.3). Also,
choosing the smoothing distributions requires some assumptions about which parts of the input are
how relevant to making a prediction. Our experiments show that natural assumptions like homophily
can be sufficient. But choosing a distribution may be more challenging for other tasks. A limitation
of (most) randomized smoothing methods is that they use sampling to approximate the smoothed
classifier. Because we use multiple distributions, we can only use a fraction of the samples per distri-
bution. We can alleviate this problem by sharing smoothing distributions among outputs (see В§ E.1).
Still, future work should try to improve the sample efficiency of randomized smoothing or develop
deterministic base certificates (e.g. by generalizing (Levine & Feizi, 2020) to anisotropic distribu-
tions), which could then be incorporated into our linear programming framework.
    3
        This term is equivalent to the exponential of the ReМҒnyi-divergence exp (DОұ (ОЁxвҖІ ||ОЁx )) with Оұ = 2.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                 0.8


                                                                            Certified accuracy
                                                    Localized LP                                                          Localized LP

 Avg. cert. radius
                     0.8
                                                    CenterSmooth                                                          Localized NaДұМҲve
                                                                                                 0.6
                     0.6                            SegCertifyвҲ—                                                           SegCertifyвҲ—
                                                                                                 0.4
                     0.4
                                                                                                 0.2
                     0.2

                     0.0                                                                         0.0
                           0.15       0.20         0.25         0.30                               0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75    1.00     1.25
                                             mIOU                                                            Adversarial budget Пө

Figure 2: Comparison of isotropic smoothing                                Figure 3: Certified accuracy of U-Net on
with Пғiso вҲҲ {0.01, . . . , 0.5} to our LP-based cer-                       Pascal-VOC. We compare SegCertify* (Пғiso =
tificate with (Пғmin , Пғmax ) = (Пғiso , вҲһ), using a                         0.2) to localized smoothing ((Пғmin , Пғmax ) =
modified, strictly local U-Net on Pascal-VOC.                              (0.15, 1.0)). Combining the base certificates
Localized smoothing offers the same mIOU as                                (dashed blue line) via our collective LP (solid
SegCertify* and stronger robustness certificates.                          blue line) outperforms the baseline.

7                    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

In this section, we compare our method to all existing collective certificates for в„“p -norm perturba-
tions: Center smoothing using isotropic Gaussian noise (Kumar & Goldstein, 2021), SegCertify (Fis-
cher et al., 2021) and the collective certificates of Schuchardt et al. (2021). To compare SegCertify
to the other methods, we report the number of certifiably robust predictions and not just whether all
predictions are robust. We write SegCertify* to highlight this. When considering models that are
not strictly local (i.e. all outputs depend on all inputs) the certificates of Schuchardt et al. (2021)
and Fischer et al. (2021) are identical, i.e., do not have to be evaluated separately. A more detailed
description of the experimental setup, hardware and computational cost can be found in В§ C.
Metrics. Evaluating randomized smoothing methods based on certificate strength alone is not suf-
ficient. Different distributions lead to different tradeoffs between prediction quality and certifiable
robustness (as discussed in В§ 4.3). As metrics for prediction quality, we use accuracy and mean inter-
section over union (mIOU).4 The main metric for certificate strength is the certified accuracy Оҫ(Пө),
i.e., the percentage of predictions that are correct and certifiably robust, given adversarial budget Пө.
Following (Schuchardt et al., 2021), we use the average certifiable radius (ACR) as an aggregate
             PN вҲ’1
metric, i.e. n=1 Пөn В· (Оҫ(Пөn ) вҲ’ Оҫ(Пөn+1 ) with budgets Пө1 вүӨ Пө2 В· В· В· вүӨ ПөN and Пө1 = 0, Оҫ(ПөN ) = 0.
Evaluation procedure. We assess the accuracy-robustness tradeoff of each method by computing
accuracy / mIOU and ACR for a wide range of smoothing distribution parameters. We then elimi-
nate all points that are Pareto-dominated, i.e. for which there exist diffent parameter values that yield
higher accuracy / mIOU and ACR. Finally, we assess to if localized smoothing dominates the base-
lines, i.e. whether it can be parameterized to achieve strictly better accuracy-robustness tradeoffs.

7.1                    I MAGE S EGMENTATION

Dataset and model. We evaluate our certificate for l2 perturbations on 100 images from the Pascal-
VOC (Everingham et al., 2010) 2012 segmentation validation set. Training is performed on 10582
samples extracted from SBD, also known as вҖқPascal trainaugвҖқ (Hariharan et al., 2011). Additional
experiments on Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) can be found in В§ A. To increase batch sizes and
thus allow a thorough investigation of different smoothing parameters, all images are downscaled to
50% of their original size, similar to (Fischer et al., 2021). Our base model is a U-Net segmentation
model (Ronneberger et al., 2015) with a ResNet-18 backbone. For isotropic randomized smoothing,
we use Gaussian noise N (0, Пғiso ) with different Пғiso вҲҲ {0.01, 0.02, . . . , 0.5}. To perform local-
ized randomized smoothing, we choose parameters Пғmin , Пғmax вҲҲ R+ and partition all images into
regular grids (similar to Fig. 1). To smooth outputs in grid cell (i, j), we sample noise for grid cell
(k, l) from N (0, Пғ вҖІ В· 1), with Пғ вҖІ вҲҲ [Пғmin , Пғmax ] chosen proportional to the distance of (i, j) and

               4
                     I.e. add up confusion matrices over the entire dataset, compute per-class IOUs and average over all classes.


                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      1.00
                                                       Localized LP                                                            Localized LP

  Avg. cert. radius


                                                                             Avg. cert. radius
                                                                                                 1.00
                      0.75                             CenterSmooth                                                            CenterSmooth
                                                       SegCertifyвҲ—                               0.75                          SegCertifyвҲ—
                      0.50
                                                                                                 0.50
                      0.25                                                                       0.25

                                                                                                 0.00
                               0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5     0.6                                  0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5     0.6
                                               mIOU                                                                    mIOU

                             (a) 10240 samples per output pixel.                                 (b) 15 times as many samples for baselines.

Figure 4: Comparison of isotropic smoothing to our LP-based certificate with a 3 Г— 5 grid and U-
Net on Pascal-VOC. U-Net is sufficiently local to benefit from localized smoothing (Fig. 4a), but
not enough to offset the increased sample complexity (Fig. 4b) for the probabilistic base certificates.

(k, l) (more details in В§ C.2). All training data is randomly perturbed using samples from the same
smoothing distribution that is used for certification.
Accuracy-robustness tradeoff under strict locality. Our goal is to verify that, if a model is suffi-
ciently local, localized smoothing offers a better accuracy-robustness tradeoff than isotropic smooth-
ing. As an extreme example, we construct a strictly local model from our U-Net segmentation model.
This modified model partitions each image into a grid of size 2 Г— 2. It then iterates over cells (i, j),
sets all values outside (i, j) to 0 and applies the original model. Finally, it stitches all 4 segmentation
masks into a single one. For such a strictly local model, we can apply localized smoothing with the
same 2 Г— 2 grid and Пғmax вҶ’ вҲһ to recover the certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021) (see В§ I).5
Fig. 2 compares the resulting trade-off for Пғmin = Пғiso to that of both isotropic smoothing baselines
using 153600 Monte Carlo samples. Localized smoothing yields the same mIOUs as SegCertify* ,
but up to 22.4 p.p. larger ACR. Both approaches Pareto-dominate center smoothing.
Accuracy-robustness tradeoff under soft locality. Next, we want to verify our claim about the ex-
istence of softly local models for which localized smoothing is beneficial. To this end, we randomly
smooth the U-Net model itself, without using masking to enforce strict locality. We perform local-
ized smoothing with grid size 3 Г— 5, various Пғmin вҲҲ {0.01, 0.02, . . . , 0.5}, Пғmax вҲҲ [0.02, 1.0] and
10240 samples per output pixel (i.e. 10240 В· 15 = 153600 samples in total). Isotropic smoothing is
also performed with 10240 samples per output pixel. Fig. 4a shows that localized smoothing Pareto-
dominates SegCertify* for high-accuracy models with mIOU > 35.3%. Importantly the figure is not
to be read like a line graph! Even if the vertical distance between two methods is small, one may
significantly outperform the other. For example, Пғiso = 0.1, with an mIOU of 46.34% and an ACR
of 0.24 (highlighted with a bold cross) is dominated by (Пғmin , Пғmax ) = (0.09, 0.2) (highlighted
with a large circle), which has a larger ACR of 0.25 and a mIOU that is a whole 6.1 p.p. higher.
Benefit of linear programming. Fig. 3 demonstrates how the linear program derived in В§ 4.1 en-
ables this improved tradeoff. We compare SegCertify* with Пғiso = 0.2 to localized smoothing with
(Пғmin , Пғmax ) = (0.15, 1.0). NaДұМҲvely combining the base certificates (dashed line) is not sufficient
for outperforming the baseline, as they cannot certify robustness beyond Пө = 0.45. However, solving
the collective LP (solid blue line) extends the maximum certifiable radius to Пө = 1.15.
Sample efficiency. Using the same number of samples per output pixel for both localized and
isotropic smoothing neglects that localized smoothing requires sampling from 15 different distri-
butions, i.e. sampling 15 times as many images.6 In Fig. 4b we allow the baselines to sample the
same number of images. Now, localized smoothing is mostly dominated by SegCertify* , except for
high-accuracy models with mIOU вҲҲ [52.4%, 57.8%] or mIOU > 60.8%. We conclude that U-Net
is local enough to benefit from localized smoothing, but not enough to offset the practical problem
of having to work with fewer Monte Carlo samples (see also discusion in В§ 6) in the entire range of
possible isotropic smoothing parameters. Note, however, that we can always recover the guarantees
of SegCertify* by using a 1 Г— 1 grid (see В§ H).
           5
                  Note that they never evaluated their approach on image segmentation.
           6
                  This is however not necessary for the previously discussed strictly local model.


                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        20                                                                       4
                                   Localized LP                                                                         Localized LP
                                                                                                                        SparseSmooth


                                                                             Avg. cert. radius
                                   SparseSmooth
    Avg. cert. radius
                        15                                                                       3


                        10                                                                       2


                         5                                                                       1


                         0                                                                       0
                             0.4     0.5          0.6        0.7   0.8                               0.5    0.6       0.7         0.8
                                                  Accuracy                                                 Accuracy

       (a) Robustness to deletions, using S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ .                      (b) Robustness to additions, using S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ .



Figure 5: Comparison of our LP-based collective certificate to Bojchevski et al. (2020), using
APPNP on Citeseer. We consider both adversarial deletions (Fig. 5a) and additions (Fig. 5b) of
attribute bits. Locally smoothed models offer a better accuracy-robustness tradeoff , especially for
deletions. Transparent points signal that they are Pareto-dominated by points from the same method.
7.2                      N ODE C LASSIFICATION ON C ITESEER

Dataset and model. Finally, we consider models that are designed with locality in mind: Graph
neural networks. We take APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019), which aggregates per-node predictions
from the entire graph based on personalized pagerank scores, and apply it to the Citeseer (Sen et al.,
2008) dataset. To certify its robustness, we perform randomized smoothing with sparsity-aware
noise S (x, Оё+ , ОёвҲ’ ), where Оё+ and ОёвҲ’ control the probability of randomly adding or deleting node
attributes, respectively (more details in В§ F.3.2). As a baseline we apply the tight certificate SparseS-
                                                                  вҲ’         вҲ’
mooth of Bojchevski et al. (2020) to distributions S x, 0.01, Оёiso    with Оёiso вҲҲ {0.1, 0.15, . . . , 0.95}.
The small addition probability 0.01 is meant to preserve the sparsity of the graphвҖҷs attribute matrix
and was used in most experiments in (Bojchevski et al., 2020). For localized smoothing, we partition
                                                                           вҲ’
the graph into 5 clusters and define a minimum deletion probability Оёmin        вҲҲвҲ’ {0.1, 0.15,
                                                                                            . . . , 0.95}.
                                                              вҖІвҲ’        вҖІвҲ’
We then sample each clusterвҖҷs attributes from S (x, 0.01, Оё ) with Оё вҲҲ Оёmin         , 0.95 chosen based
on cluster affinity. To compute the base certificates, we use the variance-constrained certificate
from В§ F.3.2. In all cases, we take 5 В· 105 samples (i.e. 105 per cluster for localized smoothing).
Further discussions, as well as experiments on different models and datasets can be found in В§ B.
Accuracy-robustness tradeoff. Fig. 5 shows the accuracy and ACR pairs achieved by the naДұМҲve
isotropic smoothing certificate and the LP-based certificate for localized smoothing. Despite hav-
ing fewer samples per prediction, our method outperforms the baseline, offering higher accuracy
certifying larger ACRs, especially for attribute deletions. Notably, in some cases, our approach
even improves accuracy by over 7 p.p. percentage points compared to isotropically smoothed mod-
els. Similar to the observation made by Bojchevski et al. (2020) in their Section K, we also find
that increasing the probability of attribute perturbations can improve accuracy to some extent. We
posit that localized smoothing can leverage this phenomenon as a form of test-time regularization
while preserving the crucial attributes of nearby nodes. In В§ B.1 we show that the stems from the
smoothing scheme and is not solely due to using our novel variance-constrained certificate.

8                       C ONCLUSION
We proposed a novel approach to achieve provable collective robustness in multi-output classi-
fiers that extends beyond strict locality, utilizing our introduced localized randomized smoothing
scheme. Our approach involves smoothing different outputs with anisotropic smoothing distribu-
tions that match the modelвҖҷs soft locality. We demonstrated how per-output certificates obtained
through localized smoothing can be combined into a strong collective robustness certificate using
(mixed-integer) linear programming. Our experiments indicate that localized smoothing can achieve
superior accuracy-robustness tradeoffs compared to isotropic smoothing methods. However, not all
models match our distance-based locality assumption, particularly for image segmentation tasks.
Node classification tasks are more amenable to localized smoothing due to their inherent locality.
Our results highlight the importance of locality in achieving collective robustness and emphasize the
need for future research to develop effective local models for multi-output tasks.


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


9    R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We prove all theoretic results that were not already derived in the main text in В§ D to В§ G. To
ensure reproducibility of the experimental results we provide detailed descriptions of the evaluation
process with the respective parameters in В§ C. An implementation, including configuration files,
will be made available at https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/localized-smoothing.

10    E THICS STATEMENT
In this paper, we propose a method to increase the robustness of machine learning models against
adversarial perturbations and to certify their robustness. We see this as an important step towards
general usage of models in practice, as many existing methods are brittle to crafted attacks. Through
the proposed method, we hope to contribute to the safe usage of machine learning. However, robust
models also have to be seen with caution. As they are harder to fool, harmful purposes like mass
surveillance are harder to avoid. We believe that it is still necessary to further research robustness
of machine learning models as the positive effects can outweigh the negatives, but it is necessary to
discuss the ethical implications of the usage in any specific application area.

11    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is funded by the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs, Regional Development and
Energy with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bayern. Further, it is supported by the German Re-
search Foundation, grant GU 1409/4-1.

R EFERENCES
T.W. Anderson. Confidence limits for the value of an arbitrary bounded random variable with a con-
  tinuous distribution function. In Bulletin of The International and Statistical Institute, volume 43,
  pp. 249вҖ“251, 1969.
Yonatan Belinkov and Yonatan Bisk. Synthetic and natural noise both break neural machine trans-
  lation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Aleksandar Bojchevski and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Deep gaussian embedding of graphs: Unsuper-
  vised inductive learning via ranking. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Aleksandar Bojchevski and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Certifiable robustness to graph perturbations. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Aleksandar Bojchevski, Johannes Klicpera, and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Efficient robustness certifi-
  cates for discrete data: Sparsity-aware randomized smoothing for graphs, images and more. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Gregory Bonaert, Dimitar I. Dimitrov, Maximilian Baader, and Martin Vechev. Fast and precise cer-
  tification of transformers. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference
  on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2021.
Carlo Bonferroni. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilita. Pubblicazioni del R
  Istituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commericiali di Firenze, 8:3вҖ“62, 1936.
G. Bradski. The OpenCV Library. Dr. DobbвҖҷs Journal of Software Tools, 2000.
Alexander Buslaev, Vladimir I. Iglovikov, Eugene Khvedchenya, Alex Parinov, Mikhail Druzhinin,
  and Alexandr A. Kalinin. Albumentations: Fast and flexible image augmentations. Information,
  11, 2020.
Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous
  convolution for semantic image segmentation, 2017.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ruoxin Chen, Zenan Li, Jie Li, Junchi Yan, and Chentao Wu. On collective robustness of bag-
  ging against data poisoning. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2022.
C. J. Clopper and E. S. Pearson. The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case of the
  binomial. Biometrika, 26:404вҖ“413, 1934.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
   smoothing. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo
 Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic
 urban scene understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Steven Diamond and Stephen Boyd. CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling language for convex
  optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2016.
A. Dvoretzky, J. Kiefer, and J. Wolfowitz. Asymptotic Minimax Character of the Sample Distribu-
  tion Function and of the Classical Multinomial Estimator. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
  27:642 вҖ“ 669, 1956.
Francisco Eiras, Motasem Alfarra, Philip Torr, M. Pawan Kumar, Puneet K. Dokania, Bernard
  Ghanem, and Adel Bibi. ANCER: Anisotropic certification via sample-wise volume maximiza-
  tion. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Mark Everingham, Luc Gool, Christopher K. Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. The
 pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 88:303вҖ“338, June 2010.
Marc Fischer, Maximilian Baader, and Martin Vechev. Certified defense to image transformations
 via randomized smoothing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Marc Fischer, Maximilian Baader, and Martin Vechev. Scalable certified segmentation via random-
 ized smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Manuel Gil, Fady Alajaji, and Tamas Linder. ReМҒnyi divergence measures for commonly used uni-
 variate continuous distributions. Information Sciences, 249:124вҖ“131, 2013.
Bharath Hariharan, Pablo ArbelaМҒez, Lubomir Bourdev, Subhransu Maji, and Jitendra Malik. Se-
  mantic contours from inverse detectors. In 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2011.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Sture Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of
  Statistics, 6(2):65вҖ“70, 1979.
George Karypis and Vipin Kumar. A fast and high quality multilevel scheme for partitioning irreg-
  ular graphs. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 20(1):359вҖ“392, 1998.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Johannes Klicpera, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Predict then propagate:
  Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Ching-Yun Ko, Zhaoyang Lyu, Lily Weng, Luca Daniel, Ngai Wong, and Dahua Lin. POPQORN:
  Quantifying robustness of recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Aounon Kumar and Tom Goldstein. Center smoothing: Provable robustness for functions with
  metric-space outputs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aounon Kumar, Alexander Levine, Soheil Feizi, and Tom Goldstein. Certifying confidence via
  randomized smoothing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Mathias LeМҒcuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman Jana. Certified
 robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security
 and Privacy, pp. 656вҖ“672, 2019.
Guang-He Lee, Yang Yuan, Shiyu Chang, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Tight certificates of adversarial
  robustness for randomly smoothed classifiers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019.
Alexander Levine and Soheil Feizi. (de)randomized smoothing for certifiable defense against patch
  attacks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Bai Li, Changyou Chen, Wenlin Wang, and Lawrence Carin. Certified adversarial robustness with
  additive noise. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Yongge Liu, Jianzhuang Yu, and Yahong Han. Understanding the effective receptive field in seman-
  tic image segmentation. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 77(17):22159вҖ“22171, 2018.
Wenjie Luo, Yujia Li, Raquel Urtasun, and Richard Zemel. Understanding the effective receptive
 field in deep convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Andrew Kachites McCallum, Kamal Nigam, Jason Rennie, and Kristie Seymore. Automating the
  construction of internet portals with machine learning. Information Retrieval, 2000.
MOSEK ApS. MOSEK Optimizer API for Python 9.2.46, 2019. URL https://docs.mosek.
 com/9.2/pythonapi/index.html.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention вҖ“
  MICCAI 2015, 2015.
Wonryong Ryou, Jiayu Chen, Mislav Balunovic, Gagandeep Singh, Andrei Dan, and Martin Vechev.
 Scalable polyhedral verification of recurrent neural networks. In Alexandra Silva and K. Rus-
 tan M. Leino (eds.), Computer Aided Verification, 2021.
Jan Schuchardt, Aleksandar Bojchevski, Johannes Klicpera, and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Collective
  robustness certificates: Exploiting interdependence in graph neural networks. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise Getoor, Brian Galligher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad.
  Collective classification in network data. AI Magazine, 29:93, 2008.
Han Shi, Jiahui Gao, Xiaozhe Ren, Hang Xu, Xiaodan Liang, Zhenguo Li, and James Tin-Yau
  Kwok. Sparsebert: Rethinking the importance analysis in self-attention. In Marina Meila and
  Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Zhouxing Shi, Huan Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, Minlie Huang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Robustness verifi-
  cation for transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfel-
  low, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2014.
Hoang-Dung Tran, Neelanjana Pal, Patrick Musau, Diego Manzanas Lopez, Nathaniel Hamilton,
  Xiaodong Yang, Stanley Bak, and Taylor T. Johnson. Robustness verification of semantic seg-
  mentation neural networks using relaxed reachability. In Computer Aided Verification, 2021.
Cihang Xie, Jianyu Wang, Zhishuai Zhang, Yuyin Zhou, Lingxi Xie, and Alan Yuille. Adversar-
  ial examples for semantic segmentation and object detection. In International Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pavel Yakubovskiy. Segmentation models pytorch.           https://github.com/qubvel/
  segmentation_models.pytorch, 2020.
Maksym Yatsura, Kaspar Sakmann, N. Grace Hua, Matthias Hein, and Jan Hendrik Metzen. Certi-
 fied defences against adversarial patch attacks on semantic segmentation. In Workshop on Trust-
 worthy and Socially Responsible Machine Learning, NeurIPS 2022, 2022.
Dinghuai Zhang, Mao Ye, Chengyue Gong, Zhanxing Zhu, and Qiang Liu. Black-box certification
  with randomized smoothing: A functional optimization based framework. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Daniel ZuМҲgner and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Adversarial attacks on graph neural networks via meta
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Daniel ZuМҲgner and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Certifiable robustness and robust training for graph con-
  volutional networks. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019.
Daniel ZuМҲgner and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Certifiable robustness of graph convolutional networks
  under structure perturbations. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
  on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A Image Segmentation on CityScapes                                                                   15

B Additional Experiments on Node Classification                                                      16
    B.1 Comparison to the NaДұМҲve Variance-constrained Isotropic Smoothing Certificate . .            16
    B.2 Node Classification using Graph Convolutional Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           16
    B.3 Node classification on Cora-ML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         17
    B.4 Lower Certifiable Robustness to Additions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
    B.5 Benefit of Linear Programming Certificates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19

C Detailed Experimental Setup                                                                        21
    C.1 Certificate Strength Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
    C.2 Semantic Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
    C.3 Node Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
    C.4 Hardware and runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         23

D Proof of Theorem 4.2                                                                               24

E Improving Efficiency                                                                               25
    E.1 Sharing Smoothing Distributions Among Outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            25
    E.2 Quantizing Certificate Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        25
    E.3 Sharing Noise Levels Among Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26
    E.4 Linear Relaxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27

F Base Certificates                                                                                  28
    F.1   Gaussian Smoothing for l2 Perturbations of Continuous Data . . . . . . . . . . . .         28
    F.2   Uniform Smoothing for l1 Perturbations of Continuous Data . . . . . . . . . . . .          29
    F.3   Variance-Constrained Certification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29

G Monte Carlo Randomized Smoothing                                                                   38
    G.1 Monte Carlo Base Certificates for Continuous Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          38
    G.2 Monte Carlo Variance-Constrained Certification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         39
    G.3 Monte Carlo Center Smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40
    G.4 Multiple Comparisons Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41

H Comparison to the Collective Certificate of Fischer et al. (2021)                                  42

I   Comparison to the Collective Certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021)                             43
    I.1   The Collective Certificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
    I.2   Proof of Subsumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     1.0                                    Localized LP                            1.0                                  Localized LP
                                                            CenterSmooth                                                                 CenterSmooth


                                                                                Avg. cert. radius
 Avg. cert. radius
                     0.8                                    SegCertify*                             0.8                                  SegCertify*

                     0.6                                                                            0.6

                     0.4                                                                            0.4

                     0.2                                                                            0.2

                     0.0                                                                            0.0
                           0.0   0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6                                   0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6
                                               mIOU                                                                         mIOU

                             (a) 153600 samples per output pixel.               (b) 153600
                                                                                      24
                                                                                           samples per output pixel for localized LP.

Figure 6: Comparison of our LP-based collective certificate for localized randomized smoothing
with a 3 Г— 5 grid to CenterSmooth and SegCertify* , using DeepLabV3 on Cityscapes. Increasing
the number of samples used for certifying each output from 6400 = 15360024   to 153600 (same as
for the baselines) closes the gap between localized randomized smoothing and SegCertify. Still,
localized smoothing only offers stronger certificates for models with mIOU вүӨ 0.21 (compared to
mIOU вүӨ 0.11 when using fewer samples).


A                      I MAGE S EGMENTATION ON C ITY S CAPES
In the following, we apply our approach to DeepLabv3 (Chen et al., 2017) models trained on the
Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) training set. We evaluate the certificates on 50 images from the
validation set. For localized smoothing, we partition the image into a grid of shape 4Г—6. To limit the
number of LP variables despite the increased resolution, we quantize the base certificate parameters
О· (n) into 2048 bins (see В§ E.2). Different from our experiments on Pascal-VOC and due to the
increased computational cost of using higher-dimensional images, the locally smoothed models are
not trained on the localized smoothing distribution with parameters (Пғmin , Пғmax ). Instead, we use
model trained with isotropic Gaussian noise with standard deviation Пғiso = Пғmin .
Fig. 6a shows that, even when allowing 153600 samples per output pixel for both localized smooth-
ing and the baselines (i.e. localized smoothing gets to sample 24 times as many images), most
choices of (Пғmin , Пғmax ) do not offer higher accuracy and robustness than SegCertify* , except those
leading to a small mIOU below 0.21. Fig. 6b shows that reducing the number of samples per output
pixel for localized smoothing to 6400 = 153600 24   further weakens the certificate. There, localized
smoothing only offers stronger certificates for models with an mIOU below 0.11.
There are three possible explanations for why localized smoothing does not outperform SegCertify* .
The first one is that we do not train on the same distribution that we use for certification, so our
models are less accurate or less consistent in their predictions, which reduces mIOU or certified
robustness. The second one is that our simplisitic choice of localized smoothing based on grid cell
distance (see В§ C.2) does not match the actual locality structure of DeepLabv3. The last one is
that DeepLabv3, which uses dilated convolutions to increase the receptive field size in each layer,
is just inherently less local than the U-Net architecture used in our experiments on Pascal-VOC.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that we can always parameterize localized smoothing to obtain the
same results as SegCertify* (see Appendix H).


                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B                     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON N ODE C LASSIFICATION

In the following, we perform additional experiments on graph neural networks for node classifica-
tion, including a different model and an additional dataset. Unless otherwise stated, all details of the
experimental setup are identical to В§ 7.2. In particular, we use sparsity-aware smoothing distribution
S (x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ ), where probability of deleting bits ОёвҲ’ is either constant across the entire graph (for
the isotropic randomized smoothing baseline) or adjusted per output and cluster based on cluster
affinity (for localized randomized smoothing).


                     20                                                                        20
                                Localized LP                                                              Localized LP
                                SparseSmooth                                                              Variance Cert.
 Avg. cert. radius


                                                                           Avg. cert. radius
                     15                                                                        15


                     10                                                                        10


                      5                                                                         5


                      0                                                                         0
                          0.4     0.5          0.6        0.7   0.8                                 0.4     0.5            0.6        0.7   0.8
                                               Accuracy                                                                    Accuracy

(a) Using (Bojchevski et al., 2020) for the naДұМҲve (b) Using variance-constrained certification for the
isotropic smoothing baseline.                      naДұМҲve isotropic smoothing baseline.

Figure 7: Analysis of our LP-based collective certificate using APPNP on Citeseer. We use the
sparsity-aware smoothing with S (x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ ) to certify robustness to deletions. In Fig. 7a we use
the certificate of Bojchevski et al. (2020) for baseline (identical to Fig. 5a). In Fig. 7b we use
variance-constrained certification (see Theorem 5.1) as baseline. In both cases, there are locally
smoothed models with a higher accuracy than any of the isotropically smoothed models and signifi-
cantly larger average certifiable radii.
B.1                       C OMPARISON TO THE NA IМҲVE VARIANCE - CONSTRAINED I SOTROPIC S MOOTHING
                          C ERTIFICATE

In Fig. 5 of В§ 7.2, we observed that locally smoothed models surprisingly did not only achieve up
to three times higher average certifiable radii, but simultaneously had higher accuracy than any of
the isotropically smoothed models. One potential explanation is that we used variance-constrained
certification (see Theorem 5.1) (i.e. smoothing the modelsвҖҷ softmax scores instead of their predicted
labels) for localized smoothing, but not for the isotropic smoothing baseline. This might result in
two substantially different models. To investigate this, we repeat the experiment from Fig. 5a, using
variance-constrained certification for both localized smoothing and the isotropic smoothing baseline.
Fig. 7 shows that, no matter which smoothing paradigm we use for our isotropic smoothing baseline,
there is a c.a. 7 p.p. difference in accuracy between the most accurate isotropically smoothed model
and the most accurate locally smoothed model.
Interestingly, even variance-constrained smoothing with isotropic noise (green crosses in Fig. 7b) is
sufficient for outperforming the isotropic smoothing certificate of Bojchevski et al. (2020) (orange
stars in Fig. 7a). This showcases that variance-constrained certification does not only present a very
efficient, but also a very effective way of certifying robustness on discrete data (even when entirely
ignoring the collective robustness aspect).

B.2                       N ODE C LASSIFICATION USING G RAPH C ONVOLUTIONAL N ETWORKS

So far, we have only used APPNP models as our base classifier. Now, we repeat our experiments
using 6-layer Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2017). In each layer, GCNs
first apply a linear layer to each nodeвҖҷs latent vector and then average over each nodeвҖҷs 1-hop neigh-
borhood. Thus, a 6-layer GCN classifies each node using attributes from all nodes in its 6-hop
neighborhood, which covers most or all of the Citeseer graph. Aside from using GCN instead of
APPNP as the base model, we leave the experimental setup from В§ 7.2 unchanged. Note that GCNs


                                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     15         Localized LP                                                            5          Localized LP
 Avg. cert. radius              SparseSmooth                                                                       SparseSmooth


                                                                                    Avg. cert. radius
                                                                                                        4
                     10
                                                                                                        3

                                                                                                        2
                      5
                                                                                                        1

                      0                                                                                 0
                       0.40   0.45   0.50   0.55   0.60   0.65   0.70   0.75                             0.40   0.45   0.50   0.55   0.60   0.65   0.70   0.75   0.80
                                               Accuracy                                                                           Accuracy

    (a) Robustness to deletions, using S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ .                                (b) Robustness to additions, using S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ .



Figure 8: Comparison of our LP-based collective certificate for localized randomized smooth-
ing to SparseSmooth, using a 6-layer GCN on Citeseer. We consider both adversarial deletions
(Fig. 8a) and additions (Fig. 8b). Some locally smoothed models have a higher accuracy than any
of the isotropically smoothed models. However, our certificate only dominates the best isotropi-
cally smoothed models when considering robustness to deletions, not when considering robustness
to additions. This can either be attributed to a lower locality in deep GCNs or variance-constrained
certification yielding weak base certificates for addition when Оё+ is small.

are typically used with fewer layers. However, these shallow models are strictly local and it has
already been established that the certificate Schuchardt et al. (2021) вҖ“ which is subsumed by our
certificate (see В§ I.2) вҖ“ can provide very strong robustness guarantees for them. We therefore in-
crease the number of layers to obtain a model that is not strictly local.
Fig. 8 shows the results for both robustness to deletions and robustness to additions. Similar to
APPNP, some locally smoothed models have an up to 4 p.p. higher accuracy than the most accurate
isotropically smoothed model. When considering robustness to deletions, the locally smoothed mod-
els Pareto-dominate all of the isotropically smoothed models, i.e. offer better accuracy-robustness
tradeoffs. Some can guarantee average certifiable radii that are at least 50% larger than those of the
baseline. When considering robustness to additions however, some of the isotropically smoothed
models have a higher certifiably robustness.
We see two potential causes for our methodвҖҷs lower certifiable robustness to additions: The first po-
tential cause is that the GCN may be less local than APPNP or that it has a different form of locality
that does not match our clustering-based localized smoothing distributions. This appears plausi-
ble, as GCN averages uniformly over each neighborhood, whereas APPNP aggregates predictions
based on pagerank scores. APPNP may thus primarily attend to specific, densely connected nodes,
making it more local than GCN. The second potential cause is that the variance-constrained certifi-
cate we use as our base certificate may be less effective when certifying robustness to adversarial
additions by using a very small addition probablity like Оё+ = 0.01. Afterall, we have also seen
in our experiments with APPNP in В§ 7.2 that the gap in average certifiable radii between localized
and isotropic smoothing was significantly smaller when considering additions. We investigate this
second potential cause in more detail in В§ B.4.


B.3                       N ODE CLASSIFICATION ON C ORA -ML

Next, we repeat our experiments with APPNP on the Cora-ML (McCallum et al., 2000; Bojchevski
& GuМҲnnemann, 2018) node classification dataset, keeping all other parameters fixed. The results are
shown in Fig. 9. Unlike on Citeseer, the locally smoothed models have a slightly reduced accuracy
compared to the isotropically smoothed models. This can either be attributed to one smoothing ap-
proach having a more desirable regularizing effect on the neural network, or the fact that we smooth
softmax scores instead of predicted labels when constructing the locally smoothed models. Never-
theless, when considering adversarial deletions, localized smoothing makes it possible to achieve
average certifiable radii that are at least 50% larger than any of the isotropically smoothed modelsвҖҷ
вҖ“ at the cost of slightly reduced accuracy 8.6%. Or, for another point of the pareto front, we in-


                                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     20
                                                                                                                         5            Localized LP
 Avg. cert. radius                                                                                                                    SparseSmooth


                                                                                                     Avg. cert. radius
                     15                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                         3
                     10
                                                                                                                         2
                         5                Localized LP                                                                   1
                                          SparseSmooth
                         0                                                                                               0
                             0.4          0.5      0.6       0.7          0.8      0.9                                       0.0          0.2           0.4        0.6          0.8
                                                          Accuracy                                                                                      Accuracy

    (a) Robustness to deletions, using S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ .                                                 (b) Robustness to additions, using S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ .



Figure 9: Comparison of our LP-based collective certificate for localized randomized smoothing
to the SparseSmooth (Bojchevski et al., 2020), using APPNP on Cora-ML. We consider both ad-
versarial deletions (Fig. 9a) and additions (Fig. 9b). Some locally smoothed models that have a
higher accuracy than any of the isotropically smoothed models. However, our method is only able
to dominate all isotropically smoothed models when considering robustness to deletions, not when
considering robustness to additions. This can either be attributed to a lower locality in deep GCNs
or variance-constrained certification yielding weak base certificates for addition when Оё+ is small.
crease the certificate by 20% while reducing the accuracy by 2.8 percentage points. As before, the
certificates for attribute additions are significantly weaker.

B.4                          L OWER C ERTIFIABLE ROBUSTNESS TO A DDITIONS



                     5                Localized LP                                                                       5            Localized LP
                                      SparseSmooth                                                                                    Variance Cert.
 Avg. cert. radius


                                                                                                     Avg. cert. radius


                     4                                                                                                   4

                     3                                                                                                   3

                     2                                                                                                   2

                     1                                                                                                   1

                     0                                                                                                   0
                      0.40         0.45     0.50   0.55    0.60    0.65    0.70   0.75   0.80                             0.40     0.45   0.50   0.55     0.60   0.65    0.70   0.75   0.80
                                                         Accuracy                                                                                      Accuracy

(a) Using (Bojchevski et al., 2020) for the naДұМҲve (b) Using variance-constrained certification for the
isotropic smoothing certificate.                   naДұМҲve isotropic smoothing certificate.

Figure 10: Comparison of our LP-based collective certificate for localized randomized smoothing
to SparseSmooth and to a naДұМҲve combination of its base certificates, using GCN and adversarial
additions on Citeseer. Fig. 10a shows that the LP-based certificate is outperformed by naДұМҲve isotropic
smoothing. Fig. 10b shows that this is largely due to the variance-constrained base certificates
(green crosses) for adversarial additions being much weaker than the isotropic smoothing certificate
of (Bojchevski et al., 2020) in Fig. 10a.
While our certificates for adversarial deletions have compared favorably to the isotropic smoothing
baseline in all previous experiments, our certificates for adversarial additions were comparatively
weaker on Cora-ML and when using GCNs as base models. In the following, we investigate to what
extend this can be attributed to our use of variance-constrained certification for our base certificates.
Fig. 10a shows both our linear programming collective certificate and the naДұМҲve isotropic smooth-
ing certificate based on (Bojchevski et al., 2020) for GCNs on Citeseer under adversarial additions.
In Fig. 10b, we plot not only the LP-based certificates, but also our variance-constrained base cer-
tificates (drawn as green crosses). Comparing both figures shows that our base certificateвҖҷs average
certifiable radii are at least 50% smaller than the largest ACR achieved by (Bojchevski et al., 2020)


                                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in Fig. 10a. While our linear program significantly improves upon them, it is not sufficient to over-
come this significant gap. This result is in stark contrast to our results for attribute deletions В§ B.1,
where the variance-constrained base certificates alone were enough to significantly outperform the
certificate of (Bojchevski et al., 2020).
Now that we have established that the variance-constrained base certificates appear significantly
weaker for additions, we can analyze why. For this, recall that our base certificates are parameterized
by a weight vector w (see Definition 4.1), with smaller values corresponding to higher robustness
вҖ“ or two weight vectors w+ , wвҲ’ quantifying robustness to adversarial additions and deletions,
respectively (see В§ F.3.2). Using our results from В§ F.3.2, we can draw the weights w+ resulting
from smoothing distribution S (x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’ ) as a function of ОёвҲ’ . Fig. 11a shows that ОёвҲ’ has to be
brought very close to 1 in order to guarantee high robustness to deletions, effectively deleting almost
all attributes in the graph. Alternatively, one can also increase the addition probability Оё+ to perhaps
10% or 20%. But this would utterly destroy the sparsity of the graphвҖҷs attribute matrix. We can
conclude that, while variance-constrained certification can in principle provide strong certificates
for attribute deletions, it might be a worse choice than the method of Bojchevski et al. (2020) for
very sparse datasets that force the use of very low addition probabilities Оё+ .


                                                               6
      4

      3                                                        4
 w+


                                                          w+


      2
                                                               2
      1

      0                                                        0
          0.0   0.2    0.4        0.6   0.8    1.0                 0.0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0
                             ОёвҲ’                                                      Оё+

(a) Certificate weight w+ for S x, 0.01, ОёвҲ’       for (b) Certificate weight w+ for S x, Оё+ , 0.6 for vary-


varying ОёвҲ’ .                                          ing Оё+ .

Figure 11: Base certificate weight w+ of the variance-constrained sparsity-aware smoothing certifi-
cate for varying distribution parameters. Certifying high robustness to adversarial additions (i.e. ob-
taining small weights) requires either setting a high probability for random additions or an even
higher probability for random deletions.
B.5       B ENEFIT OF L INEAR P ROGRAMMING C ERTIFICATES

As we did for our experiments on image segmentation (see Fig. 3), we can inspect the certified
accuracy curves of specific smoothed models in more detail to gain a better understanding of how
the collective linear programming certificate enables larger average certifiable radii. We use the
same experimental setup as in В§ 7.2, i.e. APPNP on Citeseer, and certify robustness to deletions.
                                                                            вҲ’
We compare the certifiably most robust isotropically smoothed model (Оёiso      = 0.8, ACR = 5.67 to
                                  вҲ’              +
the locally smoothed model with Оёmin = 0.75, Оёmax = 0.95. For the locally smoothed models, we
compute both LP-based collective certificate, as well as the naДұМҲve collective certificate.
Fig. 12 shows that even naДұМҲvely combining the localized smoothing base certificates obtained
via variance-constrained certification (dashed blue line) is sufficient for outperforming the naДұМҲve
isotropic smoothing certificate. This speaks to its effectiveness as a certificate against adversarial
deletions. Combining the base certificates via linear programming (solid blue line) significantly
enlarges this gap, leading to even larger maximum and average certifiable radii.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                1.0


                           Certified accuracy
                                                                           Localized LP
                                                0.8
                                                                           Localized NaДұМҲve
                                                0.6                        SparseSmooth

                                                0.4

                                                0.2

                                                0.0
                                                      0      10     20      30      40        50
                                                          Number of adversarial deletions

Figure 12: Certified accuracy of APPNP on Citeseer. We compare the naДұМҲve isotropic smoothing
                                                 вҲ’                                      вҲ’
certificate of the most robust baseline model (Оёiso  = 0.8) to localized smoothing (Оёmin     = 0.75).
Even naДұМҲvely combining the variance-constrained base certificates (dashed blue line) is sufficient for
outperforming the SparseSmooth certificate for 15 deletions or less. Combining the base certificates
via our LP (solid blue line) further extends the certifiable radius and significantly increases the
certified accuracy for perturbations with 5 or more deletions.


                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In the following, we first explain the metrics we use for measuring the strength of certificates, and
how they can be applied to the different types of randomized smoothing certificates used in our
experiments. We then discuss the specific parameters and hyperparameters for our semantic seg-
mentation and node classification experiments. We conclude by specifying the used hardware and
comparing the computational cost of Monte Carlo sampling to that of solving the collective linear
program.

C.1     C ERTIFICATE S TRENGTH M ETRICS

We use two metrics for measuring certificate strength: For specific adversarial budgets Пө, we com-
pute the certified accuracy Оҫ(Пө) (i.e. the percentage of correct and certifiably robust predictions). As
an aggregate metric, we compute the average certifiable radius, i.e. the lower Riemann integral of
Оҫ(Пө) evaluated at Пө1 , . . . , ПөN with Пө1 = 0 and Оҫ(ПөN ) = 0. For our experiments on image segmen-
tation, we use 81 equidistant points in [0, 4]. For our experiments on node classification, where we
certify robustness to a discrete number of perturbations, we use Пөn = n, i.e. natural numbers. In all
experiments, we perform Monte Carlo randomized smoothing (see В§ G). Therefore, we may have
to abstain from making predictions. Abstentions are counted as non-robust and incorrect. In the
case of center smoothing, either all or no predictions abstain (this is inherent to the method. In our
experiments, center smoothing never abstained).

C.1.1    C OMPUTING C ERTIFIED ACCURACY
The three different types of collective certificate considered in our experiments each require
a different procedure for computing the certified accuracy. In the following, let Z =
{d вҲҲ {1, . . . , Dout } | fn (x) = yМӮn } be the indices of correct predictions, given an input x.
NaДұМҲve collective certificate. The naДұМҲve collective certificate certifies each prediction independently.
Let H(n) be the set of perturbed inputs yn is certifiably
                                                              robust to (see Definition 3.1). Let Bx be
the collective perturbation model. Then L = d вҲҲ {1, . . . , Dout } | Bx вҠҶ H(n) is the set of all
certifiably robust predictions. The certified accuracy can be computed as |LвҲ©Z| Dout .

Center smoothing Center smoothing used for collective robustness certification does not determine
which predictions are robust, but only the number of robust predictions. We therefore have to make
the worst-case assumption that the correct predictions are the first to be changed by the adversary.
Let l be the number of certifiably robust predictions. The certified accuracy can then be computed
                out вҲ’l))
as max(0,|Z|вҲ’(D
           Dout          .
Collective certificate. Let l(T) be the optimal value of our collective certificate for the set of
targeted nodes T. Then the certified accuracy can be computed via Dl(T)
                                                                     out
                                                                         with T = Z.

C.2     S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION

Here, we provide all parameters of our experiments on image segmentation.
Models. As base models for the semantic segmentation tasks, we use U-Net (Ronneberger
et al., 2015) and DeepLabv3 (Chen et al., 2017) segmentation heads with a ResNet-18 (He et al.,
2016) backbone, as implemented by the Pytorch Segmentation Models library (version 0.13)
(Yakubovskiy, 2020). We use the libraryвҖҷs default parameters. In particular, the inputs to the U-
Net segmentation head are the features of the ResNet model after the first convolutional layer and
after each ResNet block (i.e. after every fourth of the subsequent layers). The U-Net segmentation
head uses (starting with the original resolution) 16, 32, 64, 128 and 256 convolutional filters for
processing the features at the different scales. For the DeepLabv3 segmentation head, we use all de-
fault parameters from Chen et al. (2017) and an output stride of 16. To avoid dimension mismatches
in the segmentation head, all input images are zero-padded to a height and width that is the next
multiple of 32.
Data and preprocessing. We evaluate our certificates on the Pascal-VOC 2012 and Cityscapes seg-
mentation validation set. We do not use the test set, because evaluating metrics like the certified


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


accuracy requires access to the ground-truth labels. For training the U-Net models on Pascal, we
use the 10582 Pascal segmentation masks extracted from the SBD dataset (Hariharan et al., 2011)
(referred to as вҖқPascal trainaugвҖқ or вҖқPascal augmented training setвҖқ in other papers). SBD uses a
different data split than the official Pascal-VOC 2012 segmentation dataset. We avoid data leakage
by removing all training images that appear in the validation set. For training the DeepLabv3 model
on Cityscapes, we use the default training set. We downscale both the training and the validation
images and ground-truth masks to 50% of their original height and width, so that we can use larger
batch sizes and thus use our compute time to more thoroughly evaluate a larger range of different
smoothing distributions. The segmentation masks are downscaled using nearest-neighbor interpo-
lation, the images are downscaled using the INTER AREA operation implemented in OpenCV
(Bradski, 2000).
Training and data augmentation. We initialize our model weights using the weights provided by
the Pytorch Segmentation Models library, which were obtained by pre-training on ImageNet. We
train our models for 512 epochs, using Dice loss and Adam(lr = 0.001, ОІ1 = 0.9, ОІ2 = 0.999, Пө =
10вҲ’8 , weight decay = 0). We use a batch size of 128 for Pascal-VOC and a batch size of 32
for Cityscapes. Every 8 epochs, we compute the mean IOU on the validation set. After training,
we use the model that achieved the highest validation mean IOU. We apply the following train-
time augmentations: With 50% probability, each image is randomly scaled by a factor from [1, 2.0]
using the ShiftScaleRotate augmentation implemented by the Albumentations library (version 0.5.2)
(Buslaev et al., 2020). The images are than cropped to a fixed size of 160 Г— 256 (for Pascal-
VOC) or 384 Г— 384 (for Cityscapes). Where necessary, the images are padded with zeros. Padded
parts of the segmentation mask are ignored by the loss function. After these operations, each input
is randomly perturbed using Gaussian noise. For isotropic smoothing, we use a fixed standard
deviation Пғiso вҲҲ {0, 0.01, . . . , 0.5}, i.e. we train 51 different models on different isotropic smoothing
distributions. For localized smoothing with grid shape H Г— W and parameters (Пғmin , Пғmax ) we
perform localized smoothing with a single sample per image. Since this generates H В· W as many
                                                                           1
perturbed images, we perform gradient accumulation, processing HВ·W             of each batch at a time. All
samples are clipped to [0, 1] to retain valid RGB-values.
Certification. For Pascal-VOC, we evaluate all certificates on the first 100 images from the val-
idation set that вҖ“ after downscaling вҖ“ have a resolution of 166 Г— 250. For Cityscapes, we use
every tenth image from the validation set. For all certificates, we use Monte Carlo randomized
smoothing (see discussion in В§ G). We use the significance parameter Оұ to 0.01, i.e. all certifi-
cates hold with probability 0.99. For the center smoothing baseline, we use the default parameters
suggested by the authors (вҲҶ = 0.05, ОІ = 2, Оұ1 = Оұ2 ). For the naДұМҲve isotropic randomized
smoothing baseline and for localized smoothing, we use Holm correction to account for the multiple
comparisons problem, which yields strictly better results than Bonferroni correction (see В§ G.4).
For our localized smoothing distribution, we partition the input image into a regular grid of size
H Г— W (specified in the different paragraphs of В§ 7.1) and define minimum standard deviation Пғmin
and maximum standard deviation Пғmax . Let J(k,l) be the set of all pixel coordinates in grid cell
(k, l). To smooth outputs in grid cell (i, j), we use a smoothing distribution N (0, diag(Пғ)) with
вҲҖk вҲҲ {1, . . . , H}, l вҲҲ {1, . . . , W }, d вҲҲ J(k,l) ,

                                                          max (|i вҲ’ k|, |l вҲ’ j|)
                        Пғd = Пғmin + (Пғmax вҲ’ Пғmin ) В·                             ,                     (7)
                                                                   W
i.e. we linearly interpolate between Пғmin and Пғmax based on the lвҲһ distance of grid cells (i, j) and
(k, l). All results are reported for the relaxed linear programming formulation of our collective cer-
tificate (see В§ E.4). The collective linear program is solved using MOSEK (version 9.2.46) (MOSEK
ApS, 2019) through the CVXPY interface (version 1.1.13)

C.3   N ODE C LASSIFICATION

Here, we provide all parameters of our experiments on node classification.
Model We test two different models: 2-layer APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019) and 6-layer GCN (Kipf
& Welling, 2017). For both models we use a hidden size of 64 and dropout with a probability of 0.5.
For the propagation step of APPNP we use 10 for the number of iterations and 0.15 as the teleport
probability.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Data and preprocessing. We evaluate our approach on the Cora-ML and Citeseer node classifi-
cation datasets. We perform standard preprocessing, i.e., remove self-loops, make the graph undi-
rected and select the largest connected component. We use the same data split as in (Schuchardt
et al., 2021), i.e. 20 nodes per class for the train and validation set.
Training and data augmentation All models are trained with a learning rate of 0.001 and weight
decay of 0.001. The models we use for sparse smoothing are trained with the noise distribution that
is also reported for certification. The localized smoothing models are trained on the their minimal
                                                           +        вҲ’
noise level, i.e., not with localized noise but with only Оёmin and Оёmin .
Certification We evaluate our certificates on the validation nodes. For all certificates, we use Monte
Carlo randomized smoothing (see discussion in В§ G). We use 1000 samples for making smoothed
predictions and 5 В· 105 samples for certification. We use the significance parameter Оұ to 0.01, i.e. all
certificates hold with probability 0.99. For the naДұМҲve isotropic randomized smoothing baseline, we
use Holm correction to account for the multiple comparisons problem, which yields strictly better
results than Bonferroni correction (see В§ G.4). For our localized smoothing certificates, we use
Bonferroni correction. To parameterize the localized smoothing distribution, we first perform Metis
clustering (Karypis & Kumar, 1998) to partition the graph into 5 clusters. We create an affinity
ranking by counting the number of edges which are connecting cluster i and j. Specifically, let C
be the set of clusters given by the Metis clustering. Then we count the number of edges between all
cluster pairs and denote it by Ni,j , i, j вҲҲ C. If the number of edges of the pair (i, j) is higher than
the number for all other pairs (k, j) вҲҖj вҲҲ C, i.e. Ni,j > Nk,j вҲҖk вҲҲ C, we can say that, due to the
homophily assumption, cluster i is the most important one for cluster j. We create this ranking for
all pairs and use it to select the noise parameter ОёвҖІвҲ’ for smoothing the attributes of cluster j while
classifying a node of cluster i out of the discrete steps of the linear interpolation between Оёmin and
Оёmax based on its previously defined ranking between the clusters. An example would be, given
11 clusters, Оёmin = 0.0, and Оёmax = 1.0. If cluster j second most important cluster to i, then we
would take the second value out of {0.0, 0.1, . . . , 1.0}. All results are reported for the relaxed linear
programming formulation of our collective certificate (see В§ E.4). For each cluster, we use 51 of the
samples, which corresponds to 200 samples for prediction and 105 samples for certification. The
collective linear program is solved using MOSEK (version 9.2.46) (MOSEK ApS, 2019) through
the CVXPY interface (version 1.1.13) (Diamond & Boyd, 2016).

C.4   H ARDWARE AND RUNTIME

The experiments on Pascal-VOC with strictly local models (Fig. 2) were performed using a Xeon
E5-2630 v4 CPU @ 2.20GHz, an NVIDA GTX 1080TI GPU and 128 GB of RAM. All other exper-
iments were performed using an AMD EPYC 7543 CPU @ 2.80GHz, an NVIDA A100 GPU and
128 GB of RAM.
In all cases, the time needed for obtaining the Monte Carlo samples required by both localized and
isotropic smoothing was much larger than the cost of solving the collective linear program.

       вҖў For the strictly local model in Fig. 2, taking 153600 samples took 294 s on average. Aver-
         aged over all images and adversarial budgets, solving each LP only took 0.91 s.
       вҖў For the standard U-Net model in Fig. 4, taking 153600 samples took 70.3 s on average.
         Each LP took 1.8 s on average.
       вҖў For the DeepLabv3 model in Fig. 6b, taking 153600 samples took 1204 s on average. Each
         LP took 2.78 s on average.
       вҖў For the APPNP model in Fig. 5, taking 5 В· 106 samples took 1034 s on average. Each LP
         took 10.9 s on average.

For graphs, the reported time for solving a single instance of the collective linear program is much
higher than for image segmentation, even though the graph datasets require fewer variables. That is
because we used a different, not as well vectorized formulation of the linear program in CVXPY.
In all cases, the time for calculating the isotropic smoothing certificates and base certificates from
the Monte Carlo samples was too small to be measured accurately, since they can be implemented
in a few simple vector operations.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2
In the following, we prove Theorem 4.2, i.e. we derive the mixed-integer linear program that under-
lies our collective certificate and prove that it provides a valid bound on the number of simultane-
ously robust predictions. The derivation bears some semblance to that of (Schuchardt et al., 2021),
in that both use standard techniques to model indicator functions using binary variables and that both
convert optimization in input space to optimization in adversarial budget space. Nevertheless, both
methods differ in how they encode and evaluate base certificates, ultimately leading to significantly
different results (our method encodes each base certificate using only a single linear constraint and
does not perform any masking operations).
Theorem 4.2. Given locally smoothed model f , input x вҲҲ X(Din ) , smoothed prediction y = f (x)
                                  , HDout complying with interface Eq. 2, the number of simultaneously
and base certificates H(1) , . . .X
robust predictions minxвҖІ вҲҲBx         I [fn (xвҖІ ) = yn ] is lower-bounded by
                                  nвҲҲT
                                                              X
                                             min                   tn                                                    (8)
                                        D
                                  bвҲҲR+ in ,tвҲҲ{0,1}Dout nвҲҲT

                           s.t.   вҲҖn : bT w(n) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ tn )О· (n) , sum{b} вүӨ Пөp .                                          (9)

Proof. We begin by inserting the definition of our perturbation model Bx and the base certificates
H(n) into Eq. 1.1:

        X                                   X h          i
min
вҖІ
              I [fn (xвҖІ ) = yn ] вүҘ min
                                   вҖІ
                                             I xвҖІ вҲҲ H(n)                                                               (10)
x вҲҲBx                             x вҲҲBx
        nвҲҲT                                 nвҲҲT
                                                       "D                                 #          Din
                                                         in
                                                               (n)
                                             X          X                                            X
                              = min                I          wd В· |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd |p < О· (n)       s.t.         |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd |p вүӨ Пөp .
                                  xвҖІ вҲҲXDin
                                             nвҲҲT        d=1                                          d=1
                                                                                                                       (11)

Evidently, input xвҖІ only affects the elementwise distances |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd |p . Rather than optimizing xвҖІ ,
we can directly optimize these distances, i.e. determine how much adversarial budget is allocated
to each input dimension. For this, we define a vector of variables b вҲҲ RD  + (or b вҲҲ {0, 1}
                                                                            in               Din
                                                                                                 for
binary data). Replacing sums with inner products, we can restate Eq. 11 as
                              X h                    i
                        min        I bT w(n) < О· (n)    s.t. sum{b} вүӨ Пөp .                      (12)
                              D
                          bвҲҲR+ in nвҲҲT

In a final step, we replace the indicator functions in Eq. 12 with a vector of boolean variables t вҲҲ
{0, 1}Dout .
                                                  X
                                      min             tn                                        (13)
                                        D
                                  bвҲҲR+ in ,tвҲҲ{0,1}Dout nвҲҲT

                           s.t. вҲҖn : bT w(n) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ tn )О· (n) , sum{b} вүӨ Пөp .                 (14)
                                                             T (n)
The first constraint in Eq. 5 ensures that tn = 0 вҮҗвҮ’ I b w вүҘ О· (n) . Therefore, the optimiza-
tion problem
           Xin Eq. 13 and Eq. 5 is equivalent to Eq. 12, which by transitivity is a lower bound on
minxвҖІ вҲҲBx      I [fn (xвҖІ ) = yn ].
              nвҲҲT


                                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     I MPROVING E FFICIENCY

In this section, we discuss different modifications to our collective certificate that improve its sam-
ple efficiency and allow us fine-grained control over the size of the collective linear program. We
further discuss a linear relaxation of our collective linear program. All of the modifications preserve
the soundness of our collective certificate, i.e. we still obtain a provable bound on the number of
predictions that can be simultaneously attacked by an adversary. To avoid constant case distinc-
tions, we first present all results for real-valued data, i.e. X = R, before mentioning any additional
precautions that may be needed when working with binary data.

E.1   S HARING S MOOTHING D ISTRIBUTIONS A MONG O UTPUTS
                                                                                      (n)
In principle, our proposed certificate allows a different smoothing distribution ОЁx to be used per
output gn of our base model. In practice, where we have to estimate properties of the smoothed
classifier using Monte Carlo methods, this is problematic: Samples cannot be re-used, each of the
many outputs requires its own round of sampling. We can increase the efficiency of our localized
smoothing approach by partitioning our Dout outputs into Nout subsets that share the same smooth-
ing distributions. When making smoothed predictions or computing base certificates, we can then
reuse the same samples for all outputs within each subsets.
More formally, we partition our Dout output dimensions into sets K(1) , . . . , K(Nout) with

                                     Лҷ Nout
                                     [
                                              K(i) = {1, . . . , Dout }.                             (15)
                                        i=1

                                                                       (i)
We then associate each set K(i) with a smoothing distribution ОЁx . For each base model output gn
                                                      (i)
with n вҲҲ K(i) , we then use smoothing distribution ОЁx to construct the smoothed output fn , e.g.
fn (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY PrzвҲјОЁ(i) [f (x + z) = y] (note that for our variance-constrained certificate
                             x
we smooth the softmax scores instead, see В§ 5).

E.2   Q UANTIZING C ERTIFICATE PARAMETERS

Recall that our base certificates from В§ 5 are defined by a linear inequality: A prediction yn = fn (x)
                                               PD       (n)            p
is robust to a perturbed input xвҖІ вҲҲ XDin if d=1 wd В· |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd | < О· (n) , for some p вүҘ 0. The
weight vectors w(n) вҲҲ RDin only depend on the smoothing distributions. A side of effect of sharing
                         (i)
the same distribution ОЁx among all outputs from a set K(i) , as discussed in the previous section,
is that the outputs also share the same weight vector w(i) вҲҲ RDin with вҲҖn вҲҲ K(i) : w(i) =
w(n) . Thus, for all smoothed outputs fn with n вҲҲ K(i) , the smoothed prediction yn is robust if
PD       (i)    вҖІ      p      (n)
   d=1 wd В· |xd вҲ’ xd | < О·        .
Evidently, the base certificates for outputs from a set K(i) only differ in their parameter О· (n) . Recall
that in our collective linear program we use a vector of variables t вҲҲ {0, 1}Dout to indicate which
predictions are robust according to their base certificates (see Theorem 4.2). If there are two outputs
fn and fm with О· (n) = О· (m) , then fn and fm have the same base certificate and their robustness can
be modelled by the same indicator variable. Conversely, for each set of outputs K(i) , we only need
one indicator variable per unique О· (n) . By quantizing the О· (n) within each subset K(i) (for example
by defining equally sized bins between minnвҲҲK(i) О· (n) and maxnвҲҲK(i) О· (n) ), we can ensure that
there is always a fixed number Nbins of indicator variables per subset. This way, we can reduce the
number of indicator variables from Dout to Nout В· Nbins .
                                                               Nout Г—Nbins
To implement
            this
             (n)
                              a matrix of thresholds E вҲҲ R
                 idea, we define
                        (i)
                                                                               with вҲҖi : min {Ei,: } вүӨ
minnвҲҲK(i) О· | n вҲҲ K          . We then define a function Оҫ : {1, . . . , Nout } Г— R вҶ’ R with

                       Оҫ(i, О·) = max ({Ei,j | j вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nbins вҲ§ Ei,j < О·})                     (16)

that quantizes base certificate parameter О· from output subset K(i) by mapping it to the next smallest
threshold in Ei,: . We can then bound the collective robustness of the targeted dimensions T of our


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


prediction vector y = f (x) as follows:
                     X              X                          n                               o
             min                                      Ti,j      n вҲҲ T вҲ© K(i) Оҫ i, О· (n) = Ei,j               (17)
                  iвҲҲ{1,...,Nout } jвҲҲ{1,...,Nbins }

                                    s.t.    вҲҖi, j : bT w(i) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Ti,j )Ei,j ,          sum{b} вүӨ Пөp         (18)
                                                                   b вҲҲ RD
                                                                        + ,
                                                                         in                Nout Г—Nbins
                                                                                  T вҲҲ {0, 1}             .   (19)

Constraint Eq. 18 ensures that Ti,j is only set to 0 if bT w(i) вүҘ Ei,j , i.e. all predictions from subset
K(i) whose base certificate parameter О· (n) is quantized to Ei,j are no longer robust. When this is
the case, the objective function decreases by the number of these predictions. For Nout = Dout ,
Nbins = 1 and En,1 = О· (n) , we recover our general certificate from Theorem 4.2. Note that, if the
quantization maps any parameter О· (n) to a smaller number, the base certificate H(n) becomes more
restrictive, i.e. yn is considered robust to a smaller set of perturbed inputs. Thus, Eq. 17 is a lower
bound on our general certificate from Theorem 4.2.

E.3   S HARING N OISE L EVELS A MONG I NPUTS

Similar to how partitioning the output dimensions allows us to control the number of output variables
t, partitioning the input dimensions and using the same noise level within each partition allows us
to control the number of budget variables b.
Assume that we have partitioned our output dimensions into Nout subsets K(1) , . . . , K(Nout ) , with
                                                                (i)
outputs in each subset sharing the same smoothing distribution ОЁx , as explained in В§ E.1. Let us
                               (1)        (Nin )
now define Nin input subsets J , . . . , J       with

                                           Лҷ Nin (l)
                                           [
                                                J = {1, . . . , Dout }.                                      (20)
                                               l=1

Recall that a prediction yn = fn (x) with n вҲҲ K(i) is robust to a perturbed input xвҖІ вҲҲ XDin
  PD          (i)            p
if d=1 wd В· |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd | < О· (n) and that the weight vectors w(i) only depend on the smooth-
                                                                                 (i)
ing distributions. Assume that we choose each smoothing distribution ОЁx such that вҲҖl вҲҲ
                                    (i)  (i)
{1, . . . , Nin }, вҲҖd, dвҖІ вҲҲ J(l) : wd = wdвҖІ , i.e. all input dimensions within each set J(l) have the
                                                      (i)
same weight. This can be achieved by choosing ОЁx so that all dimensions in each input subset Jl
                                                                                                   (i)
are smoothed with the noise level (note that we can still use a different smoothing distribution ОЁx
for each set of outputs K(i) ). For example, one could use a Gaussian distribution with covariance
                          2
matrix ОЈ = diag (Пғ) with вҲҖl вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nin }, вҲҖd, dвҖІ вҲҲ J(l) : Пғd = ПғdвҖІ .
In this case, the evaluation of our base certificates can be simplified. Prediction yn = fn (x) with
n вҲҲ K(n) is robust to a perturbed input xвҖІ вҲҲ XDin if
                                                     Din
                                                             (i)              p
                                                     X
                                                           wd В· |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd | < О· (n)                          (21)
                                                     d=1
                                           пЈ«                                 пЈ¶
                                    Nin
                                                                         p
                                    X                 X
                                =          пЈӯu(i) В·             |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd | пЈё < О· (n) ,                       (22)
                                    l=1               dвҲҲJ(l)


with u вҲҲ RN  + and вҲҖi вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nout }, вҲҖl вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nin }, вҲҖd вҲҲ J
              in                                                          (l)
                                                                              : uil = wdi . That is, we
                                                              (i)
can replace each weight vector w(i) that has one weight wd per input dimension d with a smaller
                                          (i)
weight vector u(i) featuring one weight ul per input subset J(l) .
For our linear program, this means that we no longer need a budget vector b вҲҲ RD     in
                                                                                   + to model the
                        вҖІ      p
elementwise distance |xd вҲ’ xd | in each dimension d. Instead, we can use a smaller budget vector
                                                                                                   p
b вҲҲ RN                                                           (l)      (l)
                                                                              = dвҲҲJ(l) |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd | .
                                                                                P
      + to model the overall distance within each input subset J , i.e. b
       in

Combined with the quantization of certificate parameters from the previous section, our optimization


                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


problem becomes
                        X               X                    n                               o
             min                                      Ti,j    n вҲҲ T вҲ© K(i) Оҫ i, О· (n) = Ei,j        (23)
                   iвҲҲ{1,...,Nout } jвҲҲ{1,...,Nbins }

                        s.t.   вҲҖi, j : bT u(i) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Ti,j )Ei,j ,       sum{b} вүӨ Пөp ,              (24)
                                    b вҲҲ RN
                                         + ,
                                           in
                                                       T вҲҲ {0, 1}  Nout Г—Nbins
                                                                                 .                  (25)
with u вҲҲ RNin and вҲҖi вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nout }, вҲҖl вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nin }, вҲҖd вҲҲ J : uil = wdi . For Nout = Dout ,
Nin = Din , Nbins = 1 and En,1 = О· (n) , we recover our general certificate from Theorem 4.2.
When certifying robustness for binary data, we impose different constraints on b. To model that the
adversary can not flip more bits than are present within each subset, we use a budget vector b вҲҲ NN
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                    in

                                    (l)                                            Nin
with вҲҖl вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nin } : bl вүӨ J , instead of a continuous budget vector b вҲҲ R+ .

E.4   L INEAR R ELAXATION

Combining the previous steps allows us to reduce the number of problem variables and linear con-
straints from Din + Dout and Dout + 1 to Nin + Nout В· Nbins and Nout В· Nbins + 1, respectively.
Still, finding an optimal solution to the mixed-integer linear program may be too expensive. One
can obtain a lower bound on the optimal value and thus a valid, albeit more pessimistic, robustness
certificate by relaxing all discrete variables to be continuous.
When using the general certificate from Theorem 4.2, the binary vector t вҲҲ {0, 1}Dout can be
relaxed to t вҲҲ [0, 1]Dout . When using the certificate with quantized base certificate parameters from
В§ E.2 or В§ E.3, the binary matrix T вҲҲ [0, 1]Nout Г—Nbins can be relaxed to T вҲҲ [0, 1]Nout Г—Nbins .
Conceptually, this means that predictions can be partially certified, i.e. tn вҲҲ (0, 1) or Ti,j вҲҲ (0, 1).
In particular, a prediction can be partially certified even if we know that is impossible to attack under
the collective perturbation model Bx = xвҖІ вҲҲ XDin | ||xвҖІ вҲ’ x||p вүӨ Пө . Just like Schuchardt et al.
(2021), who encountered the same problem with their collective certificate, we circumvent this issue
by first computing a set L вҠҶ T of all targeted predictions in T that are guaranteed to always be robust
under the collective perturbation model:
                                                 D
                             (                                         !         )
                                                      (n)            p
                                               X
                                                              вҖІ              (n)
                        L = n вҲҲ T max                wd В· |xd вҲ’ xd |     <О·                          (26)
                                             xвҲҲBx
                                                      d=1
                            n         n    o            o
                           = n вҲҲ T max w(n) В· Пөp < О· (n) .                                          (27)
                                            n

The equality follows from the fact that the most effective way of attacking a prediction is to allocate
all adversarial budget to the least robust dimension, i.e. the dimension with the largest weight. Be-
cause we know that all predictions with indices in L are robust, we do not have to include them in
the collective optimization problem and can instead compute
                                               X h                  i
                                                          вҖІ     (n)
                                  |L| + min
                                          вҖІ
                                                     I  x   вҲҲ H       .                            (28)
                                             x вҲҲBx
                                                       nвҲҲT\L

The r.h.s. optimization can be solved using the general collective certificate from Theorem 4.2 or
any of the more efficient, modified certificates from previous sections.
When using the general collective certificate from Theorem 4.2 with binary data, the budget variables
b вҲҲ {0, 1}Din can be relaxed to b вҲҲ [0, 1]Din . When using the modified collective certificate
from В§ E.3, the budget variables with b вҲҲ NN        0
                                                      in
                                                         can be relaxed to b вҲҲ RN    in
                                                                                    + . The additional
                                           (l)
constraint вҲҖl вҲҲ {1, . . . , Nin } : bl вүӨ J     can be kept in order to model that the adversary cannot
flip (or partially flip) more bits than are present within each input subset J(l) .


                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F      BASE C ERTIFICATES
In the following, we show why the base certificates discussed in В§ 5 and summarized in Table 1
hold. In В§ F.3.2 we further present a base certificate (and corresponding collective certificate) that
can distinguish between adversarial addition and deletion of bits in binary data.

F.1        G AUSSIAN S MOOTHING FOR l2 P ERTURBATIONS OF C ONTINUOUS DATA

Proposition F.1. Given an output gn              :    RDin    вҶ’      Y, let fn (x)      =
                                                                                          2
argmaxyвҲҲY PrzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) [gn (z) = y] be the corresponding smoothed output with ОЈ = diag (Пғ)
and Пғ вҲҲ RD    + .
                 in
                       Given an input x вҲҲ RDin and smoothed prediction yn = fn (x), let
q = PrzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) [gn (z) = yn ]. Then, вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H(n) : fn (xвҖІ ) = yn with H(n) defined as in
                                  2
Eq. 2, wd = Пғ1d 2 , О· = ОҰ(вҲ’1) (q) and p = 2.

Proof. Based on the definition of the base certificate interface, we need to show that, вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H :
fn (xвҖІ ) = yn with
                                        Din
                         (                                                 )
                             вҖІ     Din
                                        X    1            вҖІ 2      вҲ’1
                                                                         2
                   H= x вҲҲR                      В· |xd вҲ’ xd | < ОҰ (q)          .               (29)
                                            Пғd2
                                                d=1
Eiras et al. (2022) have shown that under the same conditions as above, but with a general covariance
matrix ОЈ вҲҲ RD   +
                  in Г—Din
                          , a prediction yn is certifiably robust to a perturbed input xвҖІ if
                           p                               1 вҲ’1
                                                              ОҰ (q) вҲ’ ОҰвҲ’1 (q вҖІ ) ,

                              (x вҲ’ xвҖІ )ОЈвҲ’1 (x вҲ’ xвҖІ ) <                                           (30)
                                                           2
where q вҖІ = maxynвҖІ Мё=yn PrzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) [gn (z) = ynвҖІ ] is the probability of the second most likely pre-
diction under the smoothing distribution. Because the probabilities of all possible predictions have
to sum up to 1, we have q вҖІ вүӨ 1 вҲ’ q. Since ОҰвҲ’1 is monotonically increasing, we can obtain a
lower bound on the r.h.s. of Eq. 30 and thus a more pessimistic certificate by substituting 1 вҲ’ q
for q вҖІ (deriving such a вҖқbinary certificateвҖқ from a вҖқmulticlass certificateвҖқ is common in randomized
smoothing and was already discussed in (Cohen et al., 2019)):
                        p                                1 вҲ’1
                                                             ОҰ (q) вҲ’ ОҰвҲ’1 (1 вҲ’ q) ,

                            (x вҲ’ xвҖІ )ОЈвҲ’1 (x вҲ’ xвҖІ ) <                                             (31)
                                                         2
                                                  2
In our case, ОЈ is a diagonal matrix diag (Пғ) with Пғ вҲҲ RD          in
                                                                + . Thus Eq. 31 is equivalent to
                      v
                      u Din
                      t (x вҲ’ xвҖІ ) 1 (x вҲ’ xвҖІ ) < 1 ОҰвҲ’1 (q) вҲ’ ОҰвҲ’1 (1 вҲ’ q)  .
                      uX
                                d     d       d      d                                           (32)
                                         Пғd2               2
                           d=1

Finally, using the fact that ОҰвҲ’1 (q) вҲ’ ОҰвҲ’1 (1 вҲ’ q) = 2ОҰвҲ’1 (q) and eliminating the square root shows
that we are certifiably robust if
                                     Din
                                     X   1                                          2
                                             В· |xd вҲ’ xвҖІd |2 <        ОҰвҲ’1 (q)            .                                     (33)
                                         Пғd2
                                     d=1


Table 1: Base certificates complying with interface Eq. 2 with parameters w(n) and О· (n) . Here,
yn = fn (x) is the prediction of fn (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY qn,y . With the l0 certificate, gn (z)y refers to
the softmax score of class y and О¶ = VarzвҲјF (x,Оё) [gn (z)yn ] is the variance of yn вҖҷs softmax score.

                     (n)                                                       (n)
 Norm              ОЁx                        qn,y                            wd                               О· (n)
                                                                                                                          2
              N x, diag (s)2                                                   1
                                                                                                          ОҰвҲ’1 (qn,yn )

      l2                           PrzвҲјОЁ(n) [gn (z) = y]                      s2
                                         x                                     d
      l1         U (x, О»)          PrzвҲјОЁ(n) [gn (z) = y]                       1
                                                                              О»d
                                                                                                          ОҰвҲ’1 (qn,yn )
                                         x
                                                                               2
                                                                         (1вҲ’Оёd )            2                                  2
      l0         F (x, Оё)            EzвҲјОЁx(n) [gn (z)y ]        ln          Оёd
                                                                                   + (Оёd)
                                                                                     1вҲ’Оёd
                                                                                                    ln 1 + О¶1 qn,yn вҲ’ 12


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   U NIFORM S MOOTHING FOR l1 P ERTURBATIONS OF C ONTINUOUS DATA

An alternative base certificate for l1 perturbations is again due to Eiras et al. (2022). Using uniform
instead of Gaussian noise allows us to collective certify robustness to l1 -norm-bound perturbations.
In the following U(x, О») with x вҲҲ RD , О» вҲҲ RD      + refers to a vector-valued random distribution in
which the d-th element is uniformly distributed in [xd вҲ’ О»d , xd + О»d ].
Proposition F.2. Given an output gn : RDin вҶ’ Y, let f (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY PrzвҲјU (x,О») [g(z) = y]
be the corresponding smoothed classifier with О» вҲҲ RD + . Given an input x вҲҲ R
                                                      in                       Din
                                                                                   and smoothed
prediction y = f (x), let p = PrzвҲјU (x,О») [g(z) = y]. Then, вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H(n) : fn (xвҖІ ) = yn with H(n)
defined as in Eq. 2, wd = 1/О»d , О· = ОҰвҲ’1 (q) and p = 1.

Proof. Based on the definition of H(n) , we need to prove that вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H : fn (xвҖІ ) = yn with
                                            Din
                            (                                             )
                                           X    1
                      H = xвҖІ вҲҲ RDin |              В· |xd вҲ’ xвҖІd | < ОҰвҲ’1 (q) ,                       (34)
                                                О»d
                                                d=1

Eiras et al. (2022) have shown that under the same conditions as above, a prediction yn is certifiably
robust to a perturbed input xвҖІ if
                        Din
                        X     1                    1 вҲ’1
                                 В· (xd вҲ’ xвҖІd ) | <   ОҰ (q) вҲ’ ОҰвҲ’1 (1 вҲ’ q) ,

                            |                                                                      (35)
                              О»d                   2
                        d=1

where q вҖІ = maxynвҖІ Мё=yn PrzвҲјU (x,О») [gn (z) = ynвҖІ ] is the probability of the second most likely predic-
tion under the smoothing distribution. As in our previous proof for Gaussian smoothing, we can ob-
tain a more pessimistic certificate by substituting 1вҲ’q for q вҖІ . Since ОҰвҲ’1 (q)вҲ’ОҰвҲ’1 (1вҲ’q) = 2ОҰвҲ’1 (q)
and all О»d are non-negative, we know that our prediction is certifiably robust if
                                    Din
                                    X   1
                                               В· |xd вҲ’ xвҖІd | < ОҰвҲ’1 (p).                            (36)
                                          О»d
                                    d=1


F.3   VARIANCE -C ONSTRAINED C ERTIFICATION

In the following, we derive the general variance-constrained randomized smoothing certificate from
Theorem 5.1, before discussing specific certificates for binary data in В§ F.3.1 and В§ F.3.2.
Variance smoothing assumes that we make predictions by randomly smoothing a base modelвҖҷs soft-
max scores. That is, given base model g : X вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| mapping from an arbitrary discrete input
space X to scores from the (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-dimensional probability simplex вҲҶ|Y| , we define the smoothed
classifier f (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY EzвҲјОЁ(x) [g(z)y ]. Here, ОЁ(x) is an arbitrary distribution over X pa-
rameterized by x, e.g a Normal distribution with mean x. The smoothed classifier does not return
the most likely prediction, but the prediction associated with the highest expected softmax score.
Given an input x вҲҲ X, smoothed prediction y = f (x) and a perturbed input xвҖІ вҲҲ X, we want to
determine whether f (xвҖІ ) = y. By definition of our smoothed classifier, we know that f (xвҖІ ) = y if
y is the label with the highest expected softmax score. In particular, we know that f (xвҖІ ) = y if yвҖҷs
softmax score is larger than all other softmax scores combined, i.e.
                               EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [g(z)y ] > 0.5 =вҮ’ f (xвҖІ ) = y.                            (37)
Computing EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [g(z)y ] exactly is usually not tractable вҖ“ especially if we later want to evaluate
robustness to many xвҖІ from a whole perturbation model B вҠҶ X. Therefore, we compute a lower
bound on EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [g(z)y ]. If even this lower bound is larger than 0.5, we know that prediction y
is certainly robust. For this, we define a set of functions F with gy вҲҲ H and compute the minimum
softmax score across all functions from F:
                              min EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)] > 0.5 =вҮ’ f (xвҖІ ) = y.                           (38)
                              hвҲҲF


                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For our variance smoothing approach, we define F to be the set of all functions that have a larger
or equal expected value and a smaller or equal variance under ОЁ(x), compared to our base model
g. Let Вө = EhzвҲјОЁ(x) [g(z)y ]i be the expected softmax score of our base model g for label y. Let
                            2
О¶ = EzвҲјОЁ(x) (g(z)y вҲ’ ОҪ) be the expected squared distance of the softmax score from a scalar
ОҪ вҲҲ R. (Choosing ОҪ = Вө yields the variance of the softmax score. An arbitrary ОҪ is only needed for
technical reasons related to Monte Carlo estimation В§ G.2). Then, we define
                  n                                             h             i     o
                                                                            2
             F = h : X вҶ’ R EzвҲјОЁ(x) [h(z)] вүҘ Вө вҲ§ EzвҲјОЁ(x) (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) вүӨ О¶                       (39)

Clearly, by the definition of Вө and О¶, we have gy вҲҲ F. Note that we do not restrict functions from H
to the domain [0, 1], but allow arbitrary real-valued outputs.
By evaluating Eq. 37 with F defined as in Eq. 38, we can determine if our prediciton is robust. To
compute the optimal value, we need the following two Lemmata:
Lemma F.3. Given a discrete set X and the set О  of all probability mass functions over X, any two
probability mass functions ПҖ1 , ПҖ2 вҲҲ О  fulfill
                                              X ПҖ2 (z)
                                                                ПҖ2 (z) вүҘ 1.                        (40)
                                                       ПҖ1 (z)
                                              zвҲҲX



Proof. For a fixed probability mass function ПҖ1 , Eq. 40 is lower-bounded by the minimal expected
likelihood ratio that can be achieved by another ПҖМғ(z) вҲҲ О :
                                X ПҖ2 (z)                               X ПҖМғ(z)
                                                 ПҖ2 (z) вүҘ min                         ПҖМғ(z).       (41)
                                        ПҖ1 (z)                  ПҖМғвҲҲО          ПҖ1 (z)
                                zвҲҲX                                    zвҲҲX

The r.h.s. term can be expressed as the constrained optimization problem
                                       X ПҖМғ(z)                           X
                                min                    ПҖМғ(z) s.t.               ПҖМғ(z) = 1          (42)
                                 ПҖМғ          ПҖ1 (z)
                                       zвҲҲX                               zвҲҲX

with the corresponding dual problem
                                                                                               !
                                        X ПҖМғ(z)                                  X
                        max min                         ПҖМғ(z) + О» вҲ’1 +                  ПҖМғ(z) .    (43)
                         О»вҲҲR      ПҖМғ          ПҖ1 (z)
                                        zвҲҲX                                      zвҲҲX

The inner problem is convex in each ПҖМғ(z). Taking the gradient w.r.t. to ПҖМғ(z) for all z вҲҲ X shows
that it has its minimum at вҲҖz вҲҲ X : ПҖМғ(z) = вҲ’ О»ПҖ12(z) . Substituting into Eq. 43 results in
                                                                           !
                                 X О»2 ПҖ1 (z)2                 X О»ПҖ1 (z)
                            max                + О» вҲ’1 вҲ’                                        (44)
                             О»вҲҲR       4ПҖ1 (z)                        2
                                       zвҲҲX                                     zвҲҲX
                                             X ПҖ1 (z)
                         = max вҲ’О»2                          вҲ’О»                                     (45)
                            О»вҲҲR                         4
                                             zвҲҲX
                                         О»2
                         = max вҲ’            вҲ’О»                                                     (46)
                            О»вҲҲR          4
                         =1.                                                                       (47)

Eq. 46 follows from the fact that ПҖ1 (z) is a valid probability mass function. Due to duality, the
optimal dual value 1 is a lower bound on the optimal value of our primal problem Eq. 40.


        h Given aiprobability distribution D over a R and a scalar ОҪ вҲҲ R, let Вө = EzвҲјD [z] and
Lemma F.4.
                   2                               2
Оҫ = EzвҲјD (z вҲ’ ОҪ) . Then Оҫ вүҘ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)


                                                            30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Using the definitions of Вө and Оҫ, as well as some simple algebra, we can show:
                                                                           2
                                                      Оҫ вүҘ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)                        (48)
                                              h       i
                                                    2      2        2
                                 вҮҗвҮ’ EzвҲјD (z вҲ’ ОҪ) вүҘ Вө вҲ’ 2ВөОҪ + ОҪ                           (49)
                           вҮҗвҮ’ EzвҲјD z вҲ’ 2zОҪ + ОҪ 2 вүҘ Вө2 вҲ’ 2ВөОҪ + ОҪ 2
                                          2
                                                                                         (50)
                                          2         2
                                                           2        2
                           вҮҗвҮ’ EzвҲјD z вҲ’ 2zОҪ + ОҪ вүҘ Вө вҲ’ 2ВөОҪ + ОҪ                             (51)
                                          2           2    2        2
                           вҮҗвҮ’ EzвҲјD z вҲ’ 2ВөОҪ + ОҪ вүҘ Вө вҲ’ 2ВөОҪ + ОҪ                             (52)
                                                    2      2
                                        вҮҗвҮ’ EzвҲјD z вүҘ Вө                                    (53)

It is well known for the variance that EzвҲјD (z вҲ’ Вө)2 = EzвҲјD z 2 вҲ’ Вө2 . Because the variance is
always non-negative, the above inequality holds.

Using the previously described approach and lemmata, we can show the soundness of the following
robustness certificate:
Theorem 5.1 (Variance-constrained certification). a function g : X вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| mapping from
discrete set X to scores from the (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-dimensional probability simplex, let f (x) =
argmaxyвҲҲY EzвҲјОЁx [g(z)y ] with smoothing distribution ОЁx and probability mass function ПҖx (z) =
PrzМғвҲјОЁx [zМғ = z].h Given an input
                               i x вҲҲ X and smoothed prediction y = f (x), let Вө = EzвҲјОЁx [g(z)y ]
                                 2
and О¶ = EzвҲјОЁx (g(z)y вҲ’ ОҪ)            with ОҪ вҲҲ R. Assuming ОҪ вүӨ Вө, then f (xвҖІ ) = y if

                       X ПҖxвҖІ (z)
                                                              1                   1
                                       В· ПҖ (z) < 1 +
                                           xвҖІ                          2       ВөвҲ’         .      (54)
                             ПҖx (z)                      О¶ вҲ’ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)              2
                       zвҲҲX


Proof. Following our discussion above, we know that f (xвҖІ ) = y if EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [g(z)y ] > 0.5 with F
defined as in Eq. 39. We can compute a (tight) lower bound on minhвҲҲF EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) by following the
functional optimization approach for randomized smoothing proposed by Zhang et al. (2020). That
is, we solve a dual problem in which we optimize the value h(z) for each z вҲҲ X. By the definition
of the set F, our optimization problem is
                                                           min EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)]                  (55)
                                                             h:XвҶ’R
                                                            h            i
                                                                       2
                    s.t.   EzвҲјОЁ(x) [h(z)] вүҘ Вө,       EzвҲјОЁ(x) (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) вүӨ О¶.                     (56)

The corresponding dual problem with dual variables Оұ, ОІ вүҘ 0 is
                                              max min EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)]
                                                          Оұ,ОІвүҘ0 h:XвҶ’R
                                                   h            i                                (57)
                                                              2
                  +Оұ Вө вҲ’ EzвҲјОЁ(x) [h(z)] + ОІ EzвҲјОЁ(x) (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) вҲ’ О¶ .

We first move move all terms that donвҖҷt involve h out of the inner optimization problem:
                                                                              h            i
                                                                                         2
 = max ОұВө вҲ’ ОІО¶ + min EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)] вҲ’ ОұEzвҲјОЁ(x) [h(z)] + ОІEzвҲјОЁ(x) (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) . (58)
   Оұ,ОІвүҘ0              h:XвҶ’R

Writing out the expectation terms and combining them into one sum (or вҖ“ in the case of continuous
X вҖ“ one integral), our dual problem becomes
                                  X                                             2
     = max ОұВө вҲ’ ОІО¶ + min             h(z)ПҖxвҖІ (z) вҲ’ Оұh(z)ПҖx (z) + ОІ (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) ПҖx (z)         (59)
        Оұ,ОІвүҘ0                h:XвҶ’R
                                     zвҲҲX

(recall that ПҖxвҖІ and ПҖxвҖІ refer to the probability mass functions of the smoothing distributions). The
inner optimization problem can be solved by finding the optimal h(z) in each point z:
                           X                                                      2
      = max ОұВө вҲ’ ОІО¶ +            min h(z)ПҖxвҖІ (z) вҲ’ Оұh(z)ПҖx (z) + ОІ (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) ПҖx (z).             (60)
        Оұ,ОІвүҘ0                    h(z)вҲҲR
                           zвҲҲX


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Because ОІ вүҘ 0, each inner optimization problem is convex in h(z). We can thus find the optimal
hвҲ— (z) by setting the derivative to zero:
                        d                                           2       !
                            h(z)ПҖxвҖІ (z) вҲ’ Оұh(z)ПҖx (z) + ОІ (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) ПҖx (z) = 0                      (61)
                      dh(z)
                                                                    !
                вҮҗвҮ’ ПҖxвҖІ (z) вҲ’ ОұПҖx (z) + 2ОІ (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) ПҖx (z) = 0                                      (62)
                               ПҖxвҖІ (z)     Оұ
                =вҮ’ hвҲ— (z) = вҲ’          +     + ОҪ.                                                    (63)
                              2ОІПҖx (z) 2ОІ
Substituting into Eq. 59 and simplifying leaves us with the dual problem
                                       Оұ2     Оұ                1 X ПҖxвҖІ (z)2
                     max ОұВө вҲ’ ОІО¶ вҲ’         +     вҲ’ ОұОҪ + ОҪ вҲ’                   .                      (64)
                    Оұ,ОІвүҘ0              4ОІ    2ОІ               4ОІ       ПҖx (z)
                                                                        zвҲҲX
                                              2
In the following, let us use ПҒ = zвҲҲX ПҖПҖxxвҖІ (z)
                                  P
                                           (z) as a shorthand for the expected likelihood ratio. The
problem is concave in Оұ. We can thus find the optimum ОұвҲ— by setting the derivative to zero, which
gives us ОұвҲ— = 2ОІ(Вө вҲ’ ОҪ) + 1. Because ОІ вүҘ 0 and our theorem assumes that ОҪ вүӨ Вө, the value ОұвҲ— is
a feasible solution to the dual problem. Substituting into Eq. 64 and simplifying results in
                                          ОұвҲ— 2   ОұвҲ—                 1
                            max ОұвҲ— Вө вҲ’ ОІО¶ вҲ’    +    вҲ’ ОұвҲ— ОҪ + ОҪ вҲ’      ПҒ                              (65)
                           ОІвүҘ0             4ОІ    2ОІ                4ОІ
                                                       1
                         = max ОІ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)2 вҲ’ Пғ 2 + Вө +

                                                         (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) .                                   (66)
                           ОІвүҘ0                        4ОІ
Lemma F.3 shows that the expected likelihood ratio ПҒ is always greater than or equal to 1. Lemma F.4
shows that (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)2 вҲ’ Пғ 2 вүӨ 0. Therefore Eq. 66 is concave in ОІ. The optimal value of ОІ can again
be found by setting the derivative to zero:
                                            s
                                                    1вҲ’ПҒ
                                     ОІвҲ— =                         .                            (67)
                                              4 ((Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)2 вҲ’ Пғ 2 )
                                                 2
Recall that our theorem assumes Пғ 2 вүҘ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ) and thus ОІ вҲ— is real valued. Substituting Eq. 67 into
Eq. 66 shows that the maximum of our dual problem is
                                     p
                                Вө + (1 вҲ’ p) ((Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)2 вҲ’ Пғ 2 ).                                 (68)
By duality, this is a lower bound on our primal problem minhвҲҲF EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)]. We know that our
prediction is certifiably robust, i.e. f (x) = y, if minhвҲҲF EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)] > 0.5. So, in particular,
our prediction is robust if
                                    p
                              Вө + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) ((Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)2 вҲ’ Пғ 2 ) > 0.5                                (69)
                                                                  2
                                               1               1
                         вҮҗвҮ’ ПҒ < 1 +                    2   ВөвҲ’                                    (70)
                                           2
                                          Пғ вҲ’ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)          2
                               X ПҖxвҖІ (z)2                                    2
                                                            1             1
                         вҮҗвҮ’                   <1+                 2  ВөвҲ’                          (71)
                                      ПҖx (z)         Пғ 2 вҲ’ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)        2
                              zвҲҲX

The last equivalence is the result of inserting the definition of the expected likelihood ratio ПҒ.

With Theorem 5.1 in place, we can certify robustness for arbitrary smoothing distributions, assuming
we can compute the expected likelihood ratio. When we are working with discrete data and the
smoothing distributions factorize, this can be done efficiently, as the two following base certificates
for binary data demonstrate.

F.3.1   B ERNOULLI S MOOTHING FOR P ERTURBATIONS OF B INARY DATA
We begin by proving the base certificate presented in В§ 5. Recall that we we use a smoothing
distribution F(x, Оё) with Оё вҲҲ [0, 1]Din that independently flips the dвҖҷth bit with probability Оёd ,
i.e. for x, z вҲҲ {0, 1}Din and z вҲј F(x, Оё) we have Pr[zd Мё= xd ] = Оёd .


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary F.5. Given an output gn : {0, 1}Din вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| mapping to scores from the (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-
dimensional probability simplex, let fn (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY EzвҲјF (x,Оё) [gn (z)y ] be the corresponding
smoothed classifier with Оё вҲҲ [0, 1]Din . Given an input x вҲҲ {0, 1}Din and smoothed prediction
                                                                                        вҖІ     (n)
yn = fn (x), let Вө = EzвҲјF (x,Оё) [gn (z)y ] and О¶ = VarzвҲјF (x,Оё) [gn (z)y ]. Then,
                                                                                  вҲҖx вҲҲ H    :
                                                            2         2                         2
fn (xвҖІ ) = yn with H(n) defined as in Eq. 2, wd = ln (1вҲ’Оё
                                                       Оёd
                                                          d)    (Оёd )
                                                              + 1вҲ’Оё  d
                                                                        , О· = ln 1 + О¶1 Вө вҲ’ 12
and p = 0.

Proof. Based on our definition of the base certificates interface (see Definition 4.1, we must show
that вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H : fn (xвҖІ ) = yn with
                          Din
      (                                                  !                                   2 ! )
                                            2         2
          вҖІ         Din
                          X        (1 вҲ’ Оёd )     (Оёd )         вҖІ       0          1       1
H = x вҲҲ {0, 1}                 ln             +            В· |xd вҲ’ xd | < ln 1 +      ВөвҲ’            ,
                                      Оёd        1 вҲ’ Оёd                            О¶       2
                          d=1
                                                                                                 (72)
Because all bits are flipped independently, our probability mass function ПҖx (z) = PrzМғвҲјОЁ(x) [zМғ = z]
factorizes:
                                                   D
                                                   Yin

                                        ПҖx (z) =        ПҖxd (zd )                                (73)
                                                                   d=1
with
                                              Оёd          if zd Мё= xd
                                          ПҖxd (zd ) =                  .                                                (74)
                                              1 вҲ’ Оёd else
Thus, our expected likelihood ratio can be written as
                                               D                    D
                X       ПҖxвҖІ (z)2       X       Y in
                                                    ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2     Y in                   X       ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2
                                 =                               =                                             .        (75)
                         ПҖx (z)                     ПҖxd (zd )                                      ПҖxd (zd )
                    D
              zвҲҲ{0,1}    in                D   zвҲҲ{0,1}     in d=1                d=1 zd вҲҲ{0,1}
For each dimension d, we can distinguish two cases: If both the perturbed and unperturbed input are
                                                           ПҖxвҖІ (z)
the same in dimension d, i.e. xвҖІd = xd , then ПҖxd (z) = 1 and thus
                                                               d
                         X            ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2        X
                                                  =                ПҖxвҖІd (zd ) = Оёd + (1 вҲ’ Оёd ) = 1.                     (76)
                                      ПҖxd (zd )
                    zd вҲҲ{0,1}                         zd вҲҲ{0,1}
If the perturbed and unperturbed input differ in dimension d, then
                              X ПҖxвҖІ (zd )2                  2          2
                                        d
                                                   (1 вҲ’ Оёd )     (Оёd )
                                                =             +          .                                              (77)
                                     ПҖxd (zd )        Оёd        1 вҲ’ Оёd
                                      zd вҲҲ{0,1}
Therefore, the expected likelihood ratio is
                    D                                  D
                                                                                           !|xвҖІd вҲ’xd |
                                                                            2          2
                    Yin        X         ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2   Yin
                                                                    (1 вҲ’ Оёd )   (Оёd )
                                                     =                        +                          .              (78)
                                         ПҖxd (zd )                     Оёd       1 вҲ’ Оёd
                   d=1 zd вҲҲ{0,1}                           d=1
Due to Theorem 5.1 (and using ОҪ = Вө when computing the variance), we know that our prediction
is robust, i.e. fn (xвҖІ ) = yn , if
                                                         2
                                  ПҖxвҖІ (z)2

                         X                     1      1
                                           <1+     ВөвҲ’                                    (79)
                            D
                                   ПҖx (z)      О¶      2
                   zвҲҲ{0,1}       in


                   D
                                                           !|xвҖІd вҲ’xd |                        2
                    in                     2           2
                   Y           (1 вҲ’ Оёd )   (Оёd )                             1           1
             вҮҗвҮ’                          +                               <1+          ВөвҲ’                                (80)
                                  Оёd       1 вҲ’ Оёd                            О¶           2
                   d=1
                   Din
                                                               !                                              2 !
                                               2           2
                   X             (1 вҲ’ Оёd )   (Оёd )                                       1            1
             вҮҗвҮ’           ln               +                       |xвҖІd вҲ’ xd | < ln   1+           ВөвҲ’               .   (81)
                                    Оёd       1 вҲ’ Оёd                                      О¶            2
                 d=1
Because xd and xвҖІd are binary, the last inequality is equivalent to
             Din
                                              !                              2 !
                                2           2
             X         (1 вҲ’ Оёd )      (Оёd )       вҖІ       0         1     1
                 ln               +             |xd вҲ’ xd | < ln 1 +    ВөвҲ’        .                                      (82)
                          Оёd         1 вҲ’ Оёd                         О¶     2
             d=1


                                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.3.2     S PARSITY- AWARE S MOOTHING FOR P ERTURBATIONS OF B INARY DATA
Sparsity-aware randomized smoothing (Bojchevski et al., 2020) is an alternative smoothing ap-
proach for binary data. It uses different probabilities for randomly deleting (1 вҶ’ 0) and adding
(0 вҶ’ 1) bits to preserve data sparsity. For a random variable z distributed according to the
sparsity-aware distribution S(x, Оё + , Оё вҲ’ ) with x вҲҲ {0, 1}Din and addition and deletion probabil-
ities Оё + , Оё вҲ’ вҲҲ [0, 1]Din , we have:
                                                        1вҲ’xd        x d
                                  Pr[zd = 0] = 1 вҲ’ Оёd+       В· ОёdвҲ’      ,
                                                 + 1вҲ’xd          вҲ’ xd

                                  Pr[zd = 1] = Оёd        В· 1 вҲ’ Оёd       .
The Bernoulli smoothing distribution we discussed in the previous section is a special case of
sparsity-aware smoothing with Оё + = Оё вҲ’ . The runtime of the robustness certificate derived by
Bojchevski et al. (2020) increases exponentially with the number of unique values in Оё + and Оё вҲ’ ,
which makes it unsuitable for localized smoothing. Variance-constrained smoothing, on the other
hand, allows us to efficiently compute a certificate in closed form.
Corollary F.6. Given an output gn : RDin вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| mapping to scores from the (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-
dimensional probability simplex, let fn (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY EzвҲјS(x,Оё+ ,ОёвҲ’ ) [gn (z)y ] be the corre-
sponding smoothed classifier with Оё + , Оё вҲ’ вҲҲ [0, 1]Din . Given an input x вҲҲ {0, 1}Din and smoothed
prediction yn = fn (x), let Вө = EzвҲјS(x,Оё+ ,ОёвҲ’ ) [gn (z)y ] and О¶ = VarzвҲјS(x,Оё+ ,ОёвҲ’ ) [gn (z)y ]. Then,
вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H : fn (xвҖІ ) = yn for
                                   Din
              (                                                                           )
                                   X
                   вҖІ         Din        +                  вҖІ     вҲ’                 вҖІ
         H = x вҲҲ {0, 1}          |     Оіd В· I [xd = 0 Мё= xd ] + Оіd В· I [xd = 1 Мё= xd ] < О· ,      (83)
                                           d=1
                                                          2                2
                                                                                                     2         2

                                                 (ОёdвҲ’ )           (1вҲ’ОёdвҲ’ )                   (1вҲ’Оёd+ )    (Оёd+ )
where Оі + , Оі вҲ’ вҲҲ RDin , Оіd+ = ln                1вҲ’Оё +
                                                       +             Оёd+
                                                                                , ОіdвҲ’ = ln     ОёвҲ’
                                                                                                       + 1вҲ’Оё вҲ’
                                                                                                                 .   and О· =
                                                      d                                             d              d
                  2
ln 1 + О¶1 Вө вҲ’ 12      .


Proof. Just like with the Bernoulli distribution we discussed in the previous section, all bits are
flipped independently, meaning our probability mass function ПҖx (z) = PrzМғвҲјОЁ(x) [zМғ = z] factor-
izes:
                                                 D
                                                 Yin

                                      ПҖx (z) =       ПҖxd (zd )                                 (84)
                                                                    d=1

with
                                                                  Оёd           if zd Мё= xd
                                          ПҖxd (zd ) =                                      .                            (85)
                                                                  1 вҲ’ Оёd       else
As before, our expected likelihood ratio can be written as
                                                                  D                   D
                     X      ПҖxвҖІ (z)2               X              Yin
                                                                        ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2   Yin      X        ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2
                                     =                                              =                               .   (86)
                             ПҖx (z)                                     ПҖxd (zd )                       ПҖxd (zd )
               zвҲҲ{0,1}Din                       zвҲҲ{0,1}Din d=1                          d=1 zd вҲҲ{0,1}

We can now distinguish three cases. If both the perturbed and unperturbed input are the same in
                                         ПҖxвҖІ (z)
dimension d, i.e. xвҖІd = xd , then ПҖxd (z) = 1 and thus
                                            d


                                       X         ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2               X
                                                             =                    ПҖxвҖІd (zd ) = 1.                       (87)
                                                 ПҖxd (zd )
                                     zd вҲҲ{0,1}                       zd вҲҲ{0,1}

If xвҖІd = 1 and xd = 0, i.e. a bit was added, then
                                                                               2          2
         X         ПҖxвҖІd (z)2         X    ПҖ1 (zd )2   ПҖ1 (0)2   ПҖ1 (1)2    ОёвҲ’    1 вҲ’ ОёdвҲ’
                             =                      =         +         = d ++                                          (88)
       zd вҲҲ{0,1}
                   ПҖxd (z)
                                 z вҲҲ{0,1}
                                          ПҖ0 (zd )    ПҖ0 (0)    ПҖ0 (1)   1 вҲ’ Оёd    Оёd+
                                 d


                                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If xвҖІd = 0 and xd = 1, i.e. a bit was deleted, then
                                                                                                         2            2
       X         ПҖxвҖІd (z)2            X   ПҖ0 (zd )2   ПҖ0 (0)2   ПҖ0 (1)2   1 вҲ’ Оёd+                                Оёd+
                           =                        =         +         =                                    +          .   (89)
     zd вҲҲ{0,1}
                 ПҖxd (z)
                                 z вҲҲ{0,1}
                                          ПҖ1 (zd )    ПҖ1 (0)    ПҖ1 (1)      ОёdвҲ’                                1 вҲ’ ОёdвҲ’
                                  d


Therefore, the expected likelihood ratio is
             D
             Yin     X         ПҖxвҖІd (zd )2
                                                                                                                            (90)
                               ПҖxd (zd )
             d=1 zd вҲҲ{0,1}

             D              2            2 !I[xd =0Мё=xвҖІd |]                            2            2 !I[xd =1Мё=xвҖІd |]
             Yin
                       ОёdвҲ’      1 вҲ’ ОёdвҲ’                                    1 вҲ’ Оёd+             Оёd+
         =                    +                                                            +                                (91)
             d=1
                     1 вҲ’ Оёd+      Оёd+                                        ОёdвҲ’             1 вҲ’ ОёdвҲ’
             Din
             Y                  I[xd =0Мё=xвҖІd |]                I[xd =1Мё=xвҖІd |]
         =         exp Оіd+                        В· exp ОіdвҲ’                      .                                          (92)
             d=1

In the last equation, we have simply used the shorthands Оіd+ and ОіdвҲ’ defined in Corollary F.6. Due
to Theorem 5.1 (and using ОҪ = Вө when computing the variance), we know that our prediction is
robust, i.e. fn (xвҖІ ) = yn , if
                                                   2
                         ПҖxвҖІ (z)2

                 X                     1        1
                                  <1+      ВөвҲ’                                                  (93)
                      D
                           ПҖx (z)      О¶        2
             zвҲҲ{0,1}    in

              Din                                                             2
              Y                  I[xd =0Мё=xвҖІd |]                           1
                                                                I[xd =1Мё=xвҖІd |]            1
      вҮҗвҮ’            exp Оіd+                        В· exp ОіdвҲ’                         <1+           ВөвҲ’                       (94)
                                                                           2               О¶
         d=1
         Din                                                                       2 !
         X
              +                 вҖІ       вҲ’                 вҖІ             1       1
      вҮҗвҮ’     Оіd В· I [xd = 0 Мё= xd |] В· Оіd В· I [xd = 1 Мё= xd |] < ln 1 +     ВөвҲ’         .                                    (95)
                                                                        О¶       2
             d=1


Use for collective certification. It should be noted that this certificate does not comply with
our interface for base certificates (see Definition 4.1), meaning we can not directly use it to
certify robustness to norm-bound perturbations using our collective linear program from The-
orem 4.2. We can however use it to certify collective robustness to the more refined threat
model
n        used in (Schuchardt et al., 2021): Let the set of admissible perturbed
                    PDin                              PDin                           o inputs be Bx =
  xвҖІ вҲҲ {0, 1}Din | d=1     [xd = 0 Мё= xвҖІd |] вүӨ Пө+ вҲ§ d=1    [xd = 1 Мё= xвҖІd |] вүӨ ПөвҲ’ with Пө+ , Пөy вҲҲ N0
specifying the number of bits the adversary is allowed to add or delete. We can now follow the
procedure outlined in В§ 3.2 to combine the per-prediction base certificates into a collective cer-
tificate for our new collective perturbation model. As discussed in, we can bound the number of
predictions that are robust to simultaneous attacks by minimizing the number of predictions that are
certifiably robust according to their base certificates:
                              X                              X h                 i
                                           вҖІ                         вҖІ       (n)
                        min
                         вҖІ
                                  I [fn (x   ) = yn ] вүҘ min
                                                         вҖІ
                                                                I  x   вҲҲ H         .               (96)
                              x вҲҲBx                                  x вҲҲBx
                                      nвҲҲT                                    nвҲҲT

Inserting the linear inequalities characterizing our perturbation model and base certificates results
in:
                              "D                                                            #
                        X X      in
                                     +                 вҖІ      вҲ’                 вҖІ       (n)
                min         I       Оіd В· I [xd = 0 Мё= xd ] + Оіd В· I [xd = 1 Мё= xd ] < О·         (97)
             xвҖІ вҲҲ{0,1}Din
                              nвҲҲT      d=1
                                Din
                                X                                      Din
                                                                       X
                       s.t.           [xd = 0 Мё= xвҖІd |] вүӨ Пө+ ,               [xd = 1 Мё= xвҖІd |] вүӨ ПөвҲ’ .                       (98)
                                d=1                                    d=1



                                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Instead of optimizing over the perturbed input xвҖІ , we can define two vectors b+ , bвҲ’ вҲҲ {0, 1}Din
that indicate in which dimension bits were added or deleted. Using these new variables, Eq. 97 can
be rewritten as
                                      X h       T             T            i
                           min           I Оі + b+ + Оі вҲ’ bвҲ’ < О· (n)                            (99)
                          b+ ,bвҲ’ вҲҲ{0,1}Din
                                                  nвҲҲT
                                 s.t.      sum{b+ } вүӨ Пө+ , sum{bвҲ’ } вүӨ ПөвҲ’ ,                          (100)
                                            X              X
                                               b+
                                                d = 0,        bвҲ’
                                                               d = 0.                               (101)
                                          d|xd =1                  d|xd =0

The last two constraints ensure that bits can only be deleted where xd = 1 and bits can only be added
where xd = 0. Finally, we can use the procedure for replacing the indicator functions with indicator
variables that we discussed in В§ D to restate the above problem as the mixed-integer problem
                                                              X
                                               min                tn                             (102)
                                          b+ ,bвҲ’ вҲҲ{0,1}Din ,tвҲҲ{0,1}Dout
                                                                                 nвҲҲT
                                              + T     +       вҲ’ T     вҲ’
                                                                     b вүҘ (1 вҲ’ tn )О· (n) ,

                              s.t.        Оі         b + Оі                                           (103)
                                                  +       +                  вҲ’         вҲ’
                                      sum{b } вүӨ Пө ,                sum{b } вүӨ Пө ,                    (104)
                                        X                           X
                                            b+
                                             d = 0,                     bвҲ’
                                                                         d = 0.                     (105)
                                          d|xd =1                  d|xd =0

The first constraint ensures that tn can only be set to 0 if the l.h.s. is greater or equal О·n , i.e. only
when the base certificate can no longer guarantee robustness. The efficiency of the certificate can be
improved by applying any of the techniques discussed in В§ E.

F.3.3   G AUSSIAN S MOOTHING FOR P ERTURBATIONS OF C ONTINUOUS DATA
Even though we specifically proposed variance-constrained certification as a means of efficiently
certifying anisotropically smoothed classifiers for discrete data, it can be generalized to continuous
distributions by replacing sums with integrals and mass functions with density functions (the proof
is analogous to that in Appendix F.3).
In the following, we assume Gaussian smoothing, i.e. ОЁ(x) вҲј N (x, ОЈ) with ОЈ вҲҲ RDГ—D      +     with
density function ПҖx . In this case, the expected ratio between ПҖxвҖІ and ПҖx is the exponential of the
squared Mahalanobis distance (see Table 2 of (Gil et al., 2013) with Оұ = 2), i.e.
                           ПҖxвҖІ (z)
                      Z
                                   ПҖxвҖІ (z) dz = exp (xвҖІ вҲ’ x)ОЈвҲ’1 (xвҖІ вҲ’ x) .

                       RD ПҖx (z)

This leads us to the following corollary of Theorem 5.1:
Corollary F.7. Given a function h : RD вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| mapping to scores from the (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-dimensional
                                                                                             DГ—D
probability simplex, let f (x) = argmaxyвҲҲY EzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) [h(z)y ] with covariance matrix ОЈ вҲҲ R+      .
Given an input
            h    x вҲҲ  X   andi smoothed prediction y = f (x), let Вө = EzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) [h(z) y ] and О¶ =
                             2
EzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) (h(z)y вҲ’ ОҪ)           with ОҪ вҲҲ R. Assuming ОҪ вүӨ Вө, then f (xвҖІ ) = y if
                                                                               !
                      вҖІ              вҲ’1       вҖІ                             1    1
                   (x вҲ’ x)ОЈ               (x вҲ’ x) < ln 1 +            2  ВөвҲ’      .                  (106)
                                                           О¶ вҲ’ (Вө вҲ’ ОҪ)      2

As with Theorem 5.1, The r.h.s. of Eq. 106 depends on the expected softmax score Вө, a variable
ОҪ вүӨ Вө and the expected squared difference О¶ between Вө and ОҪ. For ОҪ = Вө the parameter О¶ is the
variance of the softmax score. A higher expected value and a lower variance allow us to certify
robustness for larger adversarial perturbations.
For comparison, ANCER (Eiras et al., 2022) guarantees robustness for the smoothed prediction
yn = argmaxyвҲҲY Pr [g(x) = y] if

                                     (xвҖІ вҲ’ x)ОЈвҲ’1 (xвҖІ вҲ’ x) < ОҰвҲ’1 (qyn )2 ,                           (107)


                                                              36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where qyn is the probability of predicting class yn , i.e. qyn = PrzвҲјN (x,ОЈ) [g(z) = yn ]. Here,
g : RD вҶ’ Y directly outputs a class label instead of a softmax score. We see that both the variance-
constrained certificate and ANCER yield the same certified ellipsoid, scaled by a different factor.
This factor is the certifiable radius О·, i.e. the r.h.s. term of Eqs. (106) and (107). We also see that both
certificates have the same computational complexity вҖ“ they both involve calculation of the squared
Mahalanobis distance and a constant number of operations for evaluation of the certifiable radius.
In the following, we briefly assess under which conditions which certificate yields a larger certifiable
radius О·. For this evaluation, we assume that g(x) = argmaxy h(x), i.e. g predicts the class with the
highest softmax score. We then vary the prediction probability qyn and the expected softmax score
Вө within [0.5, 1.0]. For each Вө, we calculate the largest possible variance О¶ (using the BhatiaвҖ“Davis
inequality О¶ вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Вө) В· Вө), which will give us the weakest possible variance-constrained certificate
(see Eq. (106)).
Fig. 13 shows the difference in certifiable radius О·, with the dashed line indicating parameters for
which both certificates are identical. We have omitted all combinations of qyn and Вө that are not
possible, namely Вө > qyn + 12 (1 вҲ’ qyn ). We see that ANCER is stronger when qyn is large, i.e.
almost all samples from the smoothing distribution are correctly classified, but not necessarily with
high confidence. The variance-constrained certificate is stronger when qyn is smaller and Вө is larger,
i.e. some samples are misclassified but the correctly classified ones have high confidence. Note
however, that this is the worst case for the variance-constrained certificate. For О¶ вҶ’ 0, much larger
radii can be certified (see Fig. 14 and Eq. (106)).

       1.0                                                       0.25

                                             0
                                                                                                      2
                                             вҲ’1
                                                  вҲҶО·
qyn


      0.75                                                      0.125


                                                                                                          О·
                                                            О¶


                                             вҲ’2                                                       1

                                             вҲ’3
       0.5                                                         0                                  0
             0.5       0.75           1.0                           0.50        0.75           1.00
                        Вө                                                        Вө

Figure 13: Worst-case difference in certifi-            Figure 14: Certifiable radius О· of the variance-
able radius О· between ANCER (Eiras et al.,              constrained randomized smoothing certificate for
2022) and the variance-constrained certificate for      anisotropic Gaussian smoothing as a function of
anisotropic Gaussian smoothing. The dashed line         the expected value Вө and the variance О¶ of the
indicates combinations of prediction probability        softmax score. If the variance is small, large radii
qyn and expected softmax score Вө for which both         can be certified вҖ“ even if the expected softmax
certificates are equally strong.                        score is small.


                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G     M ONTE C ARLO R ANDOMIZED S MOOTHING

To make predictions and certify robustness, randomized smoothing requires computing certain prop-
erties of the distribution of a base modelвҖҷs output, given an input smoothing distribution. For
example, the certificate of Cohen et al. (2019) assumes that the smoothed model f predicts the
most likely label output by base model g, given a smoothing distribution N (0, Пғ В· 1): f (x) =
argmaxyвҲҲY PrzвҲјN (0,ПғВ·1) [g(x + z) = y]. To certify the robustness of a smoothed prediction y =
f (x) for a specific input x, we have to compute the probability q = PrzвҲјN (0,ПғВ·1) [g(x + z) = y]
to then calculate the maximum certifiable radius ПғОҰвҲ’1 (q) with standard-normal inverse CDF ОҰвҲ’1 .
For complicated models like deep neural networks, computing such properties in closed form is
usually not tractable. Instead, they have to be estimated using Monte Carlo sampling. The result are
predictions and certificates that only hold with a certain probability.
Randomized smoothing with Monte Carlo sampling usually consists of three distinct steps:

      1. First, a small number of samples N1 from the smoothing distribution are used to generate
         a candidate prediction yМӮ, e.g. the most frequently predicted class.
      2. Then, a second round of N2 samples is taken and a statistical test is used to determine
         whether the candidate prediction is likely to be the actual prediction of smoothed classifier
         f , i.e. whether yМӮ = f (x) with a certain probability (1 - Оұ1 ). If this is not the case, one has
         to abstain from making a prediction (or generate a new candidate prediction).
      3. To certify the robustness of prediction yМӮ, a final round of N3 samples is taken to estimate
         all quantities needed for the certificate.

In the case of (Cohen et al., 2019), we need to estimate the probability q =
PrzвҲјN (0,ПғВ·1) [g(x + z) = yМӮ] to compute the certificate ПғОҰвҲ’1 (q), whose strength is monotonically
increasing in q. To ensure that the certificate holds with high probability (1 - Оұ2 ), we have to com-
pute a probabilistic lower bound q вүӨ q. Instead of performing two separate round of sampling, one
can also re-use the same samples for the abstention test and certification. One particularly simple
abstention mechanism is to just compute the Monte Carlo randomized smoothing certificate to de-
termine whether вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ {x} : f (xвҖІ ) = yМӮ with high probability, i.e. whether the prediction is robust
to input xвҖІ that is the result of вҖқperturbingвҖқ clean input x with zero adversarial budget.
In the following, we discuss how we perform Monte Carlo randomized smoothing for our base
certificates, as well as the baselines we use for our experimental evaluation. In В§ G.4, we discuss
how we account for the multiple comparisons problem, i.e. the fact that we are not just trying to
probabilistically certify a single prediction, but multiple predictions at once.

G.1   M ONTE C ARLO BASE C ERTIFICATES FOR C ONTINUOUS DATA

For our base certificates for continuous data, we follow the approach we already discussed in the
previous paragraphs (recall that the certificate of Cohen et al. (2019) is a special case of our cer-
tificate with Gaussian noise for l2 perturbations). We are given an input space XDin , label space
Y, base model (or вҖ“ in the case of multi-output classifiers вҖ“ base model output) g : XDin вҶ’ Y
and smoothing distribution ОЁ(x) (either multivariate Gaussian or multivariate uniform). To gen-
erate a candidate prediction, we apply the base classifier  to N1 samples from the smoothing
distribution in order to obtain predictions y (1) , . . . , y (N1 ) and compute the majority prediction

yМӮ = argmaxyвҲҲY n | y (n) = yМӮ . Recall that for Gaussian and uniform noise, our certificate guar-
antees вҲҖxвҖІ вҲҲ H : f (x) = yМӮ for
                                               Din
                                (                                          )
                                               X
                                    вҖІ    Din                   вҖІ      p
                           H= x вҲҲX                  wd В· |xd вҲ’ xd | < О· ,
                                                 d=1
                            2
with О· =            ОҰвҲ’1 (q)     or О· = ОҰвҲ’1 (q) (depending on the distribution), q =
PrzвҲјN (0,ПғВ·1) [g(x + z) = yМӮ] and standard-normal inverse CDF ОҰвҲ’1 . To obtain a probabilistic cer-
tificate that holds with high probability 1 вҲ’ Оұ, we need a probabilistic lower bound on О·. Both О· are
monotonically increasing in q, i.e. we can bound them by finding a lower bound q on q. For this, we


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


take N2 more samples from the smoothing distribution and compute a Clopper-Pearson lower con-
fidence bound (Clopper & Pearson, 1934) on q. For abstentions, we use the aforementioned simple
mechanism: We test whether x вҲҲ H. Given the definition of H, this is equivalent to testing whether
                                              0 < ОҰвҲ’1 (q)
                                              вҮҗвҮ’ ОҰ(0) < q
                                              вҮҗвҮ’ 0.5 < q.
If q вүӨ 0.5, we abstain.

G.2    M ONTE C ARLO VARIANCE -C ONSTRAINED C ERTIFICATION

For variance-constrained certification, we smooth a modelвҖҷs softmax scores. That is, we are given an
input space XDin , label space Y, base model (or вҖ“ in the case of multi-output classifiers вҖ“ base model
output) g : XDin вҶ’ вҲҶ|Y| with (|Y| вҲ’ 1)-dimensional probability simplex вҲҶ|Y| and smoothing
distribution ОЁ(x) (Bernoullli or sparsity-aware noise, in the case of binary data). To generate a
candidate prediction, we apply the base classifier
                                                      to N1 samples from the smoothing distribution
in order to obtain vectors s(1) , . . . , s(N1 ) with s вҲҲ вҲҶ|Y| , compute the average softmax scores
         PN
s = N11 n=1 s and select the label with the highest score yМӮ = arg maxy sy .
Recall that our certificate guarantees robustness if the optimal value of the following optimization
problem is greater than 0.5:
                                        min EzвҲјОЁ(xвҖІ ) [h(z)]                                        (108)
                                         h:XвҶ’R
                                                          h         i
                                                                  2
                     s.t.   EzвҲјОЁ(x) [h(z)] вүҘ Вө, EzвҲјОЁ(x) (h(z) вҲ’ ОҪ) вүӨ О¶,                             (109)
                                              h                    i
                                                               2
with Вө = EzвҲјОЁ(x) [g(z)yМӮ ], О¶ = EzвҲјОЁ(x) (g(z)yМӮ вҲ’ ОҪ) and a fixed scalar ОҪ вҲҲ R. To obtain a
probabilistic certificate, we have to compute a probabilistic lower bound on the optimal value of the
optimization problem. Because it is a minimization problem, this can be achieved by loosening its
constraints, i.e. computing a probabilistic lower bound Вө on Вө and a probabilistic upper bound О¶ on
О¶.
Like in CDF-smoothing (Kumar et al., 2020), we bound the parameters using CDF-based non-
parametric confidence intervals. Let F (s) = PrzвҲјОЁ(x) [g(z)yМӮ вүӨ s] be the CDF of gyМӮ (Z) with
Z вҲј ОЁ(x). Define M thresholds вүӨ 0П„1 вүӨ П„2 . . . , П„M вҲ’1 вүӨ П„M вүӨ 1 with вҲҖm : П„m вҲҲ [0, 1].
We then take N2 samples    x(1) , . . . , x (N2 ) from the smoothing distribution to compute the empirical
             PN2   (n)
CDF FМғ (s) = n=1 I g(z )yМӮ вүӨ s . We can then use the Dvoretzky-Keifer-Wolfowitz inequality
(Dvoretzky et al., 1956) to compute an upper bound FМӮ and a lower bound F on the CDF of gyМӮ :

               F (s) = max FМғ (s) вҲ’ П…, 0 вүӨ F (s) вүӨ min FМғ (s) + П…, 1 = F (s),                       (110)
         q
with П… = ln2В·N
             2/Оұ
               2
                 , which holds with high probability (1 вҲ’ Оұ). Using these bounds on the CDF, we
can bound Вө = EzвҲјОЁ(x) [g(z)yМӮ ] as follows (Anderson, 1969):
                                                    M
                                                    X вҲ’1
                            Вө вүҘ П„M вҲ’ П„1 F (П„1 ) +          (П„m+1 вҲ’ П„m ) F (П„m ).                    (111)
                                                    m=1
                                  h           i
                                            2
The parameter О¶ = EzвҲјОЁ(x) (g(z)yМӮ вҲ’ ОҪ) can be bounded in a similar fashion.                       Define
Оҫ0 , . . . , ОҫM вҲҲ R+ with:
                         Оҫ0 = max (Оә вҲ’ ОҪ)2

                             ОәвҲҲ[0,П„1 ]

                        ОҫM = max (Оә вҲ’ ОҪ)2

                             ОәвҲҲ[П„M ,1]
                                                                                                    (112)
                                       (Оә вҲ’ ОҪ)2

                        Оҫm =     max              вҲҖm вҲҲ {1, . . . , M вҲ’ 1},
                              ОәвҲҲ[П„m ,П„m +1]


                                                    39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


i.e. compute the maximum squared distance to ОҪ within each bin [П„m , П„m+1 ]. Then:
                                       M
                                       X вҲ’1
 О¶ вүӨ Оҫ0 F (П„1 ) + ОҫM (1 вҲ’ F (П„M )) +          Оҫm (F (П„m+1 вҲ’ F (П„m ))                            (113)
                                       m=1
            M
            X вҲ’1
   = ОҫM +          (ОҫmвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оҫm ) F (П„m )                                                         (114)
            m=1
            M
            X вҲ’1

   вүӨ ОҫM +          (ОҫmвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оҫm ) sgn (ОҫmвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оҫm ) F (П„m ) + (1 вҲ’ sgn (ОҫmвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оҫm )) F (П„m ) (115)
            m=1
with probability (1 вҲ’ Оұ). In the first inequality, we bound the expected squared distance from ОҪ by
assuming that the probability mass in each bin [П„m , П„m+1 ] is concentrated at the farthest point from
ОҪ. The equality is a result of reordering the telescope sum. In the second inequality, we upper-bound
the CDF where it is multiplied with a non-negative value and lower-bound it where it is multiplied
with a negative value.
With the probabilistic bounds Вө and О¶ we can now вҖ“ in principle вҖ“ evaluate our robustness certificate,
i.e. check whether                                                     2
                          X ПҖxвҖІ (z)2                1

                                                                    1
                                       <1+                 2 Вө вҲ’         .                      (116)
                               ПҖx (z)         О¶ вҲ’ ВөвҲ’ОҪ               2
                           zвҲҲX
where the ПҖ are the probability mass functions of smoothing distributions ОЁ(x) and ОЁ(xвҖІ ). But one
crucial detail of Theorem 5.1 underlying the certificate was that it only holds for ОҪ вүӨ Вө. To use the
method with Monte Carlo sampling, one has to ensure that ОҪ вүӨ Вө by first computing Вө and then
choosing some smaller ОҪ.
In our experiments, we use an alternative method that allows us to use arbitrary ОҪ: From our proof
of Theorem 5.1we know that the dual problem of Eq. 108 is
                                      Оұ2     Оұ                1 X ПҖxвҖІ (z)2
                    max ОұВө вҲ’ ОІО¶ вҲ’         +    вҲ’ ОұОҪ + ОҪ вҲ’                      ,             (117)
                    Оұ,ОІвүҘ0             4ОІ    2ОІ               4ОІ       ПҖx (z)
                                                                   zвҲҲX
Instead of trying to find an optimal Оұ (which causes problems in subsequent derivations if ОҪ вү° Вө),
we can simply choose Оұ = 1. By duality, the result is still a lower bound on the primal problem,
i.e. the certificate remains valid. The dual problem becomes
                                                 1     1 X ПҖxвҖІ (z)2
                                 max Вө вҲ’ ОІО¶ +      вҲ’                .                        (118)
                                 ОІвүҘ0            4ОІ    4ОІ     ПҖx (z)
                                                          zвҲҲX
The problem is concave in ОІ (because the expected likelihood ratio is вүҘ 1). Finding the optimal ОІ,
comparing the result to 0.5 and solving for the expected likelihood ratio, shows that a prediction is
robust if                                                        2
                                X ПҖxвҖІ (z)2           1

                                                              1
                                              <1+        ВөвҲ’        .                           (119)
                                     ПҖx (z)          О¶        2
                                 zвҲҲX

For our abstention mechanism, like in the previous section, we compute the certificate H and then
test whether x вҲҲ H. In the case of Bernoulli smoothing and sparsity-aware smoothing), this corre-
sponds to testing whether

                                                    1        1
                                      1 < ln 1 +        ВөвҲ’                                  (120)
                                                    О¶        2
                                           1
                                вҮҗвҮ’ Вө > .                                                    (121)
                                           2

G.3   M ONTE C ARLO C ENTER S MOOTHING

While we can not use center smoothing as a base certificate, we benchmark our method against it
during our experimental evaluation. The generation of candidate predictions, the abstention mech-
anism and the certificate are explained in (Kumar & Goldstein, 2021). The authors allow multiple
options for generating candidate predictions. We use the вҖқОІ minimum enclosing ballвҖқ with ОІ = 2
that is based on pair-wise distance calculations.


                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.4    M ULTIPLE C OMPARISONS P ROBLEM

The first step of our collective certificate is to compute one base certificate for each of the Dout
predictions of the multi-output classifier. With Monte Carlo randomized smoothing, we want all of
these probabilistic certificates to simultaneously hold with a high probability (1 вҲ’ Оұ). But as the
number of certificates increases, so does the probability of at least one of them being invalid. To
account for this multiple comparisons problem, we use Bonferroni (Bonferroni, 1936) correction,
i.e. compute each Monte Carlo certificate such that it holds with probability (1 вҲ’ Оұn ).
For base certificates that only depend on qn = PrzвҲјОЁ(n) [gn (z) = yМӮn ], i.e. the probability of the
base classifier predicting a particular label yМӮn under the smoothing distribution, one can also use the
strictly better Holm correction (Holm, 1979). This includes our Gaussian and uniform smoothing
certificates for continuous data. Holm correction is a procedure than can be used to correct for
the multiple comparisons problem when performing multiple arbitrary hypothesis tests. Given N
hypotheses, their p-values are ordered in ascending order p1 , . . . , pN . Starting at i = 1, the iвҖҷth
                                   Оұ                                               Оұ
hypothesis is rejected if pi < N +1вҲ’i   , until one reaches an i such that pi вүҘ N +1вҲ’i .
Fischer et al. (2021) proposed to use Holm correction as part of their procedure for certifying that
all (non-abstaining) predictions of an image segmentation model are robust to adversarial perturba-
tions. In the following, we first summarize their approach and then discuss how Holm correction
can be used for certifying our notion of collective robustness, i.e. certifying the number of robust
predictions. As in В§ G.1, the goal is to obtain a lower bound q n on qn = PrzвҲјОЁ(n) [gn (z) = yМӮn ] for
                                                                        (1)        (N2 )
each of the Dout classifier outputs.   Assume we take   N2 samples z , . . . , z         from the smoothing
                           PN2            (i)
distribution. Let ОҪn = i=1 I gn (z ) = yМӮn and let ПҖ : {1, . . . , Dout } вҶ’ {1, . . . , Dout } be a
bijection that orders the ОҪn in descending order, i.e. ОҪПҖ(1) вүҘ ОҪПҖ(2) В· В· В· вүҘ ОҪПҖ(Dout ) . Instead of using
Clopper-Pearson confidence intervals to obtain tight lower bounds on the qn , Fischer et al. (2021)
define a threshold П„ вҲҲ [0.5, 1) and use Binomial tests to determine for which n the bound П„ вүӨ qn
holds with high-probability. Let BinP (ОҪn , N2 , вүӨ, П„ ) be the p-value of the one-sided binomial test,
which is monotonically decreasing in ОҪn . Following the Holm correction scheme, the authors test
whether                                                              Оұ
                                BinP ОҪПҖ(k) , N2 , вүӨ, П„ <                                              (122)
                                                              Dout + 1 вҲ’ k
for k = 1, . . . , Dout until reaching a k вҲ— for which the null-hypothesis can no longer be rejected,
                                Оұ
i.e. the p-value is g.e.q. Dout +1вҲ’k вҲ— . They then know that with probability 1 вҲ’ Оұ, the bound П„ вүӨ qn

holds for all n вҲҲ {ПҖ(k) | k вҲҲ {1, . . . , k вҲ— }. For these outputs, they use the lower bound П„ to compute
robustness certificates. They abstain with all other outputs.
This approach is sensible when one is concerned with the least robust prediction from a set of
predictions. But our collective certificate benefits from having tight robustness guarantees for each
of the individual predictions. Holm correction can be used with arbitrary hypothesis tests. For
instance, we can use a different threshold П„n per output gn , i.e. test whether
                                                                    Оұ
                            BinP ОҪПҖ(k) , N2 , вүӨ, П„ПҖ(k) <                                        (123)
                                                            Dout + 1 вҲ’ k
for k = 1, . . . , Dout . In particular, we can use
                                                                      Оұ
                      П„n = sup s.t. BinP (ОҪn , N2 , вүӨ, t) <                       ,                  (124)
                              t                               Dout + 1 вҲ’ ПҖ вҲ’1 (n)
i.e. choose the largest threshold such that the null hypothesis can still be rejected. Eq. 124 is the
                                                                   Оұ
lower Clopper-Pearson confidence bound with significance Dout +1вҲ’ПҖ    вҲ’1 (n) . This means that, instead

of performing hypothesis tests, we can obtain probabilistic lower bounds q n вүӨ qn by computing
Clopper-Pearson confidence bounds with significance parameters DОұout , . . . , Оұ1 . The q n can then be
used to compute the base certificates. Due to the definition of the П„n , all of the null hypotheses are
rejected, i.e. we obtain valid probabilistic lower bounds on all qn . We can thus use the abstention
mechanism from В§ G.1, i.e. only abstain if q n вүӨ 0.5.


                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    C OMPARISON TO THE C OLLECTIVE C ERTIFICATE OF F ISCHER ET AL .
     (2021)
Our collective certificate based on localized smoothing is designed to bound the number of simul-
taneously robust predictions. Fischer et al. (2021) designed SegCertify to determine whether all
predictions are simultaneously robust. As discussed in В§ 3.2, their work is based on the naДұМҲve collec-
tive certification approach applied to isotropic Gaussian smoothing: They first certify each output
independently, then count the number of certifiably robust predictions for a specific adversarial bud-
get and then test whether the number of certifiably robust predictions equals the overall number of
predictions. To obtain better guarantees in practical scenarios, they further propose to

       вҖў use Holm correction to address the multiple comparisons problem (see В§ G.4),
       вҖў Abstain at a higher rate to avoid вҖңbad componetsвҖқ, i.e. predictions yn that have a low
         consistency qn = PrzвҲјN (x,Пғ) [g(z) = y] and thus very small certifiable radii.

A more technical summary of their method can be found in В§ G.4.
In the following, we discuss why our certificate can always offer guarantees that are at least as
strong as SegCertify, both for our notion of collective robustness (number of robust predictions)
and their notion of collective robustness (robustness of all predictions). In short, isotropic smooth-
ing is a special case of localized smoothing and Holm correction can also be used for our base
certificates. Before proceedings, please read the discussion on Monte Carlo base certificates and
Clopper-Pearson confidence intervals in В§ G.1 and the multiple comparisons problem in В§ G.4.
A direct consequence of the results in В§ G.4 is that using Clopper-Pearson confidence intervals and
Holm correction will yield stronger per-prediction robustness guarantees and lower abstention rates
than the method of Fischer et al. (2021). The Clopper-Pearson-based method only abstains if one
cannot guarantee that qn > 0.5 with high probability, while their method abstains if one cannot
guarantee that qn вүҘ П„ with П„ вүҘ 0.5 (or specific other predictions abstain). For all non-abstaining
predictions, the Clopper-Pearson-based certificate will be at least as strong as the one obtained using
a single threshold П„ , as it computes the tightest bound for which the null hypothesis can still be
rejected (see Eq. 124).
Consequently, when certifying our notion of collective robustness, i.e. determining the number of
robust predictions given adversarial budget Пө, a naДұМҲve collective robustness certificate (i.e. count-
ing the number of predictions whose robustness are guaranteed by the base certificates) based on
Clopper-Pearson bounds will also be stronger than the method of Fischer et al. (2021). It should
however be noted that their method could potentially be used with other methods of family-wise
error rate correction, although they state that вҖңthese methods do not scale to realistic segmentation
problemsвҖқ and do not discuss any further details.
Conversely, when certifying their notion of collective robustness, i.e. determining whether all non-
abstaining predictions are robust given adversarial budget Пө, the certificate based on Clopper-Pearson
confidence bounds is also at least as strong as that of Fischer et al. (2021). To certify their notion
of robustness, they iterate over all predictions and determine whether all non-abstaining predictions
are certifiably robust, given Пө. Naturally, as the Clopper-Pearson-based certificates are stronger,
any prediction that is robust according to (Fischer et al., 2021) is also robust acccording to the
Clopper-Pearson-based certificates. The only difference is that, for П„ > 0.5, their method will have
more abstaining predictions. But, due to the direct correspondence of Clopper-Pearson confidence
bounds and Binomial tests, we can modify our abstention mechanism to obtain exactly the same set
of abstaining predictions: We simply have to use q n вүӨ П„ instead of qn вүӨ 0.5 as our criterion.
Finally, it should be noted that our proposed collective certificate based on linear programming is at
least as strong as the naДұМҲve collective certificate (see Eq. 1.1 and Eq. 1.2 in В§ 3.2). Thus, letting the
set of targeted predictions T be the set of all non-abstaining predictions and checking whether the
collective certificate guarantees robustness for all of T will also result in a certificate that is at least
as strong as that of Fischer et al. (2021) in their setting.


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I     C OMPARISON TO THE C OLLECTIVE C ERTIFICATE OF S CHUCHARDT ET AL .
      (2021)

In the following, we first present the collective certificate for binary graph-structured data proposed
by Schuchardt et al. (2021) (see В§ I.1. We then show that, when using sparsity-aware smoothing
distributions (Bojchevski et al., 2020) вҖ“ the family of smoothing distributions used both in our work
and that of Schuchardt et al. (2021) вҖ“ our certificate subsumes their certificate. That is, our collective
robustness certificate based on localized randomized smoothing can provide the same robustness
guarantees (see В§ I.2).

I.1   T HE C OLLECTIVE C ERTIFICATE

Their certificate assumes the input space to be G = {0, 1}N Г—D Г— {0, 1}N Г—N вҖ“ the set of undirected
attributed graphs with N nodes and D attributes per node. The model is assumed to be a multi-
output classifier f : G вҶ’ YN that assigns a label from label set Y to each of the nodes. Given an
input graph G = (X, A) and a corresponding prediction y = f (G), they want to certify collective
robustness to a set of perturbed graphs B вҠҶ G. The perturbation model B is characterized by four
                     +    вҲ’    + +
scalar parameters rX   , rX , rA , rA вҲҲ N0 , specifying the number of bits the adversary is allowed to
add (0 вҶ’ 1) and delete (1 вҶ’ 0) in the attribute and adjacency matrix, respectively. It can also
be extended to feature additional constraints (e.g. per-node budgets). We discuss how these can be
integrated after showing our main result. A formal definition of the perturbation model can be found
in Section B of (Schuchardt et al., 2021).
The goal of their work is to certify collective robustness for a set of targeted nodes T вҠҶ {1, . . . , N },
i.e. compute a lower bound on
                                             X
                                       min
                                        вҖІ
                                                 I [fn (GвҖІ ) = yn ] .                                (125)
                                       G вҲҲB
                                              nвҲҲT

Their approach to obtaining this lower-bound shares the same high-level idea as ours (see В§ 3.2):
Combining per-prediction base certificates and leveraging some notion of locality. But while our
method uses localized randomized smoothing, i.e. smoothing different outputs with different non-
i.i.d. smoothing distributions to obtain base certificates that encode locality, their method uses a-
priori knowledge about the strict locality of the classifier f . A model is strictly local if each of its
outputs fn only operates on a well-defined subset of the input data. To encode this strict locality,
Schuchardt et al. (2021) associate each output fn with an indicator vector ПҲ (n) and an indicator
matrix ОЁ(n) that fulfill

                 X D
                 N X                                N
                                                  N X
                            (n)            вҖІ
                                                 X                  вҖІ
                                                      ОЁ(n)

                           ПҲm   I Xm,d Мё= Xi,j  +      m I Am,d Мё= Ai,j = 0
                 m=1 d=1                             i=1 j=1
                                                                                                     (126)
                                                                                  вҖІ    вҖІ
                                                         =вҮ’ fn (X, A) = fn (X , A ).

for any perturbed graph G вҖІ = (X вҖІ , AвҖІ ). Eq. 126 expresses that the prediction of output fn remains
unchanged if all inputs in its receptive field remain unchanged. Conversely, it expresses that per-
turbations outside the receptive field can be ignored. Unlike in our work, Schuchardt et al. (2021)
describe their base certificates as sets in adversarial budget space. That is, some certification proce-
dure is applied to each output fn to obtain a set
                                           +       вҲ’       +       вҲ’
                                  K(n) вҠҶ [rX ] Г— [rX ] Г— [rA ] Г— [rX ]                               (127)

                                                  вҲ’ T
with [k] = {0, . . . , k}. If c+      cвҲ’    c+

                                 X     X     A cA        вҲҲ K(n) , then prediction yn is robust to any
                                                       вҲ’                                              вҲ’
perturbed input with exactly cX attribute additions, cX attribute deletions, c+
                                +
                                                                                A edge additions and cA
edge deletions. A more detailed explanation can be found in Section 3 of (Schuchardt et al., 2021).
Note that the base certificates only depend on the number of perturbations, not their location in the
input. Only by combining them using the receptive field indicators from Eq. 126 can one obtain
a collective certificate that is better than the naДұМҲve collective certificate (i.e. counting how many
predictions are certifiably robust to the collective threat model). The resulting collective certificate


                                                    43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is
                        X  h       T                                                                    iT
                                                  (n) T                   (n) +              (n) вҲ’
                                                                                                             вҲҲ K(n)
                             ПҲ (n) b+                     bвҲ’

          min            I
                                                                P                     P
     b+ ,b+ ,B + ,B вҲ’                X        ПҲ            X         i,j ОЁi,j Bi,j      i,j ОЁi,j Bi,j
                        nвҲҲT
                                                                                                                 (128)
                 N
                 X                  N
                                    X                     N X
                                                          X N                        N X
                                                                                     X N
                                                вҲ’                                               вҲ’      вҲ’
         s.t.           b+    +
                         m вүӨ rX ,         bвҲ’
                                           m вүӨ rX ,
                                                                     +
                                                                    Bi,j    +
                                                                         вүӨ rA ,                Bi,j вүӨ rA ,       (129)
                m=1                 m=1                   i=1 j=1                    i=1 j=1

                                     b+ , bвҲ’ вҲҲ NN
                                                0         B + , B вҲ’ вҲҲ N0N Г—N .                                   (130)
The variables defined in Eq. 130 model how the adversary allocates their adversarial budget, i.e. how
many attributes are perturbed per node and which edges are modified. Eq. 129 ensures that this
allocation in compliant with the collective threat model. Finally, in Eq. 128 the indicator vector and
matrix ПҲ (n) and ОЁ(n) are used to mask out any allocated perturbation budget that falls outside the
receptive field of fn before evaluating its base certificate.
To solve the optimization problem, Schuchardt et al. (2021) replace each of the indicator functions
with binary variables and include additional constraints to ensure that they have value 1 i.f.f. the
indicator function would have value 1. To do so, they define one linear constraint per point separating
                                                          (n)
the set of certifiable budgets K(n) from its complement K in adversarial budget space (the вҖқPareto
frontвҖқ discussed in Section 3 of (Schuchardt et al., 2021)).
From the above explanation, the main drawbacks of this collective certificate compared to our lo-
calized randomized smoothing approach and corresponding collective certificate should be clear.
Firstly, if the classifier f is not strictly local, i.e. the receptive field indicators ПҲ and ОЁ only have
non-zero entries, then all base certificates are evaluated using the entire collective adversarial bud-
get. It thus degenerates to the naДұМҲve collective certificate. Secondly, even if the model is strictly
local, each of the outputs may assign varying levels of importance to different parts of its receptive
field. Their method is incapable of capturing this additional soft locality. Finally, their means of
evaluating the base certificates may involve evaluating a large number of linear constraints. Our
method, on the other hand, only requires a single constraint per prediction. Our collective certificate
can thus be more efficiently computed.

I.2      P ROOF OF S UBSUMPTION

In the following, we show that any robustness certificate obtained by using the collective certificate
of Schuchardt et al. (2021) with sparsity-aware randomized smoothing base certificates can also be
obtained by using our proposed collective certificate with an appropriately parameterized localized
smoothing distribution. The fundamental idea is that, for randomly smoothed models, completely
randomizing all input dimensions outside the receptive field is equivalent to masking out any pertur-
bations outside the receptive field.
First, we derive the certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021) for predictions obtained via sparsity-
aware smoothing. Schuchardt et al. (2021) require base certificates that guarantee robustness when
                       T
 cX cвҲ’            cвҲ’
  +
        X    c+
              A     A     вҲҲ K(n) , where the c indicate the number of added and deleted attribute and
adjacency bits. That is, the certificates must only depend on the number of perturbations, not on
their location. To achieve this, all entries of the attribute matrix and all entries of the adjacency
matrix, respectively, must share the same distribution. For the attribute matrix, they define scalar
                                вҲ’
distribution parameters p+ X , pA вҲҲ [0, 1]. Given attribute matrix X вҲҲ {0, 1}
                                                                              N Г—D
                                                                                   , they then sample
random attribute matrices ZX that are distributed according to sparsity-aware smoothing distribu-
                          вҲ’
tion S X, 1 В· p+ X , 1 В· pX (see В§ F.3.2), i.e.
                                                         1вҲ’Xm,d       Xm,d
                              Pr[(ZX )m,d = 0] = 1 вҲ’ p+
                                                      X         В· pвҲ’
                                                                   X       ,
                                                  + 1вҲ’Xm,d         вҲ’ Xm,d

                              Pr[(ZX )m,d = 1] = pX         В· 1 вҲ’ pX       .
Given input adjacency
                    вҲ’
                        matrix A, random adjacency matrices ZA are sampled from the distribution
S A, 1 В· p+
          A , 1 В· p A . Applying Corollary F.6 (to the flattened and concatenated attribute and ad-
jacency matrices) shows that smoothed prediction yn = fn (X, A) is robust to the perturbed graph


                                                           44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(X вҖІ , AвҖІ ) if
                       N X
                       X D
                                  +                  вҖІ        вҲ’                  вҖІ

                                 ОіX В· I Xm,d = 0 Мё= Xm,d   + ОіX В· I Xm,d = 1 Мё= Xm,d
                       m=1 d=1
                       N X
                       X N                                                                                         (131)
                                                             вҲ’
                                  +
                                    В· I Ai,j = 0 Мё= AвҖІi,j + ОіA В· I Ai,j = 1 Мё= AвҖІi,j

                   +             ОіA
                       i=1 i=1
                        (n)
                   <О·
                                     2             2
                                                                                            2

                                                                                                        2
            +                    (pвҲ’
                                   X)     (1вҲ’pвҲ’
                                              X)              вҲ’                       (1вҲ’p+
                                                                                          X)
                                                                                          +        (p+
                                                                                                     X)
with       ОіX =    ln 1вҲ’p+ + p+              ,           =   ОіX
                                                              ln      pвҲ’
                                                                                         ОіA     + 1вҲ’pвҲ’ . ,
                                                                                                  =
                             X        X                                X         X
    вҲ’ 2             2
                                            2         2

     (pA )   (1вҲ’pвҲ’A)                 (1вҲ’p+A)       A)
                                                 (p+
                                                                                                2
                           вҲ’                                                    1
ln 1вҲ’p   + +
                p+
                        , ОіA  = ln      pвҲ’
                                               + 1вҲ’p вҲ’ .   and О· (n) = ln 1 + Пғ(n) 2 Вө(n) вҲ’ 12      ,
           A           A                        A                   A

where Вө(n) is the mean and Пғ (n) is the variance of the base classifierвҖҷs output distribution, given the
input smoothing distribution. Since the indicator functions for each perturbation type in Eq. 131
share the same weights, Eq. 131 can be rewritten as
                                     + +      вҲ’ вҲ’      + +     вҲ’ вҲ’
                                    ОіX cX + Оі X cX + Оі A cA + ОіA cA вүӨ О· (n) ,                                      (132)
            вҲ’    + вҲ’
where c+
       X , cX , cA , cA are the overall number of added and deleted attribute and adjacency bits, re-
spectively. Eq. 132 matches the notion of base certificates defined by Schuchardt et al. (2021), i.e. it
corresponds to a set K(n) in adversarial budget space for which we provably know that prediction yn
                                              T
is certifiably robust if c+   cвҲ’    c+    cвҲ’

                          X    X     A     A    вҲҲ K(n) . When we insert the base certificate Eq. 132
into objective function Eq. 128, the collective certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021) becomes equiv-
alent to
                                                       "
                                                 X                   T                     T
                                                                               вҲ’
                                   + +
                                       min +  вҲ’
                                                     I   Оі +
                                                           X  ПҲ (n)
                                                                       b+
                                                                        X +  Оі X    ПҲ (n)
                                                                                             bвҲ’
                                                                                              X
                                         b ,b ,B ,B
                                                            nвҲҲT
                                                                                                               #
                                                                     (n) +               вҲ’ (n) вҲ’
                                                             X                    X
                                                         +
                                                       +ОіA          ОЁi,j Bi,j +         ОіA ОЁi,j Bi,j вүӨ О· (n)       (133)
                                                              i,j                 i,j
            N
            X                      N
                                   X                       N X
                                                           X N                          N X
                                                                                        X N
                                               вҲ’                                                             вҲ’
    s.t.          b+    +
                   m вүӨ rX ,              bвҲ’
                                          m вүӨ rX ,
                                                                                +
                                                                     B + i,j вүӨ rA ,               B вҲ’ i,j вүӨ rA ,   (134)
            m=1                    m=1                     i=1 j=1                      i=1 j=1

                                                                        b+ , bвҲ’ вҲҲ NN
                                                                                   0     B + , B вҲ’ вҲҲ N0N Г—N .      (135)

Next, we show that obtaining base certificates through localized randomized smoothing with ap-
propriately chosen parameters and using these base certificates within our proposed collective cer-
tificate (see Theorem 4.2) will result in the same optimization problem. Instead of using the same
smoothing distribution for all outputs, we use different distribution parameters
                                                                                 for each one. For
                                                                                                   the
                                                                                    (n)    вҲ’ (n)
nвҖҷth output, we sample random attributes matrices from distribution S X, Оҳ+       X     , ОҳX      with
     (n)         (n)
Оҳ+X    , ОҳвҲ’X      вҲҲ [0, 1]N Г—D . Note that, in order to avoid having to index flattened vectors, we over-
load the definition of sparsity-aware smoothing to allow for matrix-valued parameters. For example,
               (n)
the value Оҳ+X n,d indicates the probability of flipping the value of input attribute Xn,d from 0 to 1
                       (n)
and the value ОҳвҲ’
               X n,d indicates the probability of flipping the value of input attribute Xn,d from 1 to
0. We choose the following values for these parameters:
                                 (n)

                             Оҳ+X m,d =  ПҲm
                                          (n)
                                              В· p+
                                                 X  +   1 вҲ’ ПҲ (n)
                                                              m     В· 0.5,                      (136)
                                 (n)

                             ОҳвҲ’           (n)    вҲ’
                               X m,d = ПҲm В· pX + 1 вҲ’ ПҲm
                                                              (n)
                                                                    В· 0.5,                      (137)
                                                                                      вҲ’
where ПҲ (n) is the receptive field indicator vector defined in Eq. 126 and p+   X , В·pX вҲҲ [0, 1] are
the same flip probabilities we used for the certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021). Due to this
parameterization, attribute bits inside the receptive field are randomized using the same distribu-
tion as in the certificate of Schuchardt et al. (2021), while attribute bits outside are set to either

                                                             45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


0 or
    1 with(n)
           equal probability.
                              Similarly, we sample random adjacency matrices from distribution
               вҲ’ (n)            (n)      (n)
       +
S A, ОҳA , ОҳA           with Оҳ+A     , ОҳвҲ’
                                       A     вҲҲ [0, 1]N Г—D and

                                      (n)

                                             (n)               (n)
                                   Оҳ+
                                    A i,j = ОЁi,j В· p+
                                                    A +   1 вҲ’ ОЁi,j   В· 0.5,                           (138)
                                      (n)

                                             (n)               (n)
                                   ОҳвҲ’               вҲ’
                                    A u,j = ОЁi,j В· pA + 1 вҲ’ ОЁi,j     В· 0.5,                           (139)

where ОЁ(n) is the receptive field indicator matrix defined in Eq. 126. Note that, since we only alter
the distribution of bits outside the receptive field, the smoothed prediction yn = fn (X, A) will
be the same as the one obtained via the smoothing distribution used by Schuchardt et al. (2021).
Applying Corollary F.6 (to the flattened and concatenated attribute and adjacency matrices) shows
that smoothed prediction yn = fn (X, A) is robust to the perturbed graph (X вҖІ , AвҖІ ) if
                  N X
                  X D
                             +                      вҖІ      вҲ’                      вҖІ

                            П„X m,d В· I Xm,d = 0 Мё= Xm,d + П„X m,d В· I Xm,d = 1 Мё= Xm,d
                  m=1 d=1
                  N X
                    N
                  X
                             +
                                                    вҖІ
                                                           вҲ’
                                                                                  вҖІ
                                                                                                      (140)
             +              П„A i,j В· I Ai,j = 0 Мё= Ai,j + П„A i,j В· I Ai,j = 1 Мё= Ai,j
                  i=1 j=1

             < О· (n) .

Because we only changed the distribution outside the receptive field, the scalar О· (n) , which depends
on the output distributionвҖҷs mean and variance Вө and Пғ will be the same as the one obtained via the
smoothing scheme used by Schuchardt et al. (2021) et al. Due to Corollary F.6 and the definition of
                                                                            +        вҲ’        +        вҲ’
our smoothing distribution parameters in Eqs. (136) to (139) , the scalars П„X m,d , П„X m,d , П„A i,j , П„A i,j
have the following values:
                                                                                      !
                                                                         2
                 +          (n)   +

                                              (n)
                                                             (1 вҲ’ 0.5)         0.52
               П„X m,d = ПҲm В· ОіX + 1 вҲ’ ПҲm В· 2 В· ln                          +                          (141)
                                                                  0.5        1 вҲ’ 0.5
                                                                                      !
                                                                         2
                 вҲ’          (n)   вҲ’

                                              (n)
                                                             (1 вҲ’ 0.5)         0.52
               П„X m,d = ПҲm В· ОіX + 1 вҲ’ ПҲm В· 2 В· ln                          +                          (142)
                                                                  0.5        1 вҲ’ 0.5
                                                                                      !
                                                                         2
                   вҲ’        (n)   +

                                              (n)
                                                             (1 вҲ’ 0.5)         0.52
                 П„A i,j = ОЁi,j В· ОіA + 1 вҲ’ ОЁi,j В· 2 В· ln                    +                          (143)
                                                                  0.5        1 вҲ’ 0.5
                                                                                     !
                                                                       2
                 вҲ’         (n)   вҲ’

                                             (n)
                                                           (1 вҲ’ 0.5)          0.52
               П„A i,j = ОЁi,j В· ОіA + 1 вҲ’ ОЁi,j В· 2 В· ln                     +            ,              (144)
                                                                 0.5        1 вҲ’ 0.5

where the Оі are the same weights as those of the base certificate Eq. 131 of Schuchardt et al.
(2021).
          Inserting the  above values of П„ into the base certificate Eq. 140 and using the fact that
     (1вҲ’0.5)2     0.52
ln     0.5    + 1вҲ’0.5    = ln(1) = 0 results in

          N X
          X D
                     (n)    +                  вҖІ        (n)    вҲ’                  вҖІ

                    ПҲm   В· ОіX В· I Xm,d = 0 Мё= Xm,d   + ПҲm   В· ОіX В· I Xm,d = 1 Мё= Xm,d
          m=1 d=1
          N X
            N
          X          (n)    вҲ’                          (n)    вҲ’
                                                                                                      (145)
                              В· I Ai,j = 0 Мё= AвҖІi,j + ОЁi,j В· ОіA В· I Ai,j = 1 Мё= AвҖІi,j

      +             ОЁi,j В· ОіA
          i=1 j=1

      < О· (n) .
While our collective certificate derived in В§ 4 only considers one perturbation type, we have al-
ready discussed how to certify robustness to perturbation models with multiple perturbation types in
В§ F.3.2: We use a different budget variable per input dimension and perturbation type. Furthermore,
the attribute bits of each node share the same noise level. Therefore, we can use the method dis-
cussed in В§ E.3, i.e. use a single budget variable per node instead of using one per node and attribute.


                                                       46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Modelling our collective problem in this way, using Eq. 145 as our base certificates and rewriting
the first two sums using inner products results in the optimization problem
                                                       "
                                                X                    T                   T
                                                                              вҲ’
                                  + +
                                      min +   вҲ’
                                                     I   Оі +
                                                           X  ПҲ (n)
                                                                       b+
                                                                        X + Оі X   ПҲ (n)
                                                                                           bвҲ’
                                                                                            X
                                  b ,b ,B ,B
                                                nвҲҲT
                                                                                                     #
                                                           (n) +               вҲ’ (n) вҲ’
                                                    X                   X
                                                +
                                              +ОіA         ОЁi,j Bi,j +         ОіA ОЁi,j Bi,j вүӨ О· (n)       (146)
                                                    i,j                 i,j
          N
          X                 N
                            X                  N X
                                               X N                            N X
                                                                              X N
                                        вҲ’                                                          вҲ’
   s.t.         b+    +
                 m вүӨ rX ,         bвҲ’
                                   m вүӨ rX ,
                                                                     +
                                                          B + i,j вүӨ rA ,                B вҲ’ i,j вүӨ rA ,   (147)
          m=1               m=1                i=1 j=1                        i=1 j=1

                                                           b+ , bвҲ’ вҲҲ NN
                                                                      0        B + , B вҲ’ вҲҲ N0N Г—N .      (148)
This optimization problem is identical to that of Schuchardt et al. (2021) from Eqs. (133) to (135).
The only difference is in how these problems would be mapped to a mixed-integer linear program.
We would directly model the indicator functions in the objective using a single linear constraint.
Schuchardt et al. (2021) would use multiple linear constraints, each corresponding to one point in
the adversarial budget space.
To summarize: For randomly smoothed models, masking out perturbations using a-priori knowledge
about a modelвҖҷs strict locality is equivalent to completely randomizing (here: flipping bits with
probability 50%) parts of the input. While Schuchardt et al. (2021) only derived their certificate
for binary data, it can also be applied to strictly local models for continuous data. Considering our
certificates for Gaussian (Proposition F.1) and uniform (Proposition F.2) smoothing, where the base
certificate weights are Пғ12 and О»1 , respectively, it is possible to perform the same masking operation
as Schuchardt et al. (2021) by using Пғ вҶ’ вҲһ and О» вҶ’ вҲһ.
Finally, it should be noted that the certificate by Schuchardt et al. (2021) allows for additional con-
straints, e.g. on the adversarial budget per node or the number of nodes controlled by the adversary.
As all of them can be modelled using linear constraints on the budget variables (see Section C of their
paper), they can be just as easily integrated into our mixed-integer linear programming certificate.


                                                    47
