Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R ISK -AWARE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH
C OHERENT R ISK M EASURES AND
N ON - LINEAR F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION
  Thanh Lam†        Arun Verma†          Bryan Kian Hsiang Low†        Patrick Jaillet‡
 †
   Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
 ‡
   Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA
 {chithanh, arun, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg†                       jaillet@mit.edu‡


                                               A BSTRACT
          We study the risk-aware reinforcement learning (RL) problem in the episodic
          finite-horizon Markov decision process with unknown transition and reward
          functions. In contrast to the risk-neutral RL problem, we consider minimizing the
          risk of having low rewards, which arise due to the intrinsic randomness of the MDPs
          and imperfect knowledge of the model. Our work provides a unified framework
          to analyze the regret of risk-aware RL policy with coherent risk measures in
          conjunction with non-linear function approximation, which gives the first sub-linear
          regret bounds in the setting. Finally, we validate our theoretical results via empirical
          experiments on synthetic and real-world data.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a control-theoretic problem in which an agent
interacts with an unknown environment and aims to maximize its expected total reward. Due to
the intrinsic randomness of the environment, even a policy with high expected total rewards may
occasionally produce very low rewards. This uncertainty is problematic in many real-life applications
like competitive games (Mnih et al., 2013) and healthcare (Liu et al., 2020), where the agent (or
decision-maker) needs to be risk-averse. For example, the drug responses to patients are stochastic
due to the patients’ varying physiology or genetic profiles (McMahon & Insel, 2012); therefore, it is
desirable to select a set of treatments that yield high effectiveness and minimize the possibility of
adverse effects (Beutler et al., 2016; Fatemi et al., 2021). The existing RL policies that maximize the
risk-neutral total reward can not lead to an optimal risk-aware RL policy for problems where the total
reward has uncertainty (Yu et al., 2018). Therefore, our goal is to design an RL algorithm that learns
a risk-aware RL policy to minimize the risk of having a small expected total reward.
Then, how should we learn a risk-aware RL policy? A natural approach is to directly learn a risk-aware
RL policy that minimizes the risk of having a small expected total reward (Howard & Matheson,
1972). For quantifying such a risk, one can use risk measures like entropic risk (Föllmer & Knispel,
2011), value-at-risk (VaR) (Dempster, 2002), conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar et al.,
2000), or entropic value-at-risk (EVaR) (Ahmadi-Javid, 2012). These risk measures capture the
total reward volatility and quantify the possibility of rare but catastrophic events. The entropic risk
measure can be viewed as a mean-variance criterion, where the risk is expressed as the variance of
total reward (Fei et al., 2021). Alternatively, VaR, CVaR, and EVaR use quantile criteria, which are
often preferable for better risk management over the mean-variance criterion (Chapter 3 of Kisiala
(2015)). Among these risk measures, coherent risk measures1 such as CVaR and EVaR are preferred
as they enjoy compelling theoretical properties such as coherence (Rockafellar et al., 2000).
The risk-aware RL algorithms with CVaR as a risk measure (Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Yu et al., 2018;
Rigter et al., 2021) exist in the literature. However, apart from being customized only for CVaR,
these algorithms suffer two significant shortcomings. First, most of them focus on the tabular MDP
setting and need multiple complete traversals of the state space (Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Rigter et al.,
   1
     Apart from CVaR and EVaR, the risk measures like g-entropic risk measures, Tail value-at-risk, Proportional
Hazard (PH) risk measure, Wang risk measure, and Superhedging price also belong to the coherent risk family.
More details about various coherent risk measures are given in Appendix C.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2021). These traversals are prohibitively expensive for problems with large state space and impossible
for problems with continuous state space, thus limiting these algorithms’ applicability in practice.
Second, the existing algorithms considering continuous or infinite state space assume that MDP is
known, i.e., the probability transitions and reward of each state are known a priori to the algorithm.
In such settings, the agent does not need to explore or generalize to unseen scenarios. Therefore, the
problem considered in Yu et al. (2018) is a planning problem rather than a learning problem. This
paper alleviates both shortcomings by proposing a new risk-aware RL algorithm where MDPs are
unknown and uses non-linear function approximation for addressing continuous state space.
Recent works (Jin et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020) have proposed RL algorithms with function
approximation and finite-sample regret guarantees, but they only focus on the risk-neutral RL setting.
Extending their results to a risk-aware RL setting is non-trivial due to two major challenges. First, the
existing analyses heavily rely on the linearity of the expectation in the risk-neutral Bellman equation.
This linearity property does not hold in the risk-aware RL setting when a coherent risk measure
replaces the expectation in the Bellman equation. Then, how can we address this challenge? We
overcome this challenge by the non-trivial application of the super-additivity property2 of coherent
risk measures (see Lemma 3 and its application in Appendix 4).
The risk-neutral RL algorithms only need one sample of the next state to construct an unbiased
estimate of the Bellman update (Yang et al., 2020) as one can unbiasedly estimate the expectation in
the risk-neutral Bellman equation with a single sample. However, this does not hold in the risk-aware
RL setting. Furthermore, whether one can construct an unbiased estimate of an arbitrary risk measure
using only one sample is unknown. This problem leads to the second major challenge: how can we
construct an unbiased estimate of the risk-aware Bellman update? To resolve this challenge, we
assume access to a weak simulator3 that can sample different next states given the current state and
action and use these samples to construct an unbiased estimator. Such an assumption is mild and
holds in many real-world applications, e.g., a player can anticipate the opponent’s next moves and
hence the possible next states of the game. After resolving both challenges, we propose an algorithm
that uses a risk-aware value iteration procedure based on the upper confidence bound (UCB) and has
a finite-sample sub-linear regret upper bound. Specifically, our contributions are as follows:

       • We first formalize the risk-aware RL setting with coherent risk measures, namely the
         risk-aware objective function and the risk-aware Bellman equation in Section 3. We then
         introduce the notion of regret for a risk-aware RL policy.
       • We propose a general risk-aware RL algorithm named Risk-Aware Upper Confidence
         Bound (RA-UCB) for an entire class of coherent risk measures in Section 4. RA-UCB
         uses UCB-based value functions with non-linear function approximation and also enjoys a
         finite-sample sub-linear regret upper bound guarantee.
       • We provide a unified framework to analyze regret for any coherent risk measure in
         Section 4.1. The novelty in our analysis is in the decomposition of risk-aware RL policy’s
         regret by the super-additivity property of coherent risk measures (shown in the proof of
         Lemma 4 in Appendix D.2).
       • Our empirical experiments on synthetic and real datasets validate the different performance
         aspects of our proposed algorithm in Section 5.

1.1    R ELATED W ORK

Risk-aware MDPs first introduced in the seminal work of Howard & Matheson (1972) with the use
of an exponential utility function known as the entropic risk measure. Since then, the risk-aware
MDPs have been studied with different risk criteria: optimizing moments of the total reward (Jaquette,
1973), exponential utility or entropic risk (Borkar, 2001; 2002; Bäuerle & Rieder, 2014; Fei et al.,
2020; 2021; Moharrami et al., 2022), mean-variance criterion (Sobel, 1982; Li & Ng, 2000; La &
Ghavamzadeh, 2013; Tamar et al., 2016), and conditional value-at-risk (Boda & Filar, 2006; Artzner
et al., 2007; Bäuerle & Mundt, 2009; Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Tamar et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2018; Rigter
et al., 2021). Vadori et al. (2020) focuses on the variability or uncertainty of the rewards.
   2
    Super-additivity in the reward maximization setting becomes sub-additivity in the cost minimization setting.
   3
    Note that the weak simulator can only sample possible next states and returns no information regarding the
rewards. In this sense, our simulator is weaker than the archetypal simulators often assumed in the RL literature.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Many of these existing works assume the MDPs are known a priori (known reward and transition
kernels) (Yu et al., 2018), focus on the optimization problem (Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Yu et al., 2018) or
asymptotic behaviors of algorithms (e.g., does an optimal policy exist, and if so, is it Markovian, etc.)
(Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Bäuerle & Rieder, 2014). The closest works to ours are Fei et al. (2021); Fei
& Xu (2022), which consider the risk-aware reinforcement learning in the function approximation
and regret minimization setting. However, they use the entropic risk measure. In contrast, our work
considers a significantly different family of risk measures, namely the coherent risk measures. They
are preferable and widely used for risk management (Kisiala, 2015). The analysis in Fei et al. (2021);
Fei & Xu (2022) utilizes a technique called exponentiated Bellman equation, which is uniquely
applicable to the entropic risk measure (or more generally the exponential utility family) and cannot
be readily extended to coherent risk measures. Therefore, our analysis differs significantly from that
in Fei et al. (2021); Fei & Xu (2022). Tamar et al. (2015) proposes an actor-critic algorithm for the
entire class of coherent risk measures but does not provide any theoretical analysis of the regret.
Safe RL and constrained MDPs represent a parallel approach to obtaining risk-aware policies in the
presence of uncertainty. Unlike risk-aware MDPs, safe RL does not modify the optimality criteria.
Instead, the risk-aversion is captured via constraints on the rewards or risks (Chow & Pavone, 2013;
Chow et al., 2017), or as chance constraints (Ono et al., 2015; Chow et al., 2017). Compared with
risk-aware MDPs, the constrained MDPs approach enjoys less compelling theoretical properties. The
existence of a global optimal Markov policy using the constrained MDPs is unknown, and many
existing algorithms only return locally optimal Markov policies using gradient-based techniques. It
makes these methods extremely susceptible to policy initialization (Chow et al., 2017), and hence the
best theoretical result one can get in this setting is convergence to a locally optimal policy (Chow
et al., 2017). In contrast, our result in this paper considers the regret (or sub-optimality) with respect
to the global optimal policy.
Distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2022) attempts to model the state-value distribution, and any
risk measure can be characterized by such distribution. Therefore, distributional RL represents
a more ambitious approach in which the agent needs to estimate the entire value distribution.
Existing distributional RL algorithms need to make additional distributional assumptions to work with
distributional estimates such as quantiles (Dabney et al., 2018) or empirical distributions (Rowland
et al., 2018). In contrast, our risk-aware RL framework only considers the risk measures that apply to
the random state-value. As a trade-off, the demand for data and computational resources to estimate
the value distribution at every state can be prohibitively expensive for even moderate-sized problems.
We establish more detailed connections between risk-aware RL and distribution RL in Appendix A.

2       C OHERENT R ISK M EASURES

Let Z ∈ L1 (Ω, F, P)4 be a real-valued random variable with a finite mean and the cumulative
distribution function FZ (z) = P(Z ≤ z). For Z ′ ∈ L1 (Ω, F, P), a function ρ : L1 (Ω, F, P) →
R ∪ {+∞} is a coherent risk measure if it satisfies the following properties:

          1. Normalized: ρ(0) = 0.
          2. Monotonic: If P(Z ≤ Z ′ ) = 1, then ρ(Z) ≤ ρ(Z ′ ).
          3. Super-additive: ρ(Z + Z ′ ) ≥ ρ(Z) + ρ(Z ′ ).
          4. Positively homogeneous: For α ≥ 0, we have ρ(αZ) = αρ(Z).
          5. Translation invariant: For a constant variable A with value a, we have ρ(Z + A) = ρ(Z) + a.

Since our reward maximization setting contrasts with the cost minimization setting often considered
in the literature, we aim to maximize the risk applied to the random reward, i.e., maximizing ρ(Z).
Consequently, the properties of risk measure are upended compared to those usually presented in
cost minimization setting (Föllmer & Schied, 2010). For example, super-additivity in the reward
maximization setting becomes sub-additivity in the cost minimization setting.
Empirical estimation of the risk. The risk of a random variable ρ(Z) is completely determined by
the distribution of Z (FZ ). In practice, we do not know the distribution FZ ; instead, we can observe
    4
        In our risk-aware RL setting, the random variable Z represents the random total reward of the agent.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                   m
m independent and identically distributed (IID) samples {Zi }i=1 from the distribution FZ . Then we
can use these samples to get an empirical estimator of ρ(Z), which is denoted by ρ̂(Z1 , . . . , Zm ).

3     P ROBLEM S ETTING
We consider an episodic finite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP), denoted by a tuple M =
(S, A, H, P, r), where S and A are sets of possible states and actions, respectively, H ∈ Z+ is
the episode length, P = {Ph }h∈[H] are the state transition probability measures, and r = {rh :
S × A → [0, 1]}h∈[H] : are the deterministic reward functions. We assume S is a measurable space of
possibly infinite cardinality, and A is a finite set. For each h ∈ [H], Ph (·|x, a) denotes the probability
transition kernel when the agent takes action a at state x in time step h.
An agent interacts with the MDP as follows. There are T episodes. In the t-th episode, the agent
begins at state xt1 chosen arbitrarily by the environment. In each step h ∈ [H], the agent observes a
state xth ∈ S, selects an action ath ∈ A, and receives a reward rh (xth , ath ). The MDP then transitions
to the next state following the probability transition kernel xth+1 ∼ Ph (·|xth , ath ). The episode
terminates when the agent reaches state xH+1 at time step H + 1. In the last time step, the agent
takes no action and receives no reward.
A policy π of an agent is a sequence of H functions, i.e., π = {πh }h∈[H] , in which each πh (·|x) is a
probability distribution over A. Here, πh (a|x) indicates the probability that the agent takes action a
at state x in time step h. Any policy π and an initial state x1 determine a probability measure Pxπ1
and an associated stochastic process {(xh , ah ), h ∈ [H]}. Let Eπx1 [·] denote the expectation operator
with respect to Pxπ1 . The standard risk-neutral MDP objective is
                                               "H                 #
                                                 X
                                            π
                                      max Ex1        rh (xh , ah ) .                                 (1)
                                        π
                                                   h=1


3.1   R ISK -AWARE E PISODIC MDP

The risk-neutral objective defined in Eq. (1) does not account for the risk incurred due to the
stochasticity in the state transitions and the agent’s policy. Markov risk measures (Ruszczyński, 2010)
are proposed to model and analyze such risks. The risk-aware MDP objective is defined as
       max J π (x1 ),   where J π (x1 ) := r1 (x1 , a1 ) + ρ(r2 (x2 , a2 ) + ρ(r3 (x3 , a3 ) + . . . )),   (2)
         π

where ρ is a coherent one-step conditional risk measure (Ruszczyński, 2010, Definition 6), and
{x1 , a1 , x2 , a2 , . . . } is a trajectory of states and actions from the MDP under policy π. Here, J π is
defined as a nested and multi-stage composition  of ρ, rather than through a single-stage risk measure
                                      PH
on the cumulative reward ρ               h=1 rh (xh , ah ) .

The choice of the risk-aware objective function in Eq. (2) has two advantages. Firstly, it guarantees
the existence of an optimal policy, and furthermore, this optimal policy is Markovian. Please refer to
Theorem 4 in Ruszczyński (2010) for a rigorous treatment of the existence of the optimal Markov
policy. Secondly, the above risk-aware objective satisfies the time consistency property. This property
ensures that we do not contradict ourselves in our risk evaluation. The sequence that is better today
should continue to be better tomorrow, i.e., our risk preference stays the same over time. Note
that in standard RL, where the risk measure is replaced with expectation, this property is trivially
satisfied. In contrast, a single-stage   risk measure (i.e., static version) applied on the cumulative
           PH
reward ρ      h=1 rh (x h , ah )  does not enjoy this time consistency property (Ruszczyński, 2010).
More detailed discussions about this are in Appendix B.

3.2   B ELLMAN EQUATION AND REGRET

The risk-aware Bellman equation is developed for the risk-aware objective defined in Eq. (2)
(Ruszczyński, 2010). More specifically, let us define the risk-aware state- and action-value functions
with respect to the Markov risk measure ρ as

  Vhπ (x) = rh (x, πh (x)) + ρ rh+1 (xh+1 , πh+1 (xh+1 )) + ρ rh+2 (xh+2 , πh+2 (xh+2 )) + . . . ,


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Qπh (x, a) = rh (x, a) + ρ rh+1 (xh+1 , πh+1 (xh+1 )) + ρ rh+2 (xh+2 , πh+2 (xh+2 )) + . . . .

We also define the optimal policy π ⋆ to be the policy that yields the optimal value function Vh⋆ (x) =
supπ Vhπ (x). The advantage of the formulation given in Eq. (2) is that one can show that the optimal
policy exists, and it is Markovian (Theorem 4 of Ruszczyński (2010)). For notations convenience, for
any measurable function V : S → [0, H], we define the operator Dhρ as
                                          (Dhρ V )(x, a) := ρ (V (x′ )) ,                                      (3)
                                                                         ′
where the risk measure ρ is taken over the random variable x ∼ Ph (·|x, a). Then, the risk-aware
Bellman equation associated with a policy π takes the form
         Qπh (x, a) = (rh + Dhρ Vh+1
                                 π
                                     )(x, a),       Vhπ (x) = ⟨Qπh (x, ·), πh (·|x)⟩A ,     π
                                                                                           VH+1 (x) = 0,
where ⟨·, ·⟩A denote the inner product5 over A and (f + g)(x) = f (x) + g(x) for function f and g.
Similarly, the Bellman optimality equation is given by
             Q⋆h (x, a) = (rh + Dhρ Vh+1
                                     ⋆
                                         )(x, a),       Vh⋆ (x) = max Q⋆h (x, a),       ⋆
                                                                                       VH+1 (x) = 0.           (4)
                                                                   a∈A

The above equation implies that the optimal policy π ⋆ is the greedy policy with respect to the optimal
action-value function {Q⋆h }h∈[H] .
In the episodic MDP setting, the agent interacts with the environment through T episodes to learn
the optimal policy. At the beginning of episode t, the agent selects a policy π t , and the environment
                                                                         t
chooses an initial state xt1 . The difference in values between V1π (xt1 ) and V ⋆ (xt1 ) quantifies the
sub-optimality of π t , which serves as the regret of the agent at episode t. The total regret after T
episodes is defined as
                                           XT h                          i
                                 RT (ρ) =        V1⋆ (xt1 ) − V1πt (xt1 ) .                          (5)
                                                 t=1
We use the widely adopted notion of regret in the risk-neutral setting (Jin et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020)
and risk-aware setting (Fei et al., 2020; 2021). Here, the policy’s regret depends on the risk measure
ρ via the optimal policy π ⋆ . A good policy should have sub-linear regret, i.e., limT →∞ RT /T = 0,
which implies that the policy will eventually learn to select the best risk-averse actions.
Remark 1. Given two risk measures ρ1 and ρ2 with RT (ρ1 ) < RT (ρ2 ), does not imply ρ1 is a
better choice of risk measure for the given problem. Because the optimal policies for ρ1 and ρ2 can
be different, their regrets are not directly comparable. Therefore, we cannot use regret as a measure
to compare or select the risk measure.

3.3      W EAK S IMULATOR A SSUMPTION

One key challenge for the risk-aware RL policy is that the empirical estimation of risk is more
complex than the estimation of expectation in risk-neutral RL (Yu et al., 2018). In this paper, we
assume the existence of a weak simulator that we can use to draw samples from the probability
transition kernel Ph (·|x, a) for any h ∈ [H], x ∈ S, a ∈ A. This assumption is much weaker than the
archetypal simulator assumptions often seen in the RL literature, as they also allow to query reward
of a given state and action rh (x, a). To the best of our knowledge, all existing works in risk-aware RL
with coherent risk measures require some assumptions on the transition probabilities to facilitate the
risk estimation procedure. Among these assumptions, our weak simulator assumption is the weakest.

3.4      E STIMATING N ON - LINEAR F UNCTIONS

We use reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) as the class of non-linear functions to represent
the optimal action-value function Q∗h . For notational convenience, let us denote z = (x, a) and
Z = S × A. Following the standard setting, we assume that Z is a compact subset of Rd for fixed
dimension d. Let H denote the RKHS defined on Z with the kernel function k : Z × Z → R. Let
⟨·, ·⟩H and ∥·∥H be the inner product and the RKHS norm on H, respectively. Since H is an RKHS,
there exists a feature map ϕ : Z → H such that ϕ(z) = k(z, ·) and f (z) = ⟨ϕ(z), f ⟩H for all f ∈ H
and for all z ∈ Z, this is known as the reproducing kernel property.
   5
       Since A is a finite set, the inner product over A is the canonical inner product on Euclidean vector space.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4    R ISK -AWARE RL A LGORITHM WITH C OHERENT R ISK M EASURES
We now introduce our algorithm named Risk-Aware Upper Confidence Bound (RA-UCB), which is
built upon the celebrated Value Iteration Algorithm (Sutton & Barto, 2018). RA-UCB first estimates
the value function using kernel least-square regression. Then, it computes an optimistic bonus that
gets added to the estimated value function to encourage exploration. Finally, it executes the greedy
policy with respect to the estimated value function in the next episode.

RA-UCB Risk-Aware Upper Confidence Bound
 Input:
 1:      Hyperparameters of coherent risk measure ρ (e.g., confidence level α ∈ (0, 1) for CVaR)
 2: for episode t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 3:   Receive the initial state xt1 and initialize VH+1
                                                    t
                                                        as the zero function.
 4:   for step h = H, . . . , 1 do
 5:      For τ ∈ [t − 1], draw m samples from the weak simulator and construct the response vector
         yht using Eq. (7).
 6:      Compute µth and σht using Eq. (8).
 7:      Compute Qth and Vht using Eq. (9).
 8:   end for
 9:   for step h = 1, . . . , H do
10:      Take action ath ← arg max Qth (xth , a).
                                 a∈A
11:      Observe reward rh (xth , ath ) and the next state xth+1 .
12:   end for
13: end for


Recall that we defined z = (x, a) and Z = S × A in Section 3.4. We define the following Gram
matrix Kht ∈ R(t−1)×(t−1) and a function kht : Z → Rt−1 associated with the RKHS H as
                               ′                                                            ⊤
              Kht = k(zhτ , zhτ ) τ,τ ′ ∈[t−1] , kht (z) = k(zh1 , z), . . . , k(zht−1 , z) .

                                                                                              (6)

Given the observed histories and the weak simulator, we define the response vector yht ∈ Rt−1 as
                       [yht ] = rh (xτh , aτh ) + ρ̂({Vh+1
                                                       t
                                                           (x′(i) )}m

                                                                    i=1 ) τ ∈[t−1] ,           (7)

where {x′(i) }m                                                              τ  τ
              i=1 are m next states drawn from the weak simulator Ph (·|xh , ah ). This step contains
one of the key differences between RA-UCB and its risk-neutral counterpart, with the presence of
the empirical risk estimator in the definition of the response vector yht . With the newly introduced
notations, we define two functions µt : Z → R and σt : Z → R as
                     µth (z) = kht (z)⊤ (Kht + λ · I)−1 yht ,
                                                                               1/2
                     σht (z) = λ−1/2 · k(z, z) − kht (z)⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 kht (z)

                                                                                   .                      (8)
The terms µth and σht have several important connections with other literature. More specifically,
it resembles the posterior mean and standard deviation of a Gaussian process regression problem
(Rasmussen, 2003), with yht as its target. The second term σht also reduces to the UCB term used in
linear bandits when the feature map ϕ is finite-dimensional (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). We then
define our estimate of the value functions Qth and Vht as follows:
        Qth (x, a) := min µth (x, a) + β · σht (x, a), H − h + 1 , Vht (x) := max Qth (x, a),

                                                                                                 (9)
                                                                                     a∈A

where β > 0 is an exploration versus exploitation trade-off parameter.
To get some insights on the algorithm, notice that Eq. (7) implements the one-step Bellman optimality
update in Eq. (4). To see this, let X ′ ∼ Ph (·|xτh , aτh ) be the random variable representing the next
state. Recall that Vh+1 t                                                                           t
                            is the estimated value function by our algorithm at episode t. Thus, Vh+1   (X ′ )
                                                                          ′
is also a random variable, where the randomness comes from X . Here, we can start looking at
     t
ρ(Vh+1   (X ′ )), i.e., the risk measure ρ applied on the random variable Vh+1   t
                                                                                    (X ′ ). Intuitively, this
can be interpreted as the risk-adjusted value of the next state. The second term in Eq. (7) above,
       t
ρb({Vh+1  (x′(i) )}m                                       t     ′
                   i=1 ), is an empirical estimate of ρ(Vh+1 (X )).


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The choice of the response vector in Eq. (7) represents the primary novelty in our algorithm design.
This choice enables a new regret decomposition and an upper bound using the concentration inequality
of the risk estimator. More details are presented in Appendix D.1.

4.1   M AIN T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

This section presents our main theoretical result, i.e., the regret upper bound guarantee of RA-UCB.
We first outline the key assumption that enables the efficient approximation of the value function.
Assumption 1. Let R > 0 be a fixed constant, H be the RKHS, and B(r) = {f ∈ H : ∥f ∥H ≤ r} to
be the RKHS-norm ball with radius r. We assume that for any h ∈ [H] and any Q : S × A → [0, H],
we have T∗h Q ∈ B(RH), where T∗h is the Bellman optimality operator defined in Eq. (4).

This assumption postulates that the risk-aware Bellman optimality operator maps any bounded
action-value function to a function in an RKHS H with a bounded norm. This assumption ensures
that for all h ∈ [H], the optimal action-value function Q⋆h lies inside B(RH). Consequently, there
is no approximation error when using functions from H to approximate Q⋆h . It can be viewed as
equivalent to the realizability assumption in supervised learning. Similar assumptions are made in Jin
et al. (2020); Yang et al. (2020); Zanette et al. (2020). Please refer to Du et al. (2019) for a discussion
on the necessity of this assumption.
Given this assumption, it is clear that the complexity of H plays a central role in the regret bound
of RA-UCB. Following the seminal work of Srinivas et al. (2009), we characterize the intrinsic
complexity of H with the notion of maximum information gain defined as

                      Γk (T, λ) = 1/2        sup      log det(I + KD /λ) ,                       (10)
                                           D⊆Z,|D|≤T

where k is the kernel function, λ > 0 is a parameter, and KD is the Gram matrix. The maximum
information gain depends on how fast the eigenvalues of H decay to zero and can be viewed as a proxy
for the dimension of H when H is infinite-dimensional. Note that Γk (T, λ) is a problem-dependent
quantity that depends on the kernel k, state space S, and action space A. Furthermore, let us first
define the action-value function classes Qucb (h, R, B) as
  Qucb (h, R, B) = {Q :
       Q(z) = min{f (z) + β · λ−1/2 [k(z, z) − kD (z)⊤ (KD + λI)−1 kD (z)]1/2 , H − h + 1}+ ,
       f ∈ H, ∥f ∥H ≤ R, β ∈ [0, B], |D| ≤ T }.                                           (11)
With the appropriate choice of R and B, the set Qucb (h, R, B) contains every possible Qth that can
be constructed by RA-UCB. Therefore, the function class Qucb resembles the concept of hypothesis
space in supervised learning. And as we will see, the complexity of Qucb , in particular, the covering
number of Qucb , plays a crucial role in the regret bound of RA-UCB.
Theorem 1. Let λ = 1 + 1/T , β = BT in RA-UCB, and let Γk (T, λ) be the maximalpinformation
gain defined in Eq. (10). Define a constant BT > 0 that satisfies BT = Θ H( Γk (T, λ) +
          p
maxh∈H log N       ∞ (ϵ, h, BT )) . m
                                    Suppose that the empirical risk estimate ρ̂ achieves the rate of
Ξ(m, δ), i.e., P |ρ(Z) − ρ̂({Zi }i=1 )| ≤ Ξ(m, δ) ≥ 1 − δ. Then, under Assumption 1, with a
probability of at least 1 − (T 2 H 2 )−1 , the regret of RA-UCB is
                                      p
                      RT ≤ 5BT H T Γk (T, λ) + 2T H · Ξ m, (8T 3 H 3 )−1 .


The proof of Theorem 1 is in Appendix D.1. The regret upper bound consists of two terms. The
first term resembles risk-neutral regret bound (Yang et al., 2020, Theorem 4.2). Interestingly, our
bound distinguishes itself from the risk-neutral setting with the presence of the second term, which
quantifies how fast one can estimate the risk from observed samples. It originates from the risk-aware
Bellman optimality equation, in which the one-step update requires knowledge of the risk-to-go
starting from the next state (see Eq. (4) for more detail). This risk-to-go quantity is approximated by
its empirical counterpart, and the discrepancies give rise to the second term in regret.
Due to the weak simulator assumption, we have good control over the second term. In the following
result, we derive the number of samples sufficient to achieve the order-optimal regret for the
Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), which is one of the most commonly used coherent risk measures.
More details on CVaR and its properties are given in Appendix C.1.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary 1. Let ρ be the CVaR measure defined in Eq. (13) and ρ̂ be the CVaR estimator defined in
Eq. (14). Then, under
                  p the same conditions
                                        in Theorem 1, the algorithm RA-UCB achieves the regret
of RT = O BT H T Γk (T, λ) with

                              O T H · log T 5 H 6 /BT2 Γk (T, λ)

total samples (across all T episodes) from the weak simulator.

The detailed proof of Corollary 1 is in Appendix D.5.pAs an example, for  the commonly used
squared exponential (SE) kernel, we get B T = O H · log (T H) · (log T )d (Yang et al., 2020,
Corollary 4) and Γk (T, λ) = O (log T )d+1 (Srinivas et al., 2009), and thus RA-UCB incurs a regret
                √
of RT = Õ H 2 T (log T )1.5d+1 . This result leads to the first sub-linear regret upper bound of the
risk-aware RL policy with coherent risk measures.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of RA-UCB. We run different
experiments on synthetic and real-world data with the CVaR as a risk measure, which is a commonly
used coherent risk measure. We analyze the influence of the risk aversion parameter α (or confidence
level for CVaR) on the total reward as well as the behavior of the output policies. The code for these
experiments is available in the supplementary material.

5.1   S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT: ROBOT NAVIGATION

The robot navigation environment is a continuous
version of the cliff walking problem considered in
example 6.6 of Sutton & Barto (2018), visualized in
Fig. 1. In this synthetic experiment, a robot must
navigate inside a room full of obstacles to reach its
goal destination. The robot navigates by choosing from
4 actions {up, down, left, right}. Since the floor is
slippery, the direction of movement is perturbed by r ·ϕ,
where ϕ ∼ U (−π, π) and r ∈ [0, 1] represent the angle
and magnitude of the perturbation. The robot receives
a positive reward of 10 for reaching the destination and Figure 1: Illustration of the continuous
a negative reward for being close to obstacles. The version of the cliff walking problem. The
negative reward increases exponentially as the robot robot starts at (0, 0) and must navigate to
comes close to the obstacle. We set the horizon of the goal area (in green). The robot gets
each episode to H = 30. The robot does not know negative rewards for being close to the
perturbation parameters (r = 0.3) and the obstacles’ obstacles and receives a reward of 10 upon
positions, so it has to learn them online via interacting reaching the goal.
with the environment. We approximate the state-action
value function using the RBF kernel and the KernelRidge regressor from Scikit-learn.


Figure 2: Estimated distribution of the cumulative reward when following the learned policy for
different risk parameters. For α = 0.9 (leftmost plot), the policy is more risk-tolerant, which causes
the average reward to be higher, but occasionally small. As we decrease α, the policy becomes more
risk-averse, favoring safer paths with smaller average rewards and higher worst-case rewards.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Fig. 2, we show the histograms of the robot’s cumulative rewards that it receives in 50 episodes by
following the learned policy with different values of the risk parameter α ∈ [0.9, 0.5, 0.1]. For smaller
values of α, the learned policy successfully mitigates the tail risk in the distribution, illustrated by the
rightmost histogram having the smallest reward of at least 3.0, whereas the reward could go as low
as near 0 for the remaining two policies. As we increase α, the policy becomes more risk-tolerant,
leading to a higher average reward at the expense of occasional bad rewards. In this experiment, we
use m = 100 samples from the weak simulator to estimate the risk in Eq. (7).

5.2      R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENT: T RADING

This trading setup is a generalization of the betting
game environment (Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Rigter
et al., 2021). This experiment considers a simplified
foreign exchange trading environment based on
real historical exchange rates and volumes between
EUR and USD in 12 months of 2017. For simplicity,
we fixed the trade volume for each hour at 10000.
There are two actions in the environment: buy
or sell. The state of the environment includes
the current position, which is either long or short,
and a vector of signal features containing the
historical prices and trading volumes over a short
period of time. We customize this environment
based on the ForexEnv in the python package
gym-anytrading.6                                      Figure 3: Estimated distribution of the
                                                      normalized terminal wealth following the
In Fig. 3, we show a histogram of the cumulative learned policy for different risk parameters.
terminal wealth achieved by the agents in 100 The vertical lines represent the average rewards.
episodes with different risk parameters, plotted in When α = 0.9 (the blue bar), the policy is more
different colors. Similar to the robot experiment, risk-tolerant, which causes the average reward
we demonstrate that for a smaller value of α, the to be higher at the expense of occasional low
policy is risk-averse and successfully mitigates the reward. The policy is more risk-averse as we
tail of the distribution. This can be seen that the decrease the value of α, favoring safe paths
worst-case wealth for α = 0.1 (in green) is higher with lower average-case rewards and higher
than for α = 0.5 (in red) or α = 0.9 (in blue). In worst-case rewards.
this experiment, we use m = 100 samples from the
weak simulator to estimate the risk in Eq. (7). Additional experiments with other risk measures like
VaR and EVaR are given in Appendix E.
Computational complexity of RA-UCB: We need to solve H kernel ridge regression problems in
each episode. In the t-th episode, each regression problem complexity is dominated by two operations:
First, the inversion of the Gram matrix Kht of size (t − 1) × (t − 1) in Eq. (8), which has O(t3 ) time
complexity and O(t2 ) space complexity. Second, the construction of the response vector in Eq. (7)
has O(mt) time and space complexity. Therefore, the time and space complexity of the t-episode is
O(H(t3 + mt)) and O(H(t2 + mt)) respectively.

6       C ONCLUSION
We proposed a risk-aware RL algorithm named RA-UCB that uses coherent risk measures and
non-linear function approximations. We then provided a finite-sample regret upper bound guarantee
for RA-UCB and demonstrated its effectiveness in robot navigation and forex trading environments.
The performance of the proposed algorithm depends profoundly on the quality of the empirical
risk estimator. This paper assumes access to a weak simulator that can sample the next states, thus
effectively alleviating the need to estimate the risk from the observed trajectories. Therefore, a
potential future direction is to relax or weaken this assumption, allowing risk-aware RL algorithms to
be useful in more practical problems. Another interesting direction is to consider the episodic MDPs,
where episodes can have varying lengths horizons or even infinite horizons.
    6
        The package gym-anytrading is available at https://github.com/AminHP/gym-anytrading.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In this paper, we dedicate a substantial effort to improving the reproducibility and comprehensibility
of both our theoretical results and empirical experiments. We formally state and discuss the necessity
and implications of our assumptions (please see Section 3.3 and the paragraph below Assumption 1)
before presenting our theoretical results. We also provide a 3-step proof sketch of our main theoretical
result. For each step, we present the key ideas and high-level directions and refer the reader to more
detailed and complete proofs in the Appendices. For the experiments, we provide details of different
experimental settings in Section 5, and include our code in the supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is part of the programme DesCartes and is supported by the National Research
Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and
Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme. C. T. Lam is supported by the Singapore-MIT
Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) PhD Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Carlo Acerbi and Dirk Tasche. On the coherence of expected shortfall. Journal of Banking & Finance,
  26(7):1487–1503, 2002.
Amir Ahmadi-Javid. An information-theoretic approach to constructing coherent risk measures. In
 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings, pp. 2125–2127. IEEE,
 2011.
Amir Ahmadi-Javid. Entropic value-at-risk: A new coherent risk measure. Journal of Optimization
 Theory and Applications, 155(3):1105–1123, 2012.
Syed Mumtaz Ali and Samuel D Silvey. A general class of coefficients of divergence of one
  distribution from another. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 28
  (1):131–142, 1966.
Philippe Artzner, Freddy Delbaen, Jean-Marc Eber, David Heath, and Hyejin Ku. Coherent
  multiperiod risk adjusted values and bellman’s principle. Annals of Operations Research, 152(1):
  5–22, 2007.
Kazuoki Azuma. Weighted sums of certain dependent random variables. Tohoku Mathematical
 Journal, Second Series, 19(3):357–367, 1967.
Dorian Baudry, Romain Gautron, Emilie Kaufmann, and Odalric Maillard. Optimal thompson
  sampling strategies for support-aware cvar bandits. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 716–726. PMLR, 2021.
Nicole Bäuerle and André Mundt. Dynamic mean-risk optimization in a binomial model.
  Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 70(2):219–239, 2009.
Nicole Bäuerle and Jonathan Ott. Markov decision processes with average-value-at-risk criteria.
  Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 74(3):361–379, 2011.
Nicole Bäuerle and Ulrich Rieder. More risk-sensitive markov decision processes. Mathematics of
  Operations Research, 39(1):105–120, 2014.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Mark Rowland. Distributional Reinforcement Learning. MIT
 Press, 2022. http://www.distributional-rl.org.
Larry E Beutler, Kathleen Someah, Satoko Kimpara, and Kimberley Miller. Selecting the most
  appropriate treatment for each patient. International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology,
  16(1):99–108, 2016.
Kang Boda and Jerzy A Filar. Time consistent dynamic risk measures. Mathematical Methods of
  Operations Research, 63(1):169–186, 2006.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vivek S Borkar. A sensitivity formula for risk-sensitive cost and the actor–critic algorithm. Systems
  & Control Letters, 44(5):339–346, 2001.
Vivek S Borkar. Q-learning for risk-sensitive control. Mathematics of operations research, 27(2):
  294–311, 2002.
Yin-Lam Chow and Marco Pavone. Stochastic optimal control with dynamic, time-consistent risk
  constraints. In 2013 American Control Conference, pp. 390–395. IEEE, 2013.
Yinlam Chow, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Lucas Janson, and Marco Pavone. Risk-constrained
  reinforcement learning with percentile risk criteria. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  18(1):6070–6120, 2017.
Imre Csiszár. Information-type measures of difference of probability distributions and indirect
  observation. studia scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica, 2:229–318, 1967.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and Rémi Munos. Implicit quantile networks for
 distributional reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
 1096–1105. PMLR, 2018.
Michael Alan Howarth Dempster. Risk management: value at risk and beyond. Cambridge University
 Press, 2002.
Simon S Du, Sham M Kakade, Ruosong Wang, and Lin F Yang. Is a good representation sufficient
  for sample efficient reinforcement learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03016, 2019.
Mehdi Fatemi, Taylor W Killian, Jayakumar Subramanian, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Medical
 dead-ends and learning to identify high-risk states and treatments. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Yingjie Fei and Ruitu Xu. Cascaded gaps: Towards logarithmic regret for risk-sensitive reinforcement
  learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
  Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6392–6417. PMLR, 17–23 Jul
  2022.
Yingjie Fei, Zhuoran Yang, Yudong Chen, Zhaoran Wang, and Qiaomin Xie. Risk-sensitive
  reinforcement learning: Near-optimal risk-sample tradeoff in regret. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:22384–22395, 2020.
Yingjie Fei, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning with function
  approximation: A debiasing approach. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  3198–3207. PMLR, 2021.
Hans Föllmer and Thomas Knispel. Entropic risk measures: Coherence vs. convexity, model
  ambiguity and robust large deviations. Stochastics and Dynamics, 11(02n03):333–351, 2011.
Hans Föllmer and Alexander Schied. Convex and coherent risk measures. Encyclopedia of
  Quantitative Finance, pp. 355–363, 2010.
Ronald A Howard and James E Matheson. Risk-sensitive markov decision processes. Management
  science, 18(7):356–369, 1972.
Stratton C Jaquette. Markov decision processes with a new optimality criterion: Discrete time. The
  Annals of Statistics, 1(3):496–505, 1973.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.
Ramtin Keramati, Christoph Dann, Alex Tamkin, and Emma Brunskill. Being optimistic to be
  conservative: Quickly learning a cvar policy. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4436–4443, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jakob Kisiala. Conditional value-at-risk: Theory and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.00140,
  2015.
Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency.               The annals of
  mathematical statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.
Prashanth La and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Actor-critic algorithms for risk-sensitive mdps.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Duan Li and Wan-Lung Ng. Optimal dynamic portfolio selection: Multiperiod mean-variance
  formulation. Mathematical finance, 10(3):387–406, 2000.
Friedrich Liese and Igor Vajda. On divergences and informations in statistics and information theory.
  IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(10):4394–4412, 2006.
Siqi Liu, Kay Choong See, Kee Yuan Ngiam, Leo Anthony Celi, Xingzhi Sun, Mengling Feng,
  et al. Reinforcement learning for clinical decision support in critical care: comprehensive review.
  Journal of medical Internet research, 22(7):e18477, 2020.
Andreas Löhne and Birgit Rudloff. An algorithm for calculating the set of superhedging portfolios in
  markets with transaction costs. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 17(02):
 1450012, 2014.
Francis J McMahon and Thomas R Insel. Pharmacogenomics and personalized medicine in
  neuropsychiatry. Neuron, 74(5):773–776, 2012.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Mehrdad Moharrami, Yashaswini Murthy, Arghyadip Roy, and R Srikant. A policy gradient algorithm
 for the risk-sensitive exponential cost mdp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04157, 2022.
Suresh H Moolgavkar, Ellen T Chang, Heather N Watson, and Edmund C Lau. An assessment of
  the cox proportional hazards regression model for epidemiologic studies. Risk Analysis, 38(4):
  777–794, 2018.
Xinyi Ni and Lifeng Lai. Policy gradient based entropic-var optimization in risk-sensitive
  reinforcement learning. In 2022 58th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control,
  and Computing (Allerton), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2022a.
Xinyi Ni and Lifeng Lai. Evar optimization for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 2022b.
Masahiro Ono, Marco Pavone, Yoshiaki Kuwata, and J Balaram. Chance-constrained dynamic
 programming with application to risk-aware robotic space exploration. Autonomous Robots, 39(4):
 555–571, 2015.
Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes in machine learning. In Summer school on machine
  learning, pp. 63–71. Springer, 2003.
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. Risk-averse bayes-adaptive reinforcement learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. Conditional value-at-risk for general loss distributions.
  Journal of banking & finance, 26(7):1443–1471, 2002.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar, Stanislav Uryasev, et al. Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. Journal of
  risk, 2:21–42, 2000.
Mark Rowland, Marc Bellemare, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, and Yee Whye Teh. An analysis
 of categorical distributional reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 29–37. PMLR, 2018.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eliana Rulli, Francesca Ghilotti, Elena Biagioli, Luca Porcu, Mirko Marabese, Maurizio D’Incalci,
  Rino Bellocco, and Valter Torri. Assessment of proportional hazard assumption in aggregate
  data: a systematic review on statistical methodology in clinical trials using time-to-event endpoint.
  British journal of cancer, 119(12):1456–1463, 2018.
Andrzej Ruszczyński. Risk-averse dynamic programming for markov decision processes.
 Mathematical programming, 125(2):235–261, 2010.
Matthew J Sobel. The variance of discounted markov decision processes. Journal of Applied
 Probability, 19(4):794–802, 1982.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process
  optimization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:0912.3995, 2009.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Aviv Tamar, Yinlam Chow, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shie Mannor. Policy gradient for coherent
  risk measures. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Aviv Tamar, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Learning the variance of the reward-to-go. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):361–396, 2016.
Aman Ullah. Entropy, divergence and distance measures with econometric applications. Journal of
 Statistical Planning and Inference, 49(1):137–162, 1996.
Nelson Vadori, Sumitra Ganesh, Prashant Reddy, and Manuela Veloso. Risk-sensitive reinforcement
  learning: a martingale approach to reward uncertainty. In Proceedings of the First ACM
  International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 1–9, 2020.
Shaun S Wang. A class of distortion operators for pricing financial and insurance risks. Journal of
  risk and insurance, pp. 15–36, 2000.
Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, Zhaoran Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Michael I Jordan. On function
  approximation in reinforcement learning: Optimism in the face of large state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.04622, 2020.
Pengqian Yu, William B Haskell, and Huan Xu. Approximate value iteration for risk-aware markov
  decision processes. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 63(9):3135–3142, 2018.
Andrea Zanette, David Brandfonbrener, Emma Brunskill, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric.
  Frequentist regret bounds for randomized least-squares value iteration. In International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1954–1964. PMLR, 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    C ONNECTIONS TO D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL

We first give a brief survey on the distributional RL literature and discuss its connection to
risk-sensitive RL. For a policy π in distributional RL, we define the total reward from state x
(or state-action pair (x, a)) and time step h as the sum of rewards of an agent starting in time h, at
state x (or state-action pair (x, a)), and the following policy π as follows
                     H
                     X
       Gπh (x) :=            rh′ (xh′ , ah′ )|xh = x, ah′ ∼ πh′ (·|xh′ ), xh′ +1 ∼ Ph′ (·|xh′ , ah′ ),
                     h′ =h
                     H
                     X
     Jhπ (x, a) :=           rh′ (xh′ , ah′ )|xh = x, ah = a, ah′ ∼ πh′ (·|xh′ ), xh′ +1 ∼ Ph′ (xh′ , ah′ ).
                     h′ =h

Both Gπh (x) and Jhπ (x, a) are random variables where the randomness comes from the transition
probability P and the  (possibly
                                 stochastic)
                                                    π. In standard MDP, the expected value of these
                                               policy
random variables, E Gπ (x) and E J π (x, a) , are known as the value function and action-value
function, respectively. Distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2022) is built upon the overarching idea of
estimating the value distribution, i.e., the distribution of the random variables Gπh (x) and Jhπ (x, a),
rather than just the expected values as in standard RL. The most important component of distributional
RL is the distributional Bellman equation, which is given as follows:
                                    d
                         Jhπ (x, a) = rh (x, a) + Jhπ x′ , arg max E[Jhπ (x′ , a′ )] ,

                                                                  a′ ∈A

                         d
where ∀h ∈ [H] and = denotes equality in distribution, and the next state x′ ∼ Ph (·|x, a). Although
distributional RL models the entire value distribution, notice that the optimal action is greedy with
respect to the expectation of the value of the next state, which resembles that of standard RL.


B    C OHERENT O NE -S TEP C ONDITIONAL R ISK M EASURE

Recall the formulation of the risk-aware MDP objective function given in Eq. (2):
      max J π (x1 ),         where    J π (x1 ) := r1 (x1 , a1 ) + ρ(r2 (x2 , a2 ) + ρ(r3 (x3 , a3 ) + . . . )),
        π

where ρ is a coherent one-step conditional risk measure, and x1 , a1 , x2 , a2 , . . . is a trajectory of
states and actions from the MDP under policy π. Notice that J π is defined as a nested and multi-stage
composition of conditional risk measure ρ, which is also referred to as the dynamic risk optimization
problem (Rigter et al., 2021, use CVaR as a risk measure). There are two advantages to this
formulation.
Firstly, one can show that the optimal policy exists, and it is Markovian (Theorem 4 in Ruszczyński
(2010)). Therefore, we can use the Bellman update to learn the risk-aware RL        Ppolicy. When the
                                                                                        H
objective function uses a single-stage risk measure on the sum of rewards (i.e., ρ      h=1 rh (xh , ah ) ),
the problem is referred to as the static risk optimization. Under this setting, (Bäuerle & Ott, 2011, also
use CVaR as a risk measure) shows that the optimal policy exists but is non-Markovian. Therefore,
these history-dependent policies must optimally solve the static risk optimization problem, which is
harder than learning a Markovian policy.
Secondly, the above risk-aware objective satisfies the time consistency property. Intuitively, the time
consistency property indicates that the sequence that is better today should continue to be better
tomorrow, i.e., our risk preference stays the same over time. To formally define this concept, let us
consider the problem of measuring the risk of sequences.
Let (Ω, F, P) denote a probability space with filtration F1 ⊂ F2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ FT ⊂ F. Let Z1 , . . . , ZT
denote the adapted sequence of random variables (one may view this as a sequence of random
rewards for the purpose of this paper). Finally, we define Zt = Lp (Ω, Ft , P), p ∈ [1, ∞), and
Zt,T = Zt × · · · × ZT . We define the following notion of conditional risk measure and dynamic risk
measure as follows:


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 1. A conditional risk measure is a mapping ρt,T : Zt,T → Zt that satisfies the following
monotonicity condition:
                       ρt,T (Z) ≤ ρt,T (W ) for all Z, W ∈ Zt,T such that Z ≤ W.
A sequence of conditional risk measures: {ρt,T }t=1,...,T is called a dynamic risk measure.
One can view the conditional risk measure as a non-linear extension of the conditional expectation.
The randomness of the entire sequence t, . . . , T is reduced to the randomness at time t. This is
analogous to conditional expectation in which E[Zt + · · · + ZT |Zt ] is a random variable where the
randomness comes from Zt .
Intuitively, ρt,T (Zt , . . . , ZT ) represents the amount of reward a player is willing to take in exchange
for a sequence of future random rewards Zt + · · · + ZT . For a risk-neutral player, that amount will
equal E[Zt + · · · + ZT |Zt ].
We are now ready to define the notion of time consistency.
Definition 2. A dynamic risk measure {ρt,T }t=1,...,T is time-consistent if for all τ, θ ∈ [T ] and
τ < θ, we have the following: If for all k = τ, . . . , θ − 1, Zk = Wk and ρθ,T (Zθ , . . . , ZT ) ≤
ρθ,T (Wθ , . . . , WT ), then we have ρτ,T (Zτ , . . . , ZT ) ≤ ρτ,T (Wτ , . . . , WT ).
The time-consistency property implies that a dynamic risk measure ensures that given the same
rewards, the sequence that is better today should also be better tomorrow.
Why is time consistency a desirable property? This property ensures that we do not contract ourselves
in our risk evaluation. If we observe the same realization, the sequence that is better today should
continue to be better tomorrow. Our risk preference stays the same over time. Note that this property
is trivially satisfied in standard RL, where the risk measure is replaced with expectation.
                                                                          PH
In contrast, a single risk measure applied on the cumulative reward ρ        h=1 rh (xh , ah ) does not
enjoy this time consistency property.

C     C OHERENT R ISK M EASURES
C.1    C ONDITIONAL VALUE - AT-R ISK

Let Z be a finite mean random variable, i.e., E[|Z|] < ∞, with the cumulative distribution function
FZ (z) = P(Z ≤ z) (an example to keep in mind is that Z represents the random total reward of a
learning agent). The value-at-risk at confidence level α ∈ (0, 1) is defined as
                                      VaRα (Z) = min{z : FZ (z) ≥ α}.                                            (12)
The minimum is attained because the cumulative distribution function FZ is a non-decreasing and
right-continuous function in z. When FZ is strictly increasing (and thus bijective), VaRα (Z) =
FZ−1 (α). The conditional value-at-risk (also known as the average value-at-risk) at confidence level
α ∈ (0, 1) is defined as7
                                                 1 α
                                                  Z
                                   CVaRα (Z) :=        VaRt (Z)dt.                               (13)
                                                 α 0
If Z is a continuous random variable, then CVaRα (Z) = E[Z|Z ≤ VaRα (Z)] (Acerbi & Tasche,
2002). From this expression, CVaRα (Z) can be viewed as the average of the worst-case α-fraction
of Z. It is easy to see that CVaR1 (Z) = E[Z], and as α → 0, CVaRα approaches the worst-case (or
robust) realization. An important result of CVaR (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2002, Theorem 10) (also
known as the fundamental minimization theorem) is that it can be represented as the solution of a
convex optimization problem.
Lemma 1. (Keramati et al., 2020; Baudry et al., 2021) Let Z be a finite mean random variable, and
let α ∈ (0, 1). Then, it holds that

                                      1           +
                                                                      1             −

             CVaRα (Z) = max s − E (s − Z)              = max s + E (Z − s)              ,
                             s∈R      α                    s∈R        α
    7
      Note that the definition of CVaR presented above is different from that in the literature, e.g., in (Rockafellar
et al., 2000). This is because we are treating Z as rewards and thus maximizing Z, whereas existing works
consider Z as costs and consequently minimizing Z.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where (x)+ = max{x, 0} represents the positive part of x, similarly (x)− = min{0, x} represents
the negative part of x, and the maximum point is given by s∗ = VaRα (Z).

Conditional Value-at-risk is a prominent risk measure with extensive applications in stochastic
optimization (see Rockafellar et al. (2000) for example). By carefully choosing α, CVaR can be
tuned to be sensitive to rare events with exceptionally low rewards, making it attractive as a risk
measure. The CVaR is also known for having favorable mathematical properties such as coherence.
Empirical estimation of the risk. Let Z1 , . . . , Zm be m i.i.d. samples drawn from the distribution
FZ , then the empirical estimation of CVaRα (Z) is given by
                                                    (          m
                                                                            )
                                     m                    1 X             −
                       CVaRα ({Zi }i=1 ) = max s +
                       \                                          (Zi − s)    .                  (14)
                                            s∈R          αm i=1

Lemma 2. (Lemma 3 in Yu et al. (2018)) Let Z1 , . . . , Zm ∼ FZ be m i.i.d. bounded random
variables, i.e., P[0 ≤ Zi ≤ B] = 1, ∀i, then we have
                                                                          −mε2 (1 − α)2

      h
                                    m
                                              i              4
     P CVaRα (Z) − CVaRα ({Zi }i=1 ) ≥ ε ≤ 2 1 +
                        \                                           exp                    .
                                                         ε(1 − α)          2(2 − α)2 B 2

C.2   C OMPARISONS BETWEEN E NTROPIC R ISK M EASURE AND CVA R

The closest work to ours is Fei et al. (2021), which considers the risk-aware RL problem in the
function approximation setting. However, they use the entropic risk measure. This section discusses
some key differences between the entropic risk measure and CVaR.
Entropic risk measure. For a finite-mean random variable Z and a parameter β ̸= 0, the entropic
risk measure of Z is defined as
                                                1
                                     ERβ (Z) := log E[eβZ ].
                                                β
The entropic risk measure ERβ is the normalized cumulant generating function of Z and is concave
and additive for independent random variables (Föllmer & Knispel, 2011). Using Taylor expansion,
the entropic risk can be expressed as follows:
                                                β
                               ERβ (Z) = E[Z] +   Var[Z] + O(β 2 ).
                                                2
From the above expression, we observe that β > 0 induces a risk-tolerant objective and β < 0
induces a risk-averse one. As β → 0, ERβ (Z) tends to the risk-neutral expectation E[Z].
However, the additivity property of the entropic risk measure may not be desirable in many practical
scenarios. For example, if ERβ (X1 + X2 + · · · + Xn ) is the total reward of n i.i.d. random variables,
then the reward per random variable is ERβ (X1 ), no matter how large n is. Thus, the aggregation of
independent risks does not affect ‘diversification reduces risks.’ In contrast, coherent risk measures
like CVaR are super-additive and thus enjoy this property.

C.3   E NTROPIC VALUE - AT-R ISK

Let (Ω, F, P ) be a probability space. Let Z be a finite mean random variable, i.e., E[|Z|] < ∞,
whose moment-generating function MZ (z) exists for all z ≥ 0. The Entropic Value-at-Risk (EVaR)
(Ahmadi-Javid, 2011; 2012) at confidence level 1 − α is defined as
                                                (                  )
                                                           M (z)
                                                    −1       Z
                           EVaR1−α (Z) := inf z ln                  .
                                            z>0               α
The EVaR admits a dual representation as follows:

                                   EVaR1−α (Z) = sup EQ (Z) ,
                                                    Q∈Q

where Q = {Q ≪ P : dKL (Q||P ) ≤ − ln α} where dKL denotes the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence of Q with respect to P . This dual representation of the EVaR also reveals the reason
behind its name.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.4   G - ENTROPIC R ISK M EASURE

Inspired by the dual representation of EVaR, Ahmadi-Javid (2012) proposes a large class of
information-theoretic coherent risk measures called g-entropic risk measures. This new class contains
both the CVaR and EVaR.
Let g be a convex proper function with g(1) = 0 and β ≥ 0. The generalized relative entropy
of Q with respect to P , denoted by Hg (P, Q), is an information-type pseudo-distance (also called
divergence measure) from Q to P :
                                                 Z
                                                        dQ
                                   Hg (P, Q) := g            dP.
                                                        dP
This quantity is an important divergence measure, initially mentioned in Ali & Silvey (1966); Csiszár
(1967), and discussed in more detail in Liese & Vajda (2006); Ullah (1996). For g(z) = z ln z, we
obtain the Kullback-Leibler divergence from Q to P (Kullback & Leibler, 1951).
Let Z be a finite-mean random variable. Then, the g-entropic risk measure with divergence level β is
defined as
                                     ERg,β := sup EQ (Z),
                                                 Q∈Q

where Q = {Q ≪ P : Hg (P, Q) ≤ β}. We can show that the CVaR and EVaR are special cases of
the g-entropic risk measure, with proper choices of g and β. For a more comprehensive discussion of
the properties of the g-entropic risk measure, please refer to Section 5 of Ahmadi-Javid (2012).

C.5   OTHER C OHERENT R ISK M EASURES

Risk measures like Tail value-at-risk, Proportional Hazard (PH) risk measure, Wang risk measure,
and Superhedging price also belong to the family of coherent risk measures. These risk measures
have many important applications. For example, Proportional Hazard (PH) risk measure is widely
used in healthcare domains such as clinical trials (Rulli et al., 2018) or epidemiology (Moolgavkar
et al., 2018). Wang risk measure and Superhedging price are commonly used in financial applications
such as asset pricing (Wang, 2000) or portfolio optimization (Löhne & Rudloff, 2014).
In the RL context, CVaR is the most well-known and commonly used risk measure among all coherent
risk measures and is relatively well-studied in the literature (Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Yu et al., 2018).
Some very recent works (Ni & Lai, 2022a;b) have started investigating the use of EVaR in RL. Unlike
our work, the techniques used by Ni & Lai (2022a;b) exploit properties that are unique to EVaR and
thus cannot be generalized to others in the family of coherent risk measures.


D     P ROOFS

Before presenting the proofs of the supporting lemmas, we review the properties of coherent risk
measures and derive the necessary results needed in our proofs. A coherent risk measure (Föllmer &
Schied, 2010) is defined as follows
Definition 3. Let X, Y be two random variables. A mapping ρ is called a coherent risk measure if ρ
satisfies the following conditions for all X, Y :

       • Monotonicity: If X ≤ Y a.s., then ρ(X) ≤ ρ(Y ).
       • Translation invariance: If m ∈ R, then ρ(X + m) = ρ(X) + m.
       • Positive homogeneity: If α > 0, then ρ(αZ) = αρ(Z).
       • Super-additivity: ρ(X + Y ) ≥ ρ(X) + ρ(Y ).

We want to highlight in our paper that we consider maximizing risks of the rewards. It is in direct
contrast to other papers that consider minimizing risks of the costs. Therefore, our properties are
upended compared to the properties presented in Föllmer & Schied (2010). The following result
presents a simple inequality we will use throughout this section.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 3. For any two state-action value functions f1 , f2 : S × A → R, we have

               (Dhρ f1 )(x, a) − (Dhρ f2 )(x, a) ≤ − Dhρ − (f1 − f2 ) (x, a).

Proof. The super-additivity property of ρ implies that
            ρ(X) + ρ(Y − X) ≤ ρ(Y ),             equivalently, ρ(X) − ρ(Y ) ≤ −ρ(Y − X).                 (15)
In the inequality given in Eq. (15), we want to highlight the super-additivity properties of ρ. We
emphasize that the statement ρ(X) − ρ(Y ) ≤ ρ(X − Y ) is incorrect since ρ is only positively
homogeneous. This argument concludes our proof of inequality.
Let x′ ∼ Ph (·|x, a) be the random variable represents the next state by following the transition kernel
Ph , by definition of Dhρ in Eq. (3), we have
                    (Dhρ f1 )(x, a) − (Dhρ f2 )(x, a) = ρ f1 (x′ ) − ρ f1 (x′ )


                                                      ≤ −ρ − (f1 (x′ ) − f2 (x′ ))


                                                      = − Dhρ − (f1 − f2 ) (x, a),

where the first and last equality follows from the definition of Dhρ from Eq. (3), and the inequality is
due to Eq. (15).

D.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

We first define a few notations to simplify the presentation of the proof. First, we define the
temporal-difference (TD) error as
                  δht (x, a) = (rh + Dhρ Vh+1
                                          t
                                              )(x, a) − Qth (x, a),       ∀(x, a) ∈ S × A.               (16)
For a trajectory {(xth , ath )}h∈[H] , we further define the two following quantities
       1
           = Vht (xth ) − Vhπt (xth ) − Qth (xth , ath ) − Qπht (xth , ath ) ,

      ζt,h
       2
           = (Dhρ Vh+1
                     t
                          )(xth , ath ) − (Dhρ Vh+1
                                                πt
                                                    )(xth , ath ) − Vh+1                πt
                                                                     t
                                                                            (xth+1 ) − Vh+1 (xth+1 ) .

      ζt,h                                                                                               (17)
                          1         2
The random variables ζt,h      and ζt,h capture the deviations of the value function due to two sources of
randomness in the MDP – the randomness of choosing the action ath ∼ πht (·|xth ) and drawing next
state xth+1 ∼ Ph (·|xth , ath ). We establish the upper bound in the following steps.
Step 1: Decomposition of the regret.
Lemma 4. We can upper bound the regret as
                 T X
                 X H   h−1
                       Y                                       T X
                                                               X H                    T X
                                                                                      X H
  R(T ) ≤ −                      Jπi⋆ Diρ Jπh⋆ (−δht )(xt1 ) −     δht (xth , ath ) +       1
                                                                                          (ξt,h    2
                                                                                                + ξt,h ),
                 t=1 h=1   i=1                               t=1 h=1                  t=1 h=1
             |                                {z                                 }    |         {z       }
                                             Term I                                           Term II

where δht , ζt,h
             1          2
                 , and ζt,h are defined above.

Proof sketch. We decompose the instantaneous regret at the t-th episode into
                              t                                                    t
              V1⋆ (xt1 ) − V1π (xt1 ) = V1⋆ (xt1 ) − V1t (xt1 )) + V1t (xt1 ) − V1π (xt1 ) .


To upper bound the first term, we establish an inequality of the form Vh⋆ − Vht ≤ f (Vh+1
                                                                                      ⋆      t
                                                                                          − Vh+1 ) for
some function f and apply it recursively. This inequality is established using the Bellman equation
and the super-additivity property of CVaR. Similar techniques can be applied to the upper bound of
the second term. The detailed proof is given in Appendix D.2
Step 2. Upper bounding Term I.
Lemma 5. Let λ = 1 + 1/T and β = BT in Algorithm RA-UCB. Then under Assumption 1, with
probability at least 1 − (2T 2 H 2 )−1 , we have that for all t ∈ [T ], h ∈ [H], x ∈ S, and a ∈ A:
                                       −2βbth (x, a) ≤ δht (x, a) ≤ 0.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The proof of Lemma 5 is in Appendix D.3. By Lemma Lemma 5, δht is a negative function, and
thus we could upper bound the first term in (I) by 0. We obtain that, with a probability of at least
1 − (2T 2 H 2 )−1 ,
                                                   T X
                                                   X H
                                      Term I ≤ −             δht (xth , ath )
                                                   t=1 h=1
                                                      T X
                                                      X H
                                               ≤ 2β             bth (xth , ath ),
                                                      t=1 h=1

which is an upper bound of the sum of the bonus terms. Recall that we can rewrite the bonus term as
                                                                                 1/2
                        bth (xth , ath ) = ϕ(xth , ath )⊤ (Λth )−1 ϕ(xth , ath )

                                                                                     ,
               t−1
where Λth = τ =1 ϕ(xτh , aτh )ϕ(xτh , aτh )⊤ + λ · IH and IH is the identity operator on H. Then,
             P

                                          H  X T                                         1/2
                                    √ X                  t   t ⊤     t −1        t    t
                  Term I ≤ 2β · T                   ϕ(xh , ah ) (Λh ) ϕ(xh , ah )
                                         h=1     t=1
                                    H
                                 √ X
                           ≤ 2β · T   [2 log det(I + KhT /λ)]1/2
                                         h=1
                                       p
                           = 4βH ·         T · Γk (T, λ),
where Γk (T, λ) is the maximal information gain defined in Eq. (10).
Step 3. Upper bounding Term II.
               1       2
Lemma 6. For ζt,h and ζt,h defined in Eq. (17). We have that, with probability at least 1 − δ,

              X H
              T X                          p
                         1      2
                       (ζt,h + ζt,h )≤         16T H 3 log(2/δ) + 2T H · Ξ(m, δ/(4T H)).
              t=1 h=1

                                  1
Proof sketch. We show that {ζt,h    }(t,h)∈[T ]×[H] is a bounded martingale difference sequence and
                                                              2
apply Azuma-Hoeffding concentration inequality. For {ζt,h       }(t,h)∈[T ]×[H] , we use concentration
inequality of the risk estimator. The complete proof is in Appendix D.4
Setting δ = (2T 2 H 2 )−1 gives us
                              p
                  Term II ≤ 16T H 3 log(4T 2 H 2 ) + 2T H · Ξ(m, (8T 3 H 3 )−1 )

Therefore, combining these above results, with probability at least 1 − (T 2 H 2 )−1 , the regret is
bounded by
                    p              p
       R(T ) ≤ 4βH T Γk (T, λ) + 16T H 3 log(4T 2 H 2 ) + 2T H · Ξ(m, (8T 3 H 3 )−1 )
                    p
             ≤ 5βH T Γk (T, λ) + 2T H · Ξ(m, (8T 3 H 3 )−1 ).
Substituting β = BT completes the proof of Theorem 1.

D.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

We decompose the instantaneous regret at the t-th episode into
                                  t                                                       t
                  V1⋆ (xt1 ) − V1π (xt1 ) = V1⋆ (xt1 ) − V1t (xt1 ) + V1t (xt1 ) − V1π (xt1 ) .
                                            |         {z         } |             {z        }
                                                       (A)                          (B)

We proceed to upper bound the two terms separately. For ease of presentation, we first define the
operator Jπ acting on functions f : S × A → R that map a state-action value function to the state
value function by following policy π as follows:
                                      (Jπ f )(x) = ⟨f (x, ·), π(·|x)⟩A .


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since the domain of f (x, ·) and π(·|x) is a finite set A, the inner product above can be interpreted as
an inner product between two Euclidean vectors.
Term (A). By the definitions of the optimal value function, we have Vh⋆ (x) = ⟨Q⋆h (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A
for all x ∈ S. Similarly, by the definition of Vht , we get Vht (x) = ⟨Qth (x, ·), πht (·|x)⟩A for all x ∈ S.
Thus, for any t ∈ [T ], h ∈ [H], x ∈ S, we have
       Vh⋆ (x) − Vht (x) = ⟨Q⋆h (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A − ⟨Qth (x, ·), πht (·|x)⟩A
                               = ⟨Q⋆h (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A − ⟨Qth (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A +
                                     ⟨Qth (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A − ⟨Qth (x, ·), πht (·|x)⟩A
                               = ⟨Q⋆h (x, ·) − Qth (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A + ⟨Qth (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x) − πht (·|x)⟩A .

Since πht is the greedy policy with respect to Qth , it gives
       ⟨Qth (xh , ·), πh⋆ (·|xh ) − πht (·|xh )⟩A = ⟨Qth (xh , ·), πh⋆ (·|xh )⟩A − max Qth (xh , a) ≤ 0,
                                                                                           a∈A

for all xh ∈ S. As a result, we can upper bound the second term by 0 and have
                                Vh⋆ (x) − Vht (x) ≤ ⟨Q⋆h (x, ·) − Qth (x, ·), πh⋆ (·|x)⟩A
                                                     = Jπh⋆ (Q⋆h − Qth )(x).
From the Bellman optimality equation and the definition of the temporal-difference, we get
                               Q⋆h − Qth = (rh + Dhρ Vh+1
                                                      ⋆
                                                          ) − (rh + Dhρ Vh+1
                                                                         t
                                                                             − δht )
                                             = Dhρ Vh+1
                                                     ⋆
                                                        − Dhρ Vh+1
                                                               t
                                                                   + δht
                                                   ρ
                                             ≤ −Dh − (Vh+1 − Vh+1 ) + δht ,
                                                          ⋆        t


where the last inequality follows from Lemma 3. Substituting this in the previous derivation gives us

                Vh⋆ (x) − Vht (x) ≤ Jπh⋆ − Dhρ − (Vh+1
                                                    ⋆        t
                                                                 ) + δht (x)

                                                        − Vh+1
                                  = −Jπh⋆ Dhρ − (Vh+1
                                                  ⋆       t
                                                              ) (x) − Jπh⋆ (−δht )(x).

                                                      − Vh+1                                     (18)
Eq. (18) represents a recursive relation between Vh⋆ − Vht and Vh+1 ⋆         t
                                                                         − Vh+1   . Then, recursively
applying Eq. (18) for all h ∈ [H] gives
        V1⋆ − V1t ≤ −Jπ1⋆ D1ρ − (V2⋆ − V2t ) − Jπ1⋆ (−δ1t )


                  ≤ −Jπ1⋆ D1ρ − −Jπ2⋆ D2ρ − (V3⋆ − V3t ) − Jπ2⋆ (−δ2t ) − Jπ1⋆ (−δ1t )


                  = −Jπ1⋆ D1ρ Jπ2⋆ D2ρ − (V3⋆ − V3t ) + Jπ2⋆ (−δ2t ) − Jπ1⋆ (−δ1t )


                        Y  2                              2   h−1
                                                       X       Y
                  =−         Jπh⋆ Dhρ − (V3⋆ − V3t ) −              Jπi⋆ Diρ Jπh⋆ (−δht )
                                h=1                                   h=1      i=1
                    ..
                     .
                            H
                            Y                             H   h−1
                                                         X    Y
                         ≤−   Jπh⋆ Dhρ − (VH+1
                                           ⋆      t
                                               − VH+1 ) −         Jπi⋆ Diρ Jπh⋆ (−δht )
                                h=1                                          h=1     i=1
                               H   h−1
                               X   Y
                         =−                  Jπi⋆ Diρ Jπh⋆ (−δht ),                                               (19)
                               h=1     i=1
                                                      ⋆          t
where the last equality follows due to the fact that VH+1 (x) = VH+1 (x) = 0 for all x ∈ S.
Term (B). By definitions of δht , ζt,h
                                   1        2
                                       and ζt,h defined in Eq. (16) and Eq. (17), we have

                           t                            t
       Vht (xth ) − Vhπ (xth ) = Vht (xth ) − Vhπ (xth ) + δht (xth , ath ) − δht (xth , ath )
                                                        t                                        t
                                   = Vht (xth ) − Vhπ (xth ) + Dhρ Vh+1
                                                                    t
                                                                        (xth , ath ) − Dhρ Vhπ (xth , ath )


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                      t
                                                    + (Qπh − Qth )(xth , ath ) − δht (xth , ath )
                                                             t                                      t
                                   = (Vht − Vhπ )(xth ) − (Qth − Qπh )(xth , ath ) + Dhρ Vh+1
                                                                                          t
                                                                                              (xth , ath ) −
                                                                     t                                        t
                                                    Dhρ Vhπ (xth , ath ) − (Vh+1
                                                                             t      π
                                                                                 − Vh+1 )(xth+1 ) +
                                                                                 t
                                                      t      π
                                                    (Vh+1 − Vh+1 )(xth+1 ) − δht (xth , ath )
                                                                 t
                                       t      π
                                   = (Vh+1 − Vh+1 )(xth+1 ) + ξt,h
                                                               1      2
                                                                   + ξt,h − δht (xth , ath ).
Recursively applying the above gives:
                   t                            t
  V1t (xt1 ) − V1π (xt1 ) = (V2t − V2π )(xt2 ) + ξt,1
                                                  1      2
                                                      + ξt,1 − δ1t (xt1 , at1 )
                                        t

                          = (V3t − V3π )(xt3 ) + ξt,2
                                                    1      2
                                                       + ξt,2 − δ2t (xt2 , at2 ) + ξt,1
                                                                                    1      2
                                                                                        + ξt,1 − δ1t (xt1 , at1 )
                                                                          2                             2
                                                t                         X                             X
                              = (V3t − V3π )(xt3 ) +                              1
                                                                                (ξt,h    2
                                                                                      + ξt,h )−               δht (xth , ath )
                                                                          h=1                           h=1
                         ..
                          .
                                                                                      H                               H
                                                         t                            X                               X
                                  t      π
                              = (VH+1 − VH+1 )(xtH+1 ) +                                      1
                                                                                            (ξt,h    2
                                                                                                  + ξt,h )−                 δht (xth , ath )
                                                                                      h=1                             h=1
                                  H
                                  X                                      H
                                                                         X
                                        1      2
                              =       (ξt,h + ξt,h )−                           δht (xth , ath ),                                                 (20)
                                  h=1                                    h=1
                                                                                                                  t
                                                      t              π
where the last equality follows due to the fact that VH+1 (xH+1 ) = VH+1 (xH+1 ) = 0.
Combining Eq. (19) and Eq. (20) gives
                       T
                       X                             t
               RT =           [V1⋆ (xt1 ) − V1π (xt1 )]
                       t=1
                         H   h−1
                         X   Y                                                          H
                                                                                        X                             H
                                                                                                                      X
                   ≤−                     J
                                          πi⋆   Diρ          J    ⋆
                                                                 πh      (−δht ) +              1
                                                                                              (ξt,h    2
                                                                                                    + ξt,h )−               δht (xth , ath ),
                         h=1        i=1                                                 h=1                           h=1

which concludes the proof of this lemma.

D.3     P ROOF OF L EMMA 5

Let ϕ : Z → H denote the feature representation induced by the kernel k, i.e., k(z, z ′ ) =
⟨ϕ(z), ϕ(z ′ )⟩H . For ease of representation, we view ϕ(z) as a vector and write ϕ(z)⊤ ϕ(z ′ ) =
⟨ϕ(z), ϕ(z ′ )⟩H to denote the inner product. The kernel regression problem in Eq. (9) becomes
                          t−1 h
                          X                                                                                                  i2
   θb ← min L(θ) =                 rh (xτh , aτh ) + ρ̂(Vh+1
                                                         t
                                                             ({x′(i) }m         ⊤   τ    τ
                                                                      i=1 )) − θ ϕ(xh , ah )                                      + λ · ∥θ∥2H .   (21)
         θ∈H
                          τ =1


We define the feature matrix Φth : H → Rt−1 and the covariance matrix Λth : H → H as
                                                    t−1
                                   t−1 ⊤ ⊤
                1 ⊤                                 X
      Φth =                                     t
                                                        ϕ(zhτ )ϕ(zhτ )⊤ + λIH = (Φth )⊤ Φth + λIH ,

               ϕ(zh ) , . . . , ϕ(zh )     and Λh =
                                                                                 τ =1

where IH is the identity mapping on H. The Gram matrix Kht in Eq. (6) can be expressed as
Kht = Φth (Φth )⊤ , and kht (z) = Φϕ(z). With these definitions, we can rewrite Eq. (21) as
                                          min L(θ) = ∥yht − Φth θ∥22 + λθ⊤ θ.
                                          θ∈H

The solution to the optimization problem above is given by θbht = (Λth )−1 (Φth )⊤ yht . As a result, Q
                                                                                                      bt
                                                                                                       h
                                 t          ⊤ bt
in Eq. (9) can be expressed as Qh (z) = ϕ(z) θh . In the rest of this section, to further simplify the
                               b


                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


notation, we denote Φth as simply Φ when the context is clear. Since (ΦΦ⊤ + λI) and (Φ⊤ Φ + λIH )
are positive definite, and thus invertible, and Φ⊤ (ΦΦ⊤ + λI) = (Φ⊤ Φ + λIH )Φ⊤ , we have
           (Φth )−1 Φ⊤ = (Φ⊤ Φ + λIH )−1 Φ⊤ = Φ⊤ (ΦΦ⊤ + λI)−1 = Φ⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 .
Consequently, we can write θbht as
                               θbht = (Λth )−1 Φ⊤ yht = Φ⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 yht .
In the sequel, we will bound the temporal-difference error δht defined in Eq. (16). Since Vht (x) =
maxa Qth (x, a), we have
                              δht = rh + Dhρ Vh+1
                                              t
                                                  − Qth = T⋆h Qth+1 − Qth ,
where T⋆h is the Bellman optimality operator. By Assumption Assumption 1, since for any t, h,
Qth+1 ∈ [0, H], therefore we have T⋆h Qth+1 ∈ B(RH). Consequently, there exists θth ∈ H such that
for any z ∈ Z, T⋆h Qth+1 (z) = ϕ(z)⊤ θth . We can write ϕ(z) as
                            ϕ(z) = (Λth )−1 Λth ϕ(z)
                                    = (Λth )−1 (Φ⊤ Φ + λIH )ϕ(z)
                                    = (Λth )−1 (Φ⊤ Φ)ϕ(z) + λ(Λth )−1 ϕ(z)
                                    = Φ⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 kht (z) + λ(Λth )−1 ϕ(z).
Using the above, we can write ϕ(z)⊤ θth as
                       ϕ(z)⊤ θth = kht (z)⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 Φθth + λϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 θth .
We have:
           ϕ(z)⊤ θbht − ϕ(z)⊤ θth                                                                   (22)
           = ϕ(z) Φ (Kht + λI)−1 yht − kht (z)⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 Φθth − λϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 θth
                   ⊤    ⊤

           = kht (z)⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 (yht − Φθth ) − λϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 θth .
              |                 {z                 }   |        {z        }
                                (i)                             (ii)

We proceed by bounding Term (i) and Term (ii) separately. For Term (ii), by Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality:
                  |Term (ii)| = |λϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 θth |
                               ≤ ∥λ(Λth )−1 ϕ(z)∥H · ∥θth ∥H ≤ RH∥λ(Λth )−1 ϕ(z)∥H
                                    q
                               = RH λϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 · λIH · (Λth )−1 ϕ(z)
                                    q
                               ≤ RH λϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 · (Λth ) · (Λth )−1 ϕ(z)
                                 √
                               = λRH · bth (z),                                                     (23)
where the second last inequality follows from the fact that (Λth − λIH ) is a positive-semidefinite
operator, which implies for any f ∈ H, we have f ⊤ (Λth − λIH )f ≥ 0.
We continue to bound Term (i) in the rest of this section. For τ ∈ [0, t − 1], the τ -entry of the vector
(yht − Φθth ) can be expressed as
             [yht ]τ − [Φθth ]τ = rh (xτh , aτh ) + ρ̂({Vh+1
                                                         t
                                                             (x′(i) )}m          τ    τ ⊤ t
                                                                      i=1 ) − ϕ(xh , ah ) θ h

                               = rh (xτh , aτh ) + ρ̂({Vh+1
                                                        t
                                                            (x′(i) )}m         ⋆ t       τ    τ
                                                                     i=1 ) − (Th Qh+1 )(xh , ah )
                                                             ρ t
                                      t
                               = ρ̂({Vh+1 (x′(i) )}m                   τ    τ
                                                   i=1 ) − (Dh Vh+1 )(xh , ah ).

Combining these above results, we have
   |Term (i)| = |kht (z)⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 (yht − Φθth )|
              = |ϕ(z)⊤ Φ⊤ (Kht + λI)−1 (yht − Φθth )|


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                = |ϕ(z)⊤ (Λth )−1 Φ⊤ (yht − Φθth )|
                                   Xt−1               h                                             i
                       ⊤    t −1            τ    τ          t     ′     m         ρ t       τ    τ
                = ϕ(z) (Λh )             ϕ(xh , ah ) · ρ̂({Vh+1 (x(i) )}i=1 ) − (Dh Vh+1 )(xh , ah )
                                        τ =1
                                         t−1
                                         X                     h
                ≤ ∥ϕ(z)∥(Λth )−1 ·              ϕ(xτh , aτh ) · ρ̂({Vh+1
                                                                     t
                                                                         (x′(i) )}m
                                                                                  i=1 )−
                                         τ =1
                                                                            i
                                                     (Dhρ Vh+1
                                                           t
                                                               )(xτh , aτh )               ,                         (24)
                                                                                (Λth )−1

where the last inequality follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. To bound the RKHS norm in
the second term, we apply techniques similar to (Yang et al., 2020) by combining concentration of
                                                                                          t
self-normalized processes and uniform convergence over the function classes that contain Vh+1 . To
achieve this, let us first define the action-value function classes Qucb (h, R, B) as
  Qucb (h, R, B) = {Q :
       Q(z) = min{Q0 (z) + β · λ1/2 [k(z, z) − kD (z)⊤ (KD + λI)−1 kD (z)]1/2 , H − h + 1}+ ,
       ∥Q0 ∥H ≤ R, β ∈ [0, B], |D| ≤ T }.
Let us further define the state-value function classes Vucb (h, R, B) as
                     Vucb (h, R, B) = {V : V (x) = max Q(x, a) for Q ∈ Qucb (h, R, B)}.
                                                          a∈A

By (Yang et al., 2020, Lemma C.1), if we set RT = 2HΓk (T, λ), then we have for all t ∈ [T ], h ∈
[H], Vht as defined in Eq. (9) satisfies that Vht ∈ Vucb (h, RT , BT ) where BT is defined in Theorem 1.
We now bound Term (i) by a covering number argument over the function classes Vucb (h, RT , BT ) for
h ∈ [H]. For any two state-value functions V, V ′ : S → R, we consider the maximum metric (also
known as the Chebyshev metric) d(V, V ′ ) = supx∈S |V (x) − V ′ (x)|. For ϵ, B > 0, let Nd (ϵ, h, B)
be the ϵ-covering number of Vucb (h, RT , B) with respect to the metric d, and N∞ (ϵ, h, B) as the
ϵ-covering number of Qucb (h, RT , B) with respect to the maximum metric. Applying (Yang et al.,
2020, Lemma E.2) with δ = (2T 2 H 3 )−1 and taking a union bound over h ∈ [H] gives
         t−1
         X                     h                                              i 2
                                                            ρ t
                ϕ(xτh , aτh ) · ρ̂({Vh+1
                                     t
                                         (x′(i) )}m                   τ    τ
                                                  i=1 ) − (Dh Vh+1 )(xh , ah )
         τ =1                                                                          (Λth )−1
                                      t−1
                                      X                    h                                          i 2
                                                                                      ρ
       ≤               sup                  ϕ(xτh , aτh ) · ρ̂({V (x′(i) )}m
                                                                           i=1 ) − (Dh  V )(x τ
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                              h h aτ
                                                                                                     )
           V ∈Vucb (h+1,RT ,BT )
                            τ =1                                                                          (Λth )−1

       ≤ 2H log det(I + Kht /λ) + 2H 2 t(λ − 1)
                 2

       + 4H 2 log N∞ (ϵ, h + 1, BT ) + log (2T 2 H 3 ) + 8t2 ϵ2 /λ,


uniformly over all t ∈ [T ], h ∈ [H] with probability 1 − (2T 2 H 2 )−1 . The first inequality is due to
               t
the fact that Vh+1 ∈ Vucb (h + 1, RT , BT ). According to the algorithm, we set λ = 1 + 1/T . We
             ∗
further set ϵ = H/T , the above simplifies to
                t−1
                X                     h                                              i 2
                                                                    ρ t
                       ϕ(xτh , aτh ) · ρ̂({Vh+1
                                            t
                                                (x′(i) )}m
                                                         i=1 ) − (D  V
                                                                   h h+1 )(x τ
                                                                               ,
                                                                             h h aτ
                                                                                    )
                τ =1                                                                           (Λth )−1

            ≤ 4H 2 Γk (T, λ) + 10H 2 + 4H 2 log N∞ (ϵ∗ , h + 1, BT ) + 12H 2 log (T H).
Combining the above result with Eq. (22), Eq. (23), and Eq. (24), gives

       |ϕ(z)⊤ (θbht − θth )|
                                                                                    √
        ≤ Hbth (z) · [4Γk (T, λ) + 10 + 4 log N∞ (ϵ∗ , h + 1, B) + 8 log (T H)]1/2 + λR

                                                                                     1/2
        ≤ Hbth (z) 8Γk (T, λ) + 20 + 8 log N∞ (ϵ∗ , h + 1, B) + 16 log (T H) + 2λR2


       ≤ BT · bth (z) = β · bth (z),                                                                                 (25)


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 2 2 −1
holds uniformly for all t ∈ [T ], h ∈      p probability 1 − (2T H ) . The second inequality
                                    √ [H] with
                            √                   2   2
follows from the fact that a + b ≤           2(a + b ), and the last inequality follows from the
assumption on BT .
Finally, by the definition of the temporal difference error δht and Eq. (25), we have:
               −δ t (z) = Qt (z) − T⋆ Qt
                   h         h           h    ≤ ϕ(z)⊤ (θbt − θt ) + βbt (z) ≤ 2βbt (z)
                                             h+1            h     h        h            h
which proves the left inequality of Lemma 5. For the right inequality, note that since Qth+1 (z) ≤
H − h for all z ∈ Z, we have (T⋆h Qth+1 ) ≤ H − h + 1. Therefore, we have
             δht (z) = T⋆h Qth+1 − Qth (z)
                    = ϕ(z)⊤ θth − min{ϕ(z)⊤ θbht + β · bth (z), H − h + 1}+
                    ≤ max{ϕ(z)⊤ θt − ϕ(z)⊤ θbt − β · bt (z), ϕ(z)⊤ θt − (H − h + 1)}
                                     h             h        h              h
                   ≤ 0,
where the first term is negative due to Eq. (25), and the second term is negative due to the fact that
(T⋆h Qth+1 ) ≤ H − h + 1. This completes the proof of Lemma 5.

D.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 6
                                                         1     2
This section follows Yang et al. (2020) to show {ζt,h       , ζt,h }(t,h)∈[T ]×[H] is a bounded martingale
difference sequence. We construct the filtration as follows. For any t ∈ [T ], h ∈ [H], we define the
following σ-algebras
                  Ft,h,1 = σ {(xτi , aτi )}(τ,i)∈[t−1]×[H] ∪ {(xti , ati )}i∈[h] ,


                  Ft,h,2 = σ {(xτi , aτi )}(τ,i)∈[t−1]×[H] ∪ {(xti , ati )}i∈[h] ∪ {xth+1 } ,


where σ(·) denotes the σ-algebra generated by a finite set. Since Vht and Qth are computed based on
trajectories of the first t − 1 episodes, they are measurable with respect to Ft,1,1 . Since the action ath
are sampled from πt (·|xth ), we have
                                               1
                                           E ζt,h |Ft,h−1,2 = 0.
Thus, applying Azuma-Hoeffding inequality (Azuma, 1967), we obtain that for all t > 0:
                                   X T X H                          −t2
                                              1
                               P            ζt,h   > t ≤ 2 exp                   .                    (26)
                                    t=1 h=1
                                                                    16T H 3
                                                         p
We let the right hand side equal to δ/2, yielding t = 16T H 3 · log (4/δ).
                    2
Next, we bound ζt,h     using the risk estimator concentration inequality. Recall that the empirical risk
estimate ρ̂ achieves the rate of Ξ(m, δ), i.e.,
                              P |ρ(Z) − ρ̂({Zi }m

                                                    i=1 )| ≤ Ξ(m, δ) ≥ 1 − δ.
By definition, Dhρ Vh+1
                      t
                          (xth , ath ) = ρ(x′ ) where x′ ∼ Ph (·|xth , ath ). Note that xth+1 is also sampled
             t   t
from Ph (·|xh , ah ). Applying the above inequality, for all t ∈ [T ], h ∈ [H], we have

            P Dhρ Vh+1 t
                           (xth , ath ) − Vh+1
                                           t
                                               (xth+1 ) ≤ Ξ(m, δ/(4T H)) ≥ 1 − δ/(4T H).                 (27)
Taking a union bound over all t ∈ [T ] and h ∈ [H] yields
        XT X H
     P           Dhρ Vh+1
                      t
                          (xth , ath ) − Vh+1
                                          t
                                              (xth+1 ) ≤ T H · Ξ(m, δ/(4T H)) ≥ 1 − δ/4.                (28)
         t=1 h=1
Following similar arguments, we have
        T X
        X   H
     P           Dhρ Vh+1
                      πt                  πt
                          (xth , ath ) − Vh+1 (xth+1 ) ≤ T H · Ξ(m, δ/(4T H)) ≥ 1 − δ/4.                (29)
         t=1 h=1
Finally, performing a union bound over 26, 28, and 29 gives us with probability at least 1 − δ, we
have
               T X
               X   H                  p
                        1      2
                      (ζt,h + ζt,h ) ≤ 16T H 3 log(2/δ) + 2T H · Ξ(m, δ/(4T H)),
               t=1 h=1
which concludes the proof of Lemma 6.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.5     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1

We first restate CVaR empirical risk estimator and its concentration result.
Lemma 7. (Lemma 3 in Yu et al. (2018)) Let Z1 , . . . , Zm ∼ FZ be m i.i.d. bounded random
variables, i.e., P[0 ≤ Zi ≤ B] = 1, ∀i, then we have
                                                                               −mε2 (1 − α)2

       h
                                     m
                                              i                4
     P CVaRα (Z) − CVaRα ({Zi }i=1 ) ≥ ε ≤ 2 1 +
                        \                                              exp                      ,
                                                           ε(1 − α)             2(2 − α)2 B 2
where                                             (                              )
                                                                    m
                                                          1 X
                       \α ({Zi }m
                       CVaR     i=1 ) = max           s+        (Zi − s)−            .
                                        s∈R              αm i=1

Setting the RHS to δ, we have
                                                                −mε2 (1 − α)2

                                           4
                          δ =2 1+                     exp                        ,
                                       ε(1 − α)                  2(2 − α)2 B 2
or equivalently,
                                      4T H(ϵ(1 − α) + 4) 2H 2 (2 − α)2
                          m = log                                         .
                                          δϵ(1 − α)        ϵ2 (1 − α)2
For the regret to be order-optimal, we need
                                   B pΓ (T, λ)
                                     T    k
                           ϵ=O          √          and δ = (8T 3 H 3 )−1 .
                                          T
That gives us
                                                 T 5 H 6
                                   m = O log                     ,
                                                BT2 Γk (T, λ)
which concludes the proof of Corollary 1.

E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
This section provides additional empirical results to demonstrate the effectiveness of RA-UCB. We
study the proposed algorithm under various risk measures, namely VaR, CVaR, and EVaR. Refer to
Appendix C for a formal introduction and discussion of these risk measures.
The robot navigation environment is similar to the setting in Section 5.1. The robot receives a
positive reward of 10 for reaching the destination and a negative reward for being close to obstacles.
The negative reward increases exponentially as the robot comes close to the obstacles. We set the
horizon of each episode to H = 30 and use m = 100 samples from the weak simulator to estimate
the risk in Eq. (7). We approximate the state-action value function using the RBF kernel and the
KernelRidge regressor from Scikit-learn.
We run RA-UCB for 50 episodes and report the performance of the learned policy with three
different risk measures, namely Value-at-Risk (VaR), Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), and Entropic
Value-at-Risk (EVaR). Each risk measure is evaluated against different values of the risk parameter
α ∈ [0.1, 0.5, 0.9]. We note that VaR is not a coherent risk measure; therefore, our regret upper bound
does not apply to VaR. Regardless, VaR is still an important risk measure with many real-world
applications and has important connections with CVaR and EVaR.
Fig. 4 shows the robot’s cumulative rewards following the learned policies after 50 episodes. Each
column represents a different risk measure, and each row represents a different risk parameter. We
observe that the reward distribution changes when we vary the risk parameters. For α = 0.1 (top
row), the policies are more risk-averse, favoring safer paths with higher worst-case rewards but having
smaller average rewards. As we increase the value of α, α = 0.5 (middle row), and α = 0.9 (bottom
row), the learned policies become more risk-tolerant, which causes the average rewards to be higher
but occasionally small.
We also observe that, for the same risk parameter, CVaR outperforms VaR marginally in terms of
average rewards. This gain is because VaR does not control rewards below its value (for instance, you


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can significantly reduce the smallest rewards below VaR, but the Value-at-Risk will not change). In
other words, VaR disregards some parts of the distribution. This property can be both good and bad,
depending upon the applications. For example, VaR estimates are statistically more stable than CVaR
estimates. However, in our case, we use a sufficiently high number of samples to estimate the risk
values; thus, risk measures that consider the complete distribution, like CVaR or EVaR, are slightly
more effective.
Furthermore, it can be shown that for the same risk parameter α, EVaR is more risk-averse than both
VaR and CVaR (Ahmadi-Javid, 2012). Our results show that the reward distribution using EVaR
(plots the rightmost columns) tends to have lower average rewards but better worst-case rewards.

                        VaR (α = 0.1)                               CVaR (α = 0.1)                               EVaR (α = 0.1)

              0.3                                         0.3                                          0.3
Probability


                                            Probability


                                                                                         Probability
              0.2                                         0.2                                          0.2


              0.1                                         0.1                                          0.1


              0.0                                         0.0                                          0.0
                    2     4        6    8                       2      4        6    8                       2      4        6    8
                           Rewards                                      Rewards                                      Rewards

                        VaR (α = 0.5)                               CVaR (α = 0.5)                               EVaR (α = 0.5)

              0.3                                         0.3                                          0.3
Probability


                                            Probability


                                                                                         Probability
              0.2                                         0.2                                          0.2


              0.1                                         0.1                                          0.1


              0.0                                         0.0                                          0.0
                    2     4        6    8                       2      4        6    8                       2      4        6    8
                           Rewards                                      Rewards                                      Rewards

                        VaR (α = 0.9)                               CVaR (α = 0.9)                               EVaR (α = 0.9)

              0.3                                         0.3                                          0.3
Probability


                                            Probability


                                                                                         Probability


              0.2                                         0.2                                          0.2


              0.1                                         0.1                                          0.1


              0.0                                         0.0                                          0.0
                    2     4        6    8                       2      4        6    8                       2      4        6    8
                           Rewards                                      Rewards                                      Rewards



Figure 4: Histograms show the distribution of the cumulative reward when following the learned
policy. The solid lines represent the estimated densities using Gaussian kernels, and the vertical lines
represent the mean of the distribution. For α = 0.1 (top row), the policy is more risk-averse, favoring
safer paths with higher worst-case rewards but having smaller average rewards. As we increase α,
α = 0.5 (middle row), and α = 0.9 (bottom row), the learned policy becomes more risk-tolerant,
which causes the average rewards to be higher but occasionally small. Furthermore, for the same risk
parameters, e.g., α = 0.1, EVaR usually has the smallest average but better worst-case rewards. This
result also confirms that EVaR is more risk-averse than VaR and CVaR for the same risk parameter
(Ahmadi-Javid, 2012).


                                                                      26
