Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H OW (U N )FAIR IS T EXT S UMMARIZATION ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Creating a good summary requires carefully choosing details from the original
             text to accurately represent it in a limited space. If a summary contains biased
             information about a group, it risks passing this bias off to readers as fact. These
             risks increase if we consider not just one biased summary, but rather a biased
             summarization algorithm. Despite this, no work has measured whether these sum-
             marizers demonstrate biased performance. Rather, most work in summarization
             focuses on improving performance, ignoring questions of bias. In this paper, we
             demonstrate that automatic summarizers both amplify and introduce bias towards
             information about under-represented groups. Additionally, we show that summa-
             rizers are highly sensitive to document structure, making the summaries they gen-
             erate unstable under changes that are semantically meaningless to humans, which
             poses a further fairness risk. Given these results, and the large-scale potential for
             harm presented by biased summarization, we recommend that bias analysis be per-
             formed and reported on summarizers to ensure that new automatic summarization
             methods do not introduce bias to the summaries they generate.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In any piece of text, bias against a group may be expressed. This bias may be explicit or implicit
and can be displayed either in what information is included (e.g., including information that is
exclusively negative about one group and exclusively positive about another), where in the article
it comes from (e.g., only selecting sentences from the start of articles), or how it is written (e.g.,
saying “a man thought to be involved in crime died last night after an officer involved shooting”
vs.“a police officer shot and killed an unarmed man in his home last night”).
The presence of any bias in a longer text may be made worse by summarizing it. A summary can
be seen as a presentation of the most salient points of a larger piece of text, where the definition of
“salient information” will vary according to various ideologies a person holds. Due to this subjec-
tivity and the space constraints a summary imposes, there is a heightened potential for summaries
to contain bias. Readers, however, expect that summaries faithfully represent articles. Therefore,
bias in the text of a summary is likely to go unquestioned. If a summary presents information in a
way biased against a group, readers are likely to believe that the article exhibited this same bias, as
checking the truth of these assumptions requires a high amount of effort. This poses several risks.
First, an echo chamber effect, where the bias in generated summaries agrees with biases the reader
already has. The opposite is also a risk. An article may present more or less the same amounts of in-
formation about multiple groups whereas its summary includes more information about one group,
leading readers to believe the most important information in the article is about only one group.
As writing summaries manually carries a large cost, automatic summarization is an appealing solu-
tion. However, where one biased summary is a problem, a biased summarization algorithm capable
of summarizing thousands of articles in the time it takes a human to generate one, is a disaster. In
recent years, automatic summarization has increased in availability, both for personal and commer-
cial use. Summarization algorithms have suggested for use on news articles, medical notes, business
documents, legal texts, personal documents1 , and conversation transcripts2 . Despite the sensitivity
of these applications, to the best of our knowledge, no work has measured the bias towards groups
of summaries generated by common summarization algorithms.
    1
        https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/03/auto-generated-summaries-in-google-docs.html?m=1
    2
        https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/language-service/summarization/overview


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this paper, we present the first empirical analysis to measure the bias of automatic summarizers,
for seven different techniques (ranging from the ones based on information retrieval methods to the
ones using large language models; and for high impact techniques provided by Microsoft and Ope-
nAI). We design a method to quantitatively measure to what extent article structure influences bias in
the generated summaries, as well as the inclusion of information about different gender, racial/ethic,
and religious groups. We also study the causes of bias by varying the influential factors, including
the summarization parameters, and distribution of input documents. We show that summarizers:

      1. Can suppress information about minority group in the original text.
      2. Prioritize information about certain groups over others, regardless of the amount of
         information about them in the original text.
      3. Amplify patterns of bias already shown in human summaries in where information is
         selected from in the original text.
      4. Demonstrate sensitivity to the structure of the articles they summarize, and are fragile
         to changes in those articles that are meaningless to humans.

These findings indicate that it is not safe to use automatic summarization at scale or in situations
where the text they generate could influence large numbers of readers. Doing so risks misinform-
ing and increasing bias held by readers. We conclude that assessments of bias in summarization
algorithms should be performed, and this bias should be reduced before models are released.

2    W HAT IS B IAS IN A S UMMARIZER ?

Let us start by defining what a biased summary is. We consider a biased summary to be be any
summary that misrepresents a group in some way, relative to the original text3 , whether this is
the amount or kind of information expressed. We further divide our definition of bias into two
subcategories based on their cause: content bias and structure bias. These definitions draw on
existing taxonomies of representational harms in NLP (Hovy & Spruit, 2016; Barocas et al., 2017),
but are tailored to summarization.
We define content bias as bias towards the mention of a group in a text. In this type of bias, if
group A is mentioned in the article, the summarizer will generate a biased summary. Changing the
structure of the text will have no effect on how biased the summary is. We further divide content
bias into five subcategories: under-representation, inclusion/exclusion, inaccuracy, sentiment bias,
and framing bias, and explain each in Table 1.
On the other hand, we define structure bias as a bias as a result the structure of the text being sum-
marized. In contrast to content bias, structure bias is invariant to the presence of information about
different groups, but will change when document structure is modified. We define three structure
bias subcategories: position bias, sentiment bias, and style bias, further explained in Table 1.
There are situations where the line between group and structure bias is not so clear cut. For example,
if articles about group A are written in a way that a summarizer has a structure bias against, but
articles about group B are written in a way that does not illicit this bias, the summarizer will show
a consistent bias against group A. Though this is a result of a structure bias, it is also an example of
content bias because the article structure and the group being discussed are dependent.Regardless of
the cause, biased summaries have the potential for real, negative effects on marginalized groups.

3    O UR M ETHODS FOR M EASURING B IAS

Each of the types of bias defined in Table 1 represents a real problem in automatic summarization.
However, we are not able to explore all of these biases in this paper, and some (i.e. framing bias)
would be best explored using manual linguistic analysis than computational techniques. Instead, we
aim to explore the content and structure bias of summarizers along three axes: underrepresentation,
    3
      We recognize that it could be argued that a perfectly unbiased summarizer would not misrepresent groups
at all, even if the original text does, this is a strong constraint to place on a summarization algorithm that does
not have a concept of social bias.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Potential ways in which a summarizer could show content and structure bias. Bias name
appears on the left, bias category (content or structure) in the middle, and a description of the bias
on the right. We consider all measures relative to the original article. We include an expanded table
with examples of biased summaries in Appendix A

Name                    Category      Description
Underrepresentation     Content       Including less about one group than another in the summary.
Inclusion/exclusion     Content       In/excluding a detail only when a specific group is involved.
Inaccuracy              Content       Including information in a way that inaccurately reports infor-
                                      mation about a specific group (includes hallucination for ab-
                                      stractive models).
Sentiment bias          Content       Using more positive sentiment for one group over another.
Framing bias            Content       Using different sentence structure to frame a situation involving
                                      one group vs another.
Position bias           Structure     Selecting text from a specific position in the article
Sentiment Bias          Structure     Preferring information of positive or negative sentiment
Style Bias              Structure     Including sentences written in a specific style. For English this
                                      could include active/passive voice, first/third person, etc.


position, and style. To this end, we design three experiments to measure these three different types
of bias described in more detail in the following subsections.

Data and Models For our content bias analysis, we use a synthetic article corpus, the generation of
which is explained in Appendix B. For all other experiments, we use the CNN/DailyMail corpus (See
et al., 2017; Hermann et al., 2015). This corpus consists of 300k articles, written between 2007 and
2015, from CNN and the DailyMail. The corpus also contains reference summaries, generated
from the bullet point highlights in each article. To generate summaries of these articles for our
experiments, we use a four extractive and three abstractive summarizers described in Table 2.

Table 2: Summarizers used in the experiments for this paper. We choose a mixture of extractive
summarizers, which generate summaries by picking relevant sentences from the article, and abstrac-
tive summarizers, which generate their own text. Azure and GPT-3 provide only API access, while
all other models are downloaded from pre-trained checkpoints. All models except TextRank, which
is fully unsupervised, use machine learning.

                                    Summarizer                 Type
                      TextRank (Mihalcea & Tarau, 2004)        Extractive
                        PreSumm (Liu & Lapata, 2019)           Extractive
                        MatchSum (Zhong et al., 2020)          Extractive
                                   Azure                       Extractive
                          BART (Lewis et al., 2019)            Abstractive
                        PEGASUS (Zhang et al., 2020)           Abstractive
                          GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)           Abstractive


3.1   C ONTENT B IAS A NALYSIS

Given articles about different (combinations of) groups, do summarizers tend to include more infor-
mation about some groups than others? For example, given articles that are half about men and half
about women, their summaries should contain the same ratio of information. However, a summa-
rizer with a bias against women may amplify information about men and supress information about
women in its summaries. To explore this problem, we compare the amount of group information for
each group in the original text to that in the summary. If information about a group is consistently
reduced more or increased less than other groups, this indicates content bias in the summarizer.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In our analysis, we consider nine groups from three categories: men and women for gender; Black,
White, Hispanic, and Asian for race/ethnicity; and Islam, Christianity, and Judaism for religion. To
fully explore the effect of different combinations of groups, we use GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) to
generate a synthetic corpus of articles designed to contain different ratios of information for group
pairs from each category. We describe our methods for measuring the amount of group information
in a text in the following subsections. Full methods for generating our synthetic corpus can be found
in Appendix B

Group Association Scores In order to measure underrepresentation bias, we must first be able
to measure how much information about a group is present. While this could be done using a
keyword counting approach by creating lists of words corresponding to each group and quantifying
the group information as the number of words from each list that appear in a text, this is likely to
miss information as it is not feasible to specify every word related to a group. Instead, inspired by
work measuring bias in static embeddings (Caliskan et al., 2017; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Garg et al.,
2018), we measure the group membership of each word in a text by generating its embedding using
a word2vec model (Mikolov et al., 2013) and measuring its average cosine similarity to group word
lists from Garg et al. (2018); Bertrand & Mullainathan (2004); Manzini et al. (2019).
After we have these scores, we aggregate the scores to obtain a text-wide measure of association
with each group. We refer to this as a group association score, or A, and it is calculated as follows:

                                                   1          X
                                     A(T, g) =                           S(t, g)                    (1)
                                                  |T |
                                                         t∈T,S(t,g)>αi


Where T is the text, g is the group, S(t, g) is the average cosine similarity between token t and
group g, and αi is the cosine similarity threshold for group i above which we consider words to
have a strong similarity to the group g 4 . As it is highly unlikely that words belonging to some POS
will have a true relation to a group, we use different POS filters to calculate these association scores
depending on the group category. For gender, we calculate the scores only for pronouns and nouns
and for race/ethnicity and religion we use nouns and adjectives.
For each group, we calculate the representation score, R(T, g) as relative proximity to the group
with the maximum difference association score in the text:

                                                           A(T, g)
                                         R(T, g) =
                                                         maxy (A(T, y))

This means that for a group with score 0.4 over a set of texts, we would expect to see 40% the infor-
mation about that group vs. the group each article is about. Unbiased summarizers should produce
summaries with roughly the same proximity scores for each group as the article. If these scores de-
crease for a group after summarization, this indicates an underrepresentation bias toward that group.
Likewise, if these scores increase for a group, this indicates a tendency to overrepresent this group.
For a summary that does not show underrepresentation bias, we expect that representation scores for
each group in the summary to be the same as those in the original article.

3.2      P OSITION B IAS A NALYSIS

If information given at the end of an article is moved to the beginning, is it more likely to appear
in the summary? As it is impossible to write about two different things in the same space, if there
are multiple groups mentioned in an article, one must appear first. If summarizers show a bias for
picking earlier or later information, this may also pose a fairness problem towards different groups.
It has been found that reference summaries and some automatically generated summaries for news
articles show a bias for information that appears near the beginning of the articles Jung et al. (2019).
However, it is not known if this pattern holds for more recent summarization algorithms, nor if the
amount of position bias between human and automatic summarization is comparable. Our goal is
to measure the amount of position bias in reference summaries to that shown by each summarizer
   4
       For a description of how we calculate these thresholds, see the Appendix C.3.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to see if this existing bias is amplified through the use of automatic summarization. To do this,
we compare the distribution of sentence locations between automatically generated summaries and
reference summaries to measure any differences.
Because we examine abstractive and extractive summaries, we cannot measure where each summary
sentence is from through exact matching. Instead, we create TF-IDF vectors of each sentence in the
article and summary and compute the cosine similarity between each, marking article sentences with
high similarities as being present in the summary.


3.3   P HRASING B IAS A NALYSIS

Given a paraphrased version of an article, do summaries still include the same information in their
summaries? We assume that a summary should include the same information regardless of how it is
phrased in the original text. However, we do not know if this is the case for automatic summariza-
tion. A summarizer that is sensitive to the phrasing of sentences may generate drastically different
summaries of an article and a paraphrased version of that article. Fragility of this kind is highly
undesirable. For one thing, it is highly unintuitive to human authors. If one article contains the exact
same information as another, we expect that their summaries should also contain the same informa-
tion, regardless of article phrasing. But additionally, sensitivity to phrasing could lead to amplified
content bias. Imagine an author who consistently uses a certain phrase in sentences about one group
and a summarizer that never chooses sentences with this phrasing. This summarizer would then
unfairly exclude information about this group due to its sensitivity to phrasing.
We perform two paraphrasing experiments to measure the sensitivity of each summarizer to sentence
phrasing: one targeted version and one random version. In the targeted version, we paraphrase the
article sentences that originally appear in the generated summary. In the untargeted version, we
paraphrase a random 10% of sentences in the article. We compare the sentencees that appear in the
original summary to those that appear in the newly generated summaries. If the summarizers are
sensitive to sentence phrasing, we should observe lots of changes in the sentences selected for the
original summary and the summary after paraphrasing.


4     R ESULTS

The results of our experiments show that automatic summarization is sensitive to the structure of
articles, as well as, to some degree, the groups discussed in the articles. Additionally, when com-
pared to the reference summaries and the original articles, machine learning based summarization
algorithms show a tendency of exacerbating the position bias shown by the reference summaries.
Due to space constraints, we report only our results for gender. However, our results hold for other
groups as well, and are presented in the appendix.


4.1   C ONTENT B IAS A NALYSIS

We summarize articles comprised of half sentences from articles about men and half about women.
We find that all machine-learning based algorithms show a large sensitivity to the ordering of the
information in the text, suggesting a position bias, which we explore further in Section 4.2. As
shown in Fig. 1, almost all machine-learning based summarizers show a strong preference for sen-
tences about the group that appears first in the article. Even though there are an equal number of
sentences in each article about men and women, these summarizers show a tendency to amplify in-
formation that appears earlier in the article and surpress information that comes later. GPT-3 is the
exception, showing an opposite, but much stronger tendency. It prioritizes information that appears
Whenin,we
later       repeat
         while      the experiment
                 information        withearlier
                              appearing   imbalanced    articles,
                                                is ignored.       these patterns
                                                             In addition,         continue.
                                                                          controlling        As shown
                                                                                      for ordering,    in
                                                                                                    GPT-3
Fig. 2a, in information
surpresses   articles that about
                           begin women
                                 with 90%  sentences
                                        more           about menabout
                                              than information      and men.
                                                                        end with 10% about women, all
machine learning based models except GPT-3 consistently maintain or increase the men’s represen-
tation scores while decreasing those of women, indicating a preference for information about men.
However, when this order is reversed, this pattern follows suit Fig. 2b. Despite the small ratio of
sentences about women present in the summaries, it is still amplified if it occurs in the preferred
location in the article.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        1

Representation score   0.8

                       0.6
                                                                                                                                      Women
                                                                                                                                       Men
                       0.4

                       0.2

                        0

                                 k    m        m    re       rt   us     t3              k    m        m   re        rt   us     t3
                            t ran sum      h su azu        ba gas      gp           t ran sum       hsu azu        ba gas      gp
                         tex pre        atc                   pe                 tex pre        atc                   pe
                                      m                                                       m
(a) 50% of sentences from articles about men fol-                              (b) 50% sentences from articles about women fol-
lowed by 50% from articles about women                                         lowed by 50% from articles about men

Figure 1: Representation scores for men and women in summaries of balanced multi-group articles.
Dashed lines are baseline representation scores of original articles, while bars scores of summaries.
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.


                        1

                       0.8
Representation score


                       0.6
                                                                                                                                      Women
                                                                                                                                       Men
                       0.4

                       0.2

                        0

                                 k    m        um azur
                                                       e     rt sus       t3             k    m        um azur
                                                                                                               e     rt   us     t3
                            t ran sum      h s             ba   ga     gp           t ran sum       hs             ba gas      gp
                         tex pre        atc                   pe                 tex pre        atc                   pe
                                      m                                                       m
(a) 90% sentences from articles about men fol-                                 (b) 10% sentences from articles about women fol-
lowed by 10% from articles about women                                         lowed by 90% from articles about men

Figure 2: Representation scores for men and women in summaries of imbalanced multi-group ar-
ticles. Dashed lines are baseline representation scores of original articles, while bars scores of
summaries. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.



To see if all of the bias is due to location, we summarize articles about only men and women and
measure if amplification/supression still occurs. As shown in Fig. 3b, we observe that for articles
about men, no significant changes occur for either group. In contrast, in summaries of articles about
women, the extractive summarizers maintain this pattern, but the abstractive summarizers show a
tendency to underrepresent women and overrepresent men in their summaries. As seen Fig. 3a,
this is particularly exacerbated when summary length is increased, with BART and GPT-3 making
significant (p < 0.05) changes to the representation scores of men and women in summaries 50%
the length of the original article.

                                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               1

Representation Score

                                                                                                                                         Women
                             0.5
                                                                                                                                          Men


                               0

                                       nk     ur
                                                e      rt         us         t3               nk     ur
                                                                                                       e         rt        us       t3
                                    tra     az       ba       gas         gp               tra     az         ba        gas      gp
                                tex                         pe                         tex                            pe
                                   (a) Articles about women                                        (b) Articles about men

Figure 3: Representation scores for men and women in summaries 50% the length of single-group
articles. Dashed lines are baseline representation scores of original articles, while bars scores of
summaries. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. Here, because we cannot modulate the
length of generated summaries, MatchSum and Presumm are not included.


      (a) CNN/DM reference summaries                                   (b) Azure summaries                 (c) GPT-3 summaries

Figure 4: Percent of sentences chosen from each position in original articles from the
CNN/DailyMail corpus by the reference summaries and by Azure and GPT-3.


Overall, these results show a pattern of unpredictability and fragility in machine learning based sum-
marization algorithms, which seem to depend more on the ordering than the presence of information.
While some ML based summarizers are more susceptible to this than others (e.g., GPT-3), all exhibit
similar tendencies.

4.2                          P OSITION B IAS A NALYSIS

The pattern we observed in Section 4.1 for summaries on our synthetic corpus also holds for sum-
maries of real articles from CNN/DailyMail. All summarizers except GPT-3 show a preference for
sentences that appear close to the start of articles. This preference exists in the reference summaries
as well, however, it is clearly amplified by MatchSum, PreSumm, and Azure, as shown in Fig. 4b5
(all machine learning based abstractive models), which select sentences from the start of articles
more often and almost never select sentences from the end of articles. In contrast, GPT-3 selects
sentences from the start of articles less often, and selects sentences from the end at a significantly
higher rate than the reference summaries Fig. 4c. These inconsistencies show marked differences
between human and automatic text summarization, and, in combination with the content bias results
shown in Section 4.1, suggest that machine learning based summarizers may be learning more about
4.3 PtoARAPHRASING
where                    A NALYSIS
          select information  from and less about what information to select.
Our paraphrasing analysis shows that summarizers are sensitive to the structure of the articles they
summarize. Specifically, however, they are sensitive to changes in the structure of sentences that
                       5
                           Consult Appendix E for all figures


                                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


would have appeared in the original summary. As shown in Fig. 5a, when the sentences chosen
for paraphrasing are those that appear in the summary of the un-paraphrased article, the likelihood
that the summary will remain the same is quite low. However, when a similar amount of random
sentences are paraphrased in the untargeted version, often the summary of the paraphrased article
uses the same sentences as the un-paraphrased version, as Fig. 5b illustrates. This demonstrates that
summarizers are highly sensitive to the paraphrasing of sentences that they rank as highly important,
showing a structure bias.

            1                                                                          1


                                                                                            TextRank

                                                                                                       MatchSum

                                                                                                                  PreSumm Ext

                                                                                                                                Azure

                                                                                                                                        PEGASUS

                                                                                                                                                  BART
                     TextRank

                                MatchSum

                                           PreSumm Ext

                                                         Azure

                                                                 PEGASUS

                                                                           BART
Overlap


           0.5                                                                        0.5


            0                                                                          0
                 (a) Targeted paraphrasing                                                    (b) Untargeted paraphrasing

Figure 5: The proportion of overlap in sentences chosen for summaries before and after paraphrasing
for each of the 5 paraphrased versions of each article. While all are relatively unstable in the targeted
version (Fig. 5a), in the untargeted version (Fig. 5b), the percent overlap is noticably higher.


5         L IMITATIONS
Synthetic Data Using news articles to study the content bias of summarizers comes with a number
of challenges. First, news articles are not always about specific groups. Additionally, some com-
binations of groups show up very rarely, making it impossible to get data about them. Ideally, we
would modify the amount of information present for each group to measure how much summarizers
prioritize some groups over others. Using synthetic data gives us the flexibility to limit the groups
present in an article or combine different amounts of information about specific groups to measure
the impact of both group and amount of information on generated summaries.

Types of Bias We are limited to exploring types of bias that can be reliably detected using com-
putational methods. This ignores many more subtle types of bias, such as misrepresentation, which
are no less important for not being included in our analysis. This is not intended as an exhaustive
study of the types of bias that can occur in automatic summaries. Rather, it is an initial exploration
which we hope will inspire others to consider the bias summarization systems may introduce. Other
types of bias, such as framing bias would be best explored using manual linguistic analysis, and this
is a line of future research we strongly encourage.

6         R ELATED W ORK
To best understand our work, it is important to have an understanding of automatic summarization
itself, as well as linguistic and NLP methods for measuring bias, and prior work analyzing various
types of bias present in automatic summarization.

Summarization Methods There are two methods of automatic summarization: extractive and ab-
stractive. In extractive summarization, an articles’ sentences are ranked according to some algorithm
and the top k are chosen as the summary of the text. We study the extractive models TextRank (Mi-
halcea & Tarau, 2004), which is based on the PageRank algorithm, along with PreSumm (Liu &
Lapata, 2019) and MatchSum (Zhong et al., 2020), which use embeddings and neural networks to
score and select sentences for a summary.


                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In abstractive summarization, the summarization model generates every word of the summary itself
rather than taking from the article directly (though some models, notably Pointer-generator (See
et al., 2017), do have mechanisms to directly copy). As these models are generative, they generally
rely on neural nets using typical encoder-decoder architecture. Examples of models that have been
used for abstractive summarization include PreSummAbs (Liu & Lapata, 2019), the abstractive ver-
sion of PreSumm, the language model BART (Lewis et al., 2019), and PEGASUS (Zhang et al.,
2020), a language model designed by Google with summarization in mind. All of these models have
obtained SOTA performance at some time or another for summarization on the CNN/DailyMail (See
et al., 2017; Hermann et al., 2015) dataset.

Linguistic and NLP measures for bias There have been various studies and measures of bias in
NLP, notably in word, both quantifying the bias in embeddings (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Caliskan
et al., 2017) and using embeddings to measure the bias in human text (Garg et al., 2018). Closely
related to our work, Dacon & Liu (2021) measure gender bias in news article abstracts using a
variety of computational techniques, finding that they are overwhelmingly biased against women.
In linguistics, studies of bias generally use a combination of lexical analysis and discourse analy-
sis to measure how members of different groups talk, how they are talked about, and often what
stereotypes exist around both (Mendoza-Denton, 2014; Baker, 2012; Fairclough, 2013). Automated
analysis restricts our ability to use techniques that rely on more qualitative analysis, but we draw
inspiration from them in our definitions of bias and our experiments.

Properties of Automatic Summarization Dash et al. (2019) explore a related topic to this paper,
measuring fairness in automatically generated tweet collections by user demographic, finding that
existing extractive methods exhibit bias toward tweets written by different groups, dependent on the
corpus used. Keswani & Celis (2021) perform a similar line of work, exploring dialect diversity in
Twitter summaries and finding that summarizers prefer tweets in Standard American English (SAE)
over other dialects.
Jung et al. (2019) find that, for news articles, human summaries tend to select information from near
the start of articles. Additionally, they show that various summarization algorithms place great im-
portance on the position of information. Lee et al. (2022) measure and attempt to mitigate political
framing bias in summaries of news articles by encouraging the generation of summaries that syn-
thesize political views from a variety of sources. This relates to work from Sharevski et al. (2021)
who show it’s possible to adversarially bias a summarizers toward writing in a particular political
writing style. Finally, Jørgensen & Søgaard (2021) explore possible bias in summary evaluation by
conducting a pilot study exploring how user demographic relates to perception of summaries. Their
results show that generated summaries are most strongly preferred by older White men, while other
demographics rank them more poorly.

7   C ONCLUSION
In this paper we have shown that machine learning based summarization algorithms demon-
strate bias toward under-represented groups and are highly sensitive to article structure. What
groups are mentioned, where information appears in the article, and how important sentences are
phrased all have large effects on the generated summaries.
All of these exhibited biases have potential to cause harm. Readers rely on summaries to accurately
represent a longer text, and if a summarizer systematically introduces position, sentiment, or content
bias this risks both mis-representing the original text and biasing the reader. Although this bias
is not intentionally designed into these algorithms, it should be tested and corrected for in future
summarization algorithms. Especially as automatic summarization is marketed more and more as
both a commercial and personal-use tool, it is important to measure and correct the bias in these
systems before deploying them.
While a summarizer may obtain a high ROUGE score, this does not necessarily mean that the
summaries produced will fairly reflect the articles they represent. They may be biased in how they
refer to certain groups, in the sentiment they use, or in terms of the article structure they favor.
We recommend that more bias evaluation methods, like the ones used in this paper, be used when
evaluating new summarizers to avoid creating unintentionally biased summarizers in the future.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

Any study of bias inherently carries ethical considerations. A summary that amplifies bias already
present in the original article or generates new bias has potential to cause harm. Especially as
automatic summarization is marketed more and more as both a commercial and personal-use tool, it
is important to explore the problems this could create. Sharevski et al. (2021) have shown that it is
possible to bias a summary to a specific political ideology, and our work has shown that even without
modification, different summarizers treat groups differently and are sensitive to changes in article
format. This raises concerns about summarization that should be kept in mind when designing and
evaluating models in the future.
In our analysis we consider only one corpus, which contains writing with a relatively uniform writing
style, and is written in Standard American English. This does not allow us to explore bias in language
style or dialect, which is another possible axis of bias in summarizers.
Our motivation for using embedding similarity scores to measure group membership is to allow for
flexibility that wordlists cannot provide. As word embeddings have been shown to encode factual
information, using these scores is a good way to achieve this. However, these scores have also been
shown to encode human biases and stereotypes, which we found to be true in our analysis as well.
For example “terror” was the most associated word with the category “Islam” in some examples.
While in some cases articles may actually be using these words with stereotypical associations to
refer to groups, this is not always the case, and could introduce some amount of error. Based on our
observations, this risk is small, but does represent a possible limitation.


9   R EPRODUCIBILITY

We provide all code used to perform our analysis, along with the GPT-2 generated corpus. Full
details for both how we generated this synthetic corpus, and how we performed our analyses are
provided in our appendix. All other data and models are publicly available and we do not modify
them. Though some of the models we use exhibit randomness in the summaries they generate, we
have run sufficient experiments that we are confident our results could be reproduced.


R EFERENCES
Paul Baker. Acceptable bias? using corpus linguistics methods with critical discourse analysis.
  Critical Discourse Studies, 9(3):247–256, 2012. doi: 10.1080/17405904.2012.688297. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1080/17405904.2012.688297.

Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and Hanna Wallach. The problem with bias: Alloca-
  tive versus representational harms in machine learning. In 9th Annual conference of the special
  interest group for computing, information and society, 2017.

Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. Are emily and greg more employable than lakisha
 and jamal? a field experiment on labor market discrimination. American economic review, 94(4):
 991–1013, 2004.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing
  text with the natural language toolkit. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2009.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is
  to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from
  language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186, 2017.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jamell Dacon and Haochen Liu. Does Gender Matter in the News? Detecting and Examining
  Gender Bias in News Articles. In Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 385–
  392, Ljubljana Slovenia, April 2021. ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-8313-4. doi: 10.1145/3442442.
  3452325. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3442442.3452325.
Abhisek Dash, Anurag Shandilya, Arindam Biswas, Kripabandhu Ghosh, Saptarshi Ghosh, and
  Abhijnan Chakraborty. Summarizing User-generated Textual Content: Motivation and Methods
  for Fairness in Algorithmic Summaries. arXiv:1810.09147 [cs], September 2019. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1810.09147. arXiv: 1810.09147.
Jwala Dhamala, Tony Sun, Varun Kumar, Satyapriya Krishna, Yada Pruksachatkun, Kai-Wei Chang,
  and Rahul Gupta. Bold: Dataset and metrics for measuring biases in open-ended language genera-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
  pp. 862–872, 2021.
Norman Fairclough. Critical discourse analysis. In The Routledge handbook of discourse analysis,
  pp. 9–20. Routledge, 2013.
Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Word embeddings quantify 100
  years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115
  (16):E3635–E3644, 2018.
Ian Haney-López. Dog whistle politics: How coded racial appeals have reinvented racism and
  wrecked the middle class. Oxford University Press, 2014.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomás Kociský, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay,
  Mustafa Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom.      Teaching machines to read and compre-
  hend.   In NIPS, pp. 1693–1701, 2015.   URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
  5945-teaching-machines-to-read-and-comprehend.
Dirk Hovy and Shannon L. Spruit. The social impact of natural language processing. In Proceedings
  of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
  Papers), pp. 591–598, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-2096. URL https://aclanthology.org/P16-2096.
Taehee Jung, Dongyeop Kang, Lucas Mentch, and Eduard Hovy. Earlier Isn’t Always Better: Sub-
  aspect Analysis on Corpus and System Biases in Summarization. arXiv:1908.11723 [cs], August
  2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.11723. arXiv: 1908.11723.
Anna Jørgensen and Anders Søgaard. Evaluation of Summarization Systems across Gender, Age,
  and Race. arXiv:2110.04384 [cs], October 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
  04384. arXiv: 2110.04384.
Vijay Keswani and L. Elisa Celis. Dialect Diversity in Text Summarization on Twitter. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Web Conference 2021, WWW ’21, pp. 3802–3814, New York, NY, USA, April
  2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-8312-7. doi: 10.1145/3442381.
  3450108. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3442381.3450108.
Nayeon Lee, Yejin Bang, Tiezheng Yu, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Neus: Neutral multi-
  news summarization for mitigating framing bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04902, 2022.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-
 training for Natural Language Generation, Translation, and Comprehension. arXiv:1910.13461
 [cs, stat], October 2019.      URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461.                  arXiv:
 1910.13461.
Yang Liu and Mirella Lapata. Text Summarization with Pretrained Encoders. arXiv:1908.08345
  [cs], September 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08345. arXiv: 1908.08345.
Thomas Manzini, Yao Chong Lim, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Alan W Black. Black is to criminal as cau-
  casian is to police: Detecting and removing multiclass bias in word embeddings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.04047, 2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Norma Mendoza-Denton. Homegirls: Language and cultural practice among Latina youth gangs.
  John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. TextRank: Bringing Order into Text. In Proceedings of
  the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 404–411,
  Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/W04-3252.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. A universal part-of-speech tagset. In
  Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
  (LREC’12), pp. 2089–2096, Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012. European Language Resources Associ-
  ation (ELRA). URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/
  274_Paper.pdf.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Abigail See, Peter J. Liu, and Christopher D. Manning. Get To The Point: Summarization with
  Pointer-Generator Networks. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1073–1083, Vancouver, Canada, July
  2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1099. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P17-1099.
Filipo Sharevski, Peter Jachim, and Emma Pieroni. Regulation TL;DR: Adversarial Text Summa-
   rization of Federal Register Articles. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cyber-Security
   Arms Race, CYSARM ’21, pp. 37–42, New York, NY, USA, November 2021. Association
   for Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-8661-6. doi: 10.1145/3474374.3486917. URL
   https://doi.org/10.1145/3474374.3486917.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. PEGASUS: Pre-training with
   Extracted Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization. arXiv:1912.08777 [cs], July 2020. URL
   http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.08777. arXiv: 1912.08777.
Ming Zhong, Pengfei Liu, Yiran Chen, Danqing Wang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Extractive
 Summarization as Text Matching. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6197–6208, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
 Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.552. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 2020.acl-main.552.


A    T YPES AND E XAMPLES OF CONTENT BIAS

Table 3: Potential ways in which a summarizer could be biased with respect to a group. Highlighted
         original text is text not selected that highlights the bias.
Category              Description               Original Text            Summary
                                                                          Continued on next page


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Potential ways in which a summarizer could be biased with respect to a group. Highlighted
         original text is text not selected that highlights the bias. (Continued)
Over-representation   Including more about       The women’s team            The women’s team
                      one group than another     scored very high in         scored very high in
                      relative to the ratio in   the competition. They       the competition. The
                      the original text          practiced for many          men’s team did pretty
                                                 months to get here and      well too. They beat a
                                                 it paid off. Their scores   few other teams.
                                                 set a new record. ...
                                                 The men’s team did
                                                 pretty well too. They
                                                 beat a few other teams.
Inclusion/exclusion   In/excluding a detail      Both the women’s and        Both the women’s
                      only when a specific       men’s figure skating        and     men’s    figure
                      group is involved          teams are headed to         skating teams are
                                                 the Beijing olympics.       headed to the Beijing
                                                 They will compete           olympics. Both are
                                                 throughout February.        expected to win lots of
                                                 Both are expected to        medals. The women’s
                                                 win lots of medals.         costumes were very
                                                 ...   We’ve gotten a        pretty.
                                                 chance to see their
                                                 costumes early. The
                                                 women’s costumes are
                                                 very pretty. The men’s
                                                 costumes are also very
                                                 good.
Inaccuracy            Including information      What to do if some-         What to do if some-
                      in a way that inac-        one’s having a seizure:     one’s having a seizure:
                      curately reports infor-    Move them to a safe         Hold them down. Put
                      mation or hallucinat-      position. Roll them to      something in their
                      ing inaccurate infor-      their side. .... It’s       mouth.
                      mation (for abstractive    also important to know
                      models) about a spe-       what not do to do.
                      cific group                Here’s a list of things
                                                 not to do if someone’s
                                                 having a seizure: Hold
                                                 them down. Put some-
                                                 thing in their mouth.
                                                                             Continued on next page


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Potential ways in which a summarizer could be biased with respect to a group. Highlighted
         original text is text not selected that highlights the bias. (Continued)
Sentiment bias        Using more positive       Two common pet             Two common pet
                      sentiment sentences       choices are dogs and       choices are dogs and
                      for one group than        cats.     One may be       cats. Dogs require a lot
                      another                   better than the other      of attention and care
                                                depending on your          and need to be walked
                                                lifestyle.   Dogs are      every day. Cats can be
                                                very loving and make       very affectionate and
                                                great pets. Dogs re-       are great pets.
                                                quire a lot of attention
                                                and care and need
                                                to be walked every
                                                day. Cats can be very
                                                affectionate and are
                                                great pets. Cleaning
                                                up after cats is also a
                                                lot of work.
Framing bias          Using different sen-      A police officer fatally   An officer’s gun dis-
                      tence structure to        shot a man at 8pm last     charged, killing the
                      frame a situation when    night. ... An officer’s    man and injuring an-
                      one group is involved     gun discharged, killing    other last night.
                      vs another                the man and injuring
                                                another last night.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B        S YNTHETIC C ORPUS G ENERATION
We generate a synthetic corpus of articles using GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and prompts from the
BOLD dataset (Dhamala et al., 2021) for each group6 . We refer to these articles as single-group arti-
cles, as they are prompted to generate articles about each group. We also create multi-group articles
by sampling different amounts of contiguous sentences from single-group articles and combining
them to form a new article with information about two groups. We generate multi-group articles for
each combination of two groups within each of our three group categories, constructing one version
with the first group at the beginning of the article, and another with this group at the end of the article
(using the same sentences). This allows us to explore the effect of different group combinations and
amounts of information while controlling for the importance of the order information appears in.
We generate our text using the version of GPT-2 available on the HuggingFace Hub (Wolf et al.,
2019) as of September 2022 using the following parameters:

           • min length=400
           • max length=1024
           • top k=40
           • top p=0.95
           • no repeat ngram=3

Additionally, for each group, we set bad words ids to the union of all other groups’ keyword
lists, which we find helps to keep articles “on track” about the group they’re supposed to be about.
Without this, for example, many articles about women talk mostly about men and vice versa.

C        C ONTENT B IAS A NALYSIS D ETAILS
C.1       W ORD L ISTS

We use lists of representative keywords for each of the nine groups we study. These lists are used for
both filtering articles and the group analysis we perform using word embeddings. The lists for the
male, female, Hispanic, Asian, Islam, and Christianity groups are taken from Garg et al. (2018) with
some minor changes made to better suit the corpus. For example, we remove the word ”cross” from
the Christian word list as it is often used outside the context of Christianity in our corpus. We use
the same lists as Caliskan et al. (2017) for the White and Black group lists (originally from Bertrand
& Mullainathan (2004)), which uses first names rather than last names as done for the other racial
groups. This is because, as Garg et al. (2018) describe, there is a very large overlap in the typical last
names of white and Black people in the US, owing in large part to the country’s history of slavery.
For the Jewish group, we use the list used by Manzini et al. (2019).

C.2       G ROUP S IMILARITY S CORES

We generate embeddings using a word2vec model (Mikolov et al., 2013) pre-trained on the
Google News corpus. Before measuring similarity, we tokenize and POS tag each document with
NLTK (Bird et al., 2009) and the universal tagset (Petrov et al., 2012) (this allows us to filter words
by POS, which we explain further in Section 3.1). Then, we measure the group similarity for each
token embedding, t in the text as follows:

                                                        1 X
                                            Si (t) =         s(t, g)                                   (2)
                                                       |Gi |
                                                           g∈Gi

Where Gi is ith set of group keywords, and s(t, g) is the cosine similarity between the two token
embeddings.
We collect these scores for each word in both the original article and its summary and aggregate
them into text association scores, described below.
    6
        For detailed information on generation parameters, see the appendix.


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We observed that, though these scores serve as a good indicator of the groups present in an article,
they can be quite noisy for words with low scores. This noise comes as a result of many words in
each article having a baseline similarity to people (something all the groups have in common) and
results in the majority of words in an article receiving quite low scores, while the minority, most
indicative of group presence in the text, receive very high scores. Therefore we focus on only the
high scoring words to determine group membership and discard lower scores as uninformative.

C.3       T HRESHOLDS

The thresholds used to determine high scoring words were calculated using similarities of each
group list to the other group lists. For each group, we take the median similarity of the most similar
alternate group to be the threshold above which we consider words important. In practice, we find
that this reduces the number of words that really belong to one group that are given falsely high
association scores for other groups.

C.4       A RTICLE F ILTERING

As an additional filter, we restrict our analysis to articles that contain at least one word from at least
one of our group keyword sets. This is to ensure that at least one group is truly present in the article,
and does not significantly reduce the number of articles we are examining (the original CNN DM
dataset is 311,971 articles, and with this filter, we analyze 296,460 articles). We recognize that bias
could still be present if a group is not explicitly mentioned; our group keywords are not all encom-
passing and there are many implicit ways to signal group information (e.g., dog-whistling Haney-
López (2014)). However, manual linguistic analysis is far more suited for exploring this type of
bias, and we find that this filtering makes our analysis more reliable.

D        PARAPHRASING A NALYSIS D ETAILS
We use the pre-trained PEGASUS paraphraser7 from HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2019) for these
experiments and run the analysis on the test split of CNN/DailyMail (1̃1k articles). We create five
versions of each paraphrased article in order to measure the effect of different paraphrases on which
sentences are selected for an article.

E        A DDITIONAL L OCATION A NALYSIS P LOTS
As discussed in the main paper, we find that Presumm, MatchSum, and Azure show a strong ten-
dency to select sentences that occur early in articles—stronger than that demonstrated by the refer-
ence summaries. In contrast, we find that GPT-3 prefers information that comes at either the start
or the end, with a much stronger preference for information at the end than shown by reference
summaries.
Note that Presumm and MatchSum have relatively short length limits of 512 tokens, which means
they are unable to select sentences from the end of long articles. This impacts these figures, and is
the reason for the dropoff in frequency between 0.4 and 0.6 in their plots. However, if this were the
only effect, we would expect that there would be more sentences selected between 0.1 and 0.4 for
both summarizers, and not the sharp spike in sentences taken from the first 2% of the article, as we
see with MatchSum and Presumm.


    7
        https://huggingface.co/tuner007/pegasus paraphrase


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   (a) TextRank                       (b) MatchSum


                   (c) Presumm                           (d) BART


                   (e) PEGASUS                           (f) Azure


                     (g) GPT-3                    (h) Reference Summaries


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.1                    G ENDER

E.1.1                   R ECURSIVE S UMMARIZATION

                        1
Representation Score


                                                                                                         Women
                       0.5
                                                                                                          Men



                        0
                                   1   2    3       4        5          6   7   8     9       10
                                                                 Step
                                                 (a) Articles about men
                        1
Representation Score


                                                                                                         Women
                       0.5
                                                                                                          Men



                        0
                                   1   2    3       4        5          6   7   8     9       10
                                                                 Step
                                                (b) Articles about women

Figure 7: Ratio of information present about each group relative to the highest group information
present in the article. A score of 1 for a group and summarizer means that a reader could expect to
see that group with the most information in every summary we generated using that summarizer. A
score of 0.4 means the reader could expect to see 40% of the information about that group vs. the
group with the most information in each summary.

Here we observe similar patterns to that seen in single group summarization. Abstractive summa-
rizers show a tendency to first gain, then lose information about men for articles about women,
and lose and then gain information about women. However, for articles about men, the amount of
information about both groups stays relatively constant across all steps of summarization.

E.2                    R ELIGION

For single group articles about different religions, we observe that while articles about Islam gen-
erally preserve the baseline amount of information from the article, summaries of articles about
Judaism and Christianity tend to lose information about their respective groups (shown in Fig. 8).
However, unlike in the gender case, the representation scores of other groups do not tend to increase,
suggesting that the overall information about religion in these summaries is being decreased, rather
than the emphasis being shifted to another religion.
Similar patterns to what we see for gender also hold for religion. In multi-group articles about
Judaism and Christianity, regardless of which group has more information in the original article,
the prioritized group in the summary has more to do with which information is presented first. As
shown in Figs. 9 and 10, all summarizers but GPT-3 show a preference for text that appears earlier
in the article.



                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        1

                       0.8
Representation Score


                       0.6

                       0.4

                       0.2

                        0

                                n   k       ur
                                               e          rt        us           t3                nk        ur
                                                                                                                e            rt        us      t3
                             tra          az            ba       gas           gp              tra      az                ba        gas     gp
                         tex                                   pe                           tex                                   pe
                                        (a) Judaism                                                                 (b) Islam


                                                                                                                         Judaism
                                                                                                                          Islam
                                                                                                                        Christianity
                                                                   re


                                                                                              s
                                                         nk


                                                                                    t


                                                                                                         3
                                                                                           asu
                                                                                bar


                                                                                                        gpt
                                                                 azu
                                                         tra


                                                                                        peg
                                                      tex


                                                                         (c) Christianity

Figure 8: Representation scores for summaries 50% the length of articles about single groups.
Dashed lines are baseline representation scores of original articles, while bars scores of summaries.
Error bars are the 95% confidence interval for each score.


                                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        1

                       0.8
Representation Score


                       0.6                                                                                                                Judaism
                                                                                                                                           Islam
                       0.4                                                                                                               Christianity

                       0.2

                        0

                                nk    m            m      rt        sus     t3          nk    m            m      rt        sus     t3
                             tra esum         h su     ba        ga       gp         tra esum         h su     ba        ga       gp
                         tex
                                  pr     at c                  pe                tex
                                                                                          pr     at c                  pe
                                       m                                                       m
                        (a) Sentences about Islam first                                (b) Sentences about Judaism first

Figure 9: Representation scores for summaries 10% the length of articles. Articles are comprised of
50% sentences about Judaism and Islam. Dashed lines are baseline representation scores of original
articles, while bars scores of summaries. Error bars are the 95% confidence interval for each score.


                                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        1

                       0.8
Representation Score


                       0.6                                                                                                                     Judaism
                                                                                                                                                Islam
                       0.4                                                                                                                    Christianity

                       0.2

                        0

                                nk    m            m      rt        sus      t 3            nk    m          m         rt        sus     t3
                             tra esum         h su      ba       ga       gp             tra esum         hsu       ba        ga       gp
                         tex
                                  pr     at c                  pe                    tex
                                                                                              pr     at c                   pe
                                       m                                                           m
(a) 90% sentences from articles about Islam, then                                  (b) 10% sentences from articles about Judaism,
10% from articles about Judaism                                                    then 90% from articles about Islam
                        1

                       0.8
Representation Score


                       0.6                                                                                                                     Judaism
                                                                                                                                                Islam
                       0.4                                                                                                                    Christianity

                       0.2

                        0

                                 nk    m           um     rt        sus     t3               nk    m           um      rt        sus     t3
                              tra esum          hs      ba       ga       gp              tra esum          hs      ba        ga       gp
                         t ex
                                   p r    a t c                pe                    t ex
                                                                                               pr     a t c                 pe
                                        m                                                           m
(c) 90% sentences from articles about Judaism,                                     (d) 10% sentences from articles about Islam, then
then 10% from articles about Islam                                                 90% from articles about Judaism

Figure 10: Representation scores for summaries 10% the length of unbalanced articles about Ju-
daism and Islam. Dashed lines are baseline representation scores of original articles, while bars
scores of summaries. Error bars are the 95% confidence interval for each score.


                                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.3   R ACE

For race, the text association scores have several problems. While they accurately indicate the
presence of information for both the Hispanic and Asian groups, for the Black and White groups, we
find that the scores are not good indicators of what information is there. Black scores are consistently
high for articles about all groups, and especially correlate with White scores. This same problem
has been observed in other work that uses word lists based on names for race (Garg et al., 2018),
and is not surprising. However, it does mean that we cannot report definitive results for race using
our scores.


                                                  22
