Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


A DVERSARIAL L EARNED FAIR R EPRESENTATIONS US -
ING DAMPENING AND S TACKING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         As more decisions in our daily life become automated, the need to have machine
         learning algorithms that make fair decisions increases. In fair representation learn-
         ing we are tasked with finding a suitable representation of the data in which a sen-
         sitive variable is censored. Recent work aims to learn fair representations through
         adversarial learning. This paper builds upon this work by introducing a novel
         algorithm which uses dampening and stacking to learn adversarial fair represen-
         tations. Results show that that our algorithm improves upon earlier work in both
         censoring and reconstruction.



1    I NTRODUCTION

The need to have machine learning algorithms that make fair decisions becomes increasingly impor-
tant in modern society. A decision is fair if it does not depend on a sensitive variable such as gender,
race, or age. Models trained with biased data can lead to unfair decisions Mehrabi et al. (2021).
In fair representation learning we are tasked with finding a suitable representation of the data in
which the sensitive variable is censored. This ensures that these representations can be used for any
downstream task, such as classification or segmentation, which should not rely on the value of the
sensitive variable. Throughout this paper, we often refer to this sensitive variable as the protected
variable.
Fairness can be applied to machine learning algorithms at roughly three stages of the process: during
preprocessing, inprocessing or postprocessing. With preprocessing we aim to learn a new represen-
tation of the input data which is more fair. A well known example of this is Zemel et al. (2013),
which obfuscates inputs when it can lead to unfairness. With inprocessing techniques the task is to
make a machine learning algorithm more fair during training, typically by modifying the learning
algorithm or by adding extra constraints to the learning objective. With postprocessing we are trying
to correct the predictions of a machine learning algorithm after training in order to achieve fairness.
In recent years, inprocessing techniques such as Zhang et al. (2018) have become very popular since
they typically strike an optimal balance between accuracy and fairness. However, the major ad-
vantage of preprocessing over any other technique is that the transformed data can be used for any
downstream task, both supervised and unsupervised. This makes preprocessing still invaluable in
many practical applications where we know the protected variable beforehand, but have no specific
machine learning task in mind yet. Hence the focus on preprocessing in this paper. Moreover, as
shown in McNamara et al. (2017), preprocessing techniques can still provide us with theoretical
fairness guarantees if required.
It is important to note that the notion of fairness is not trivial, and a multitude of fairness constraints
have been proposed pertaining to both group fairness and individual fairness Mitchell et al. (2021).
In this paper we adopt the demographic parity constraint due to its widespread use in benchmarking
and evaluating fairness of machine learning algorithms. Demographic parity enforces that a classifier
treats the data containing the protected variable statistically similar to the general population, and
a major downside of this criterion is that it tends to cripple accuracy as long as we achieve equal
acceptance rates. In reality, for every specific dataset and problem we need to assess which fairness
criterion is most applicable and cannot simply select one as preferred Verma & Rubin (2018). The
upside however is that in this paper we encode our fairness constraint in the form of a loss function,
and as shown in Madras et al. (2018) we are able to associate different loss functions to different


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


group fairness constraints. This makes this approach applicable to far more fairness metrics than the
one that we adopted in this paper.
Often with learning a fair representation, the naive approach of dropping certain features of the
data is insufficient. The origin of the bias might latently depend on some nonlinear combination of
other variables, and can thus leak back into a decision making model. This inspired the work by
Edwards & Storkey (2016), which aims to learn a fair representation through adversarial learning.
They use an auto-encoder as a generator for the new representation whose aim is to learn a new
latent representation which attempts to censor the protected variable for the adversary. This work
was later extended in Madras et al. (2018) where they propose learning objectives for other fairness
metrics such as equalized odds and equal opportunity. In Kenfack et al. (2021) this work was further
extended by introducing stacked auto-encoders to enforce fairness and improve censoring at different
latent spaces.
This work builds on the previous adversarial approach. In particular it focuses on the case where the
downstream task we may encounter is unknown, i.e. it can be either some supervised classification
objective or some unsupervised clustering or segmentation objective. The challenge with learning
fair representations is that on one hand we want to censor the data, and on the other we want to
retain as much information as possible. Since these objectives are often opposed, the approaches in
Edwards & Storkey (2016), Madras et al. (2018), Kenfack et al. (2021), and various others define
the global objective of the model as a weighted sum of reconstruction error and predictive loss. This
requires the trainer of a model to select some suitable hyperparameter which defines how much we
value reconstruction error over predictive loss. This hyperparameter often has a large impact on the
learned representations we get, and we can identify at least three issues with it. Firstly, we have no a
priori knowledge on how the reconstruction error and the predictive loss relate. It could be nonlinear,
which makes it almost impossible to make an informed decision beforehand. Secondly, the value of
this hyperparameter gives us no formal guarantee of the censoring capabilities of the model. Some
values can cause a collapse of the model. Thirdly, the hyperparameter choice is not explainable to
the relevant stakeholders of the model. This makes it impractical for most industry use cases where
hyperparameter choices need to be justified. As such, many authors using this methodology such as
Edwards & Storkey (2016), Beutel et al. (2017), Madras et al. (2018), Feng et al. (2019), Kenfack
et al. (2021) use a trial-and-error approach, or an arbitrary chosen constant, with regard to the choice
of this hyperparameter. More often than not, the censoring capabilities of the learned representation
are a hard constraint of the model. Thus, in many industry use cases, we are only interested in
finding solutions in some restricted hypothesis space abiding some censoring constraint.
A second perhaps even greater issue with the previous work is its instability. In particular, due to the
unstable dynamic between actor and adversary we often learn suboptimal solutions. This has been
observed in many cases such as Edwards & Storkey (2016) and Kenfack et al. (2021), but never fully
addressed. This paper attempts to mitigate these issues by introducing a novel algorithm for learning
fair representations. In particular, it uses dampening to stabilize the interaction between actor and
adversary, and uses stacking to learn strong censored representations within a restricted hypothesis
space.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we briefly reiterate related work,
in Section 3 we formally define the problem, in Section 4 we introduce the algorithm, in Section 5
we discuss the experiments and results, and in Section 6 we conclude this work.


2   R ELATED W ORK

In Zemel et al. (2013) the first fair representation learning approach was presented. Their method-
ology aims to map input data to a new representation in terms of a probabilistic mapping to a set of
prototypes. Several other noteworthy algorithms for finding fair representations are further explored
in Feldman et al. (2015) and Calmon et al. (2017).
In Louizos et al. (2016) an architecture based on the Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) was proposed
in order to learn fair representations, called the Variational Fair Auto-Encoder. A similar idea is
explored in Locatello et al. (2019). Although the idea of disentanglement between the protected
variable and other features seems promising, it has not found widespread use yet due to the difficulty
of finding independence between the sensitive and latent factors of variations.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


In Edwards & Storkey (2016) the first adversarial approach was introduced to learning fair repre-
sentations. They use an auto-encoder as a generator for the new representation whose aim is to
learn a new latent representation which attempts to censor the protected variable for the adversary.
Many paper in the fairness community have followed this line, noteworthy Beutel et al. (2017) and
Feng et al. (2019). This work was extended by Madras et al. (2018) where they propose learning
objectives for other fairness metrics. In Kenfack et al. (2021) this work was further extended by
introducing stacked auto-encoders to enforce fairness at different latent spaces.

3   P ROBLEM D EFINITION

This paper focuses purely on representation learning rather than classification. The aim is to learn a
fair representation independent of the downstream that may be encountered (supervised or unsuper-
vised). The notation of Edwards & Storkey (2016) of using the letter X to represent the data, and S
to represent the protected variable is adopted. Each xi ∈ X is assumed to be some real-valued vec-
tor xi ∈ Rn , and each si ∈ S is either 0 or 1, denoting if instance i is sensitive or not: si ∈ {0, 1}.
As argued in the introduction, the demographic parity constraint is adopted Dwork et al. (2012):
given data X and protected variable S, the aim is to learn a new representation f (X) for which it
holds that for any predictor g derived from f (X) we have g(f (X)) ⊥ S, i.e. g(f (x)) and S are
independent. In short, the aim is to find a representation f (X) which give no predictive preference
towards S. Throughout this paper f (X) is referred to as the censored representation. It is important
to note that the censored representation is not (necessarily) in the same space as the original data,
and can have a different number of dimensions.
On one hand the aim is to censor the representation, while on the other hand the goal is to retain as
much information as possible. In order to capture these opposing objectives, the learning objective
can be framed as an adversarial learning problem. Similar to Edwards & Storkey (2016) and various
papers following this, two agents are modeled with competing objectives: An auto-encoder e with
corresponding decoder d representing the actor; and a classifier h representing the adversary. As
per usual, e, d and h are implemented in this paper using a feed-forward neural network. The aim
is to find a censored representation e(X). The objective of the adversary is to predict S from the
censored representation e(X), while the aim of the actor is to learn this censored representation such
that d(e(X)) is as close to X as possible (the normal objective of an auto-encoder) and to deny the
adversary from being able to learn S from e(X).
To make these notions precise, let Lact
                                     e,d be the loss of the auto-encoder, and set it to be the mean-
squared error (MSE), alternatively reconstruction error:
                                         1 X                       2
                                Lact
                                 e,d =            ∥xi − d(e(xi ))∥2
                                        |X|
                                                 xi ∈X

Moreover, the loss of the adversary is set to be the negative cross-entropy loss over S:
                             1        X
                   Ladv
                     e,h =                       si log(sˆi ) + (1 − si ) log(1 − sˆi )
                            |X|
                                 si ,sˆi ∈S,h(e(X))

Note that in Madras et al. (2018) a multitude of other loss functions are proposed which lead to
different notions of fairness (e.g. equal opportunity or equalized odds), but as argued earlier this
paper optimizes for parity. Defining the loss to be the negative cross-entropy allows us frame it as a
maximization problem rather than a minimization one, which entails that the joint objective of the
actor and adversary is in the form of a min-max problem. Particularly, let L(e, d, h) be the joint loss,
and define it as a weighted sum of Lact        adv
                                      e,d and Le,h :

                                     L(e, d, h) = Lact     adv
                                                   e,d + αLe,h

Here α is some predetermined chosen hyperparameter denoting the importance of Lact                adv
                                                                                        e,d over Le,h .
Since the negative cross-entropy loss is considered, the aim is to minimize this loss under the as-
sumption that the adversary is trying to maximize this. Thus, the aim is to find e and d which satisfy
the following:
                                         min max L(e, d, h)
                                           e,d    h


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Once these e and d have been found, the fair representations can be computed with e(X) and the
censored original representation by d(e(X)). Reason to use the latter can be due to the fact that
these representations share a lot of the inherent properties of X both dimension- and structure-wise.
Thus, depending on the use case and task, e(X) or d(e(X)) can be used to characterize the censored
data.

3.1   R ESTRICTING THE H YPOTHESIS S PACE

A problem with the joint loss function L(e, d, h) is the correct choice of α. This hyperparameter
needs to be selected beforehand, and it has a large impact on the representations that are learned.
Since (1) there is typically no a priori knowledge on how Lact        adv
                                                            e,d and Le,h relate for a given X and S,
(2) choices of α give no formal guarantee on the censoring ability of the encoder, and (3) a choice
of α is hard to explain to the relevant stakeholders, any choice of α is hard to justify and interpret.
Additionally, low and high values for α could cause the trivial function to be learned, i.e. either the
encoder learns an uncensored representation, or a constant function is learned.
In order to eliminate these problems, we propose a different objective function. More often than
not, the censoring capabilities of the target function are a hard constraint on the resulting model.
We recognize that perfect censoring is in most cases not feasible, and as such these hard constraints
should define a hypothesis space of possible target functions. An example hard constraint could
be that we do not wish that a very competent adversary receives above 60% accuracy on trying to
classify the gender based on a loan application. Such a hard constraint solves the problem of not
having a formal guarantee of the target function, and is both more intuitive and explainable to the
relevant stakeholders.
To formalize this, a score function scoreX,S,e (h) and accompanying threshold T is assumed to
be specified beforehand which evaluates the performance of adversary h based on data X, S and
encoder e. The constrained hypothesis space Ê for e can be defined as follows:


                               Ê = {e | score(arg max(Ladv
                                                        e,h )) ≤ T }
                                          X,S,e      h

It is assumed that score and T are chosen in accordance with the distribution of S such that Ê is
nonempty, e.g. if an accuracy score is used, T should at least be 50%. The global objective is now
to simply to minimize Lact
                         e,d by only considering encoders from the viable hypothesis space Ê, that
is to optimize mine∈Ê,d Lact
                           e,d . In order to find solutions in Ê, different optimization methods need
to be used. One of the main contributions of this paper is that such an algorithm is supplied.


4     A DVERSARIAL LEARNING USING S TACKING AND DAMPENING

Before delving into the technical details, it is worthwhile to discuss the shortcomings of the current
approach. As mentioned in Edwards & Storkey (2016), Madras et al. (2018), and various other
papers, it is very difficult to train these models due to the unstable dynamic between the actor and
the adversary. This is true for adversarial learning in general because of the underlying saddle point
optimization problem. Different approaches in literature have been proposed to stabilize adversarial
networks, ranging from simple solutions such as early stopping or weight clipping Arjovsky et al.
(2017) to more intricate ones such as adding extra stabilizing steps Yadav et al. (2018). A multitude
of stabilization methods exist, but the downside is that they need to be adapted accordingly to the
properties of the loss function Xing et al. (2021). Thus, in the context of our setting, it is worthwhile
to investigate what the root cause of the instability is. During training, the actor is continuously
updating in the direction to make the adversary worse at predicting the protected variable (recall that
the objective of the actor is to minimize the negative cross-entropy loss of the adversary, while the
adversary is trying to maximize this). A key insight here is that the loss signal that the adversary is
giving to the actor is paradoxical in nature:
       • If the magnitude of the loss is high, the adversary is incompetent at predicting S. Since
         the adversary is also updating its own loss towards 0, it means we are at a point where
         the gradient of the loss will be high. This in turn will result in a big update of the actor.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


         However, the adversary was already incompetent at predicting S, but a big update in an
         uninformative direction is performed as opposed to a smaller conservative update.
       • If the magnitude of the loss is relatively low, the adversary is competent at predicting S.
         When the loss is relatively smooth at local maxima, a low magnitude of the loss will more
         often than not result in a small update of the actor. However, the adversary was already
         competent at predicting S, but we are performing a small update in an informative direction
         when we would rather perform a bigger less careful update.
The key issue is thus that if the adversary is too competent then the gradients will be weak, and if
the adversary is too incompetent the gradients will be uninformative. This interplay between the
competence of the adversary and the size of the gradients is also mentioned in Edwards & Storkey
(2016), but not further explored.
Now consider what this means when we are actually training and updating the actor and adversary.
When the weights of the actor and adversary are adjusted in turns, as described in Goodfellow
et al. (2014), there is a risk that the adversary will never be sufficiently competent in the task. This is
particularly true when a strong adversary is used with a lot of parameters, which typically need more
batches to converge. This means that constantly big weight adjustments in an imprecise direction are
made, which again causes the adversary to be incompetent. On the other hand when the adversary
is trained in the inner loop, apart from it being very inefficient, we would also run the risk of the
adversary being too strong, and not being able to make any meaningful updates.
To mitigate these problems and to make the training process more stable, the notion of dampening
is introduced.


4.1   DAMPENING

Dampening is a function that serves as a modulating term of our algorithm in the interaction between
actor and adversary. Similar ideas for weighted loss schemes such as focal loss have been proposed
for imbalanced datasets Lin et al. (2017), but here it is applied to modulate the actor and adversary.
Dampening returns a number between 0 and 1 denoting how much information the classifier has over
a training sample. First, define g as a function over subsets S ′ of our protected variable S ′ ⊆ S:
                                                                                          
                                           1             X                 X
                              g(S ′ ) =          max             s′i ,              1 − s′i 
                                          |S ′ |       ′si ∈S ′           s′i ∈S ′


In words, g(S ′ ) represents the best possible accuracy a predictor can receive when using only infor-
mation about S ′ . Observe that since the protected variable is binary, g(S ′ ) ∈ [0.5, 1]. The role of
g(S ′ ) is to serve as a baseline guessing accuracy.
Now given a classifier f and training sample X ′ , S ′ , dampening δ is defined as:

                                                max(0, acc(f, X ′ , S ′ ) − g(S ′ ))
                           δ(f, X ′ , S ′ ) =
                                                          1 − g(S ′ )

In the above definition, acc(f, X ′ , S ′ ) is used as shorthand notation to denote the accuracy score of
f on training sample X ′ , S ′ . Whenever g(S ′ ) = 1, we set δ(f, X ′ , S ′ ) = 0. In words, dampening
δ(f, X ′ , S ′ ) ∈ [0, 1] tells us the percentage decrease of number of misclassifications would we use
f instead of guessing the most frequent label in the sample. Whenever dampening is 1 for f , we
know that f achieves perfect accuracy on the training sample X ′ , S ′ , and whenever dampening is 0
we would be no worse off by just informed guessing. Thus, dampening is a measure of information
a classifier has over a certain classification task. An important property of dampening is that it is
contained within the unit interval, meaning that it can be used as a modulating term since the results
will never be larger than the original value. Multiple notions of bounded information were explored,
but found dampening to work the best for a variety of tasks. We suspect it is due to its linear scaling
with the number of correctly classified samples whenever its value is nonzero; a small increase in
correctly classified samples translates in a small increase in dampening, and vice versa for a big
increase.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Algorithm 1 ALFR-DS
  Initialize e = id, initialize θact and θadv randomly.               ▷ Start with the ”empty” encoder.
  repeat
      Initialize enew randomly.
      e = enew ◦ e                                              ▷ Add new encoder to the (frozen) stack.
      repeat
           X ′ , S ′ = random mini-batch from X, S
                             ′
           Lact = Lact e,d (X )
           L adv
                   = Le,h (X ′ , S ′ )
                       adv

           θ = θact − η · ∇θact Lact + δ(h ◦ e, X ′ , S ′ ) · ∇θact Ladv
            act


           θadv = θadv + η · (1 − δ(h ◦ e, X ′ , S ′ )) · ∇θadv Ladv
      until Sufficient epochs reached.
      Freeze encoder e.
  until scoreX,S,e (h) ≤ T or Deadline reached.


4.2   S TACKING

Stacking is a technique for censoring which was recently introduced in Kenfack et al. (2021). The
idea is that during training we start out with a simple encoder which learns a censored representation.
After this initial training phase, we freeze the encoder and append a new trainable one. This process
continues until we are completely done with training. Another perspective on this process is that
once we learn a censored representation, we recursively start over a completely new training process,
except that we use the censored representation as the new input. The key idea behind stacking is that
once a censored representation is learned and frozen, it is highly likely that some information about
the protected variable is lost for good. Thus in theory, repeating the stacking operation can give us
representation with arbitrary strong censoring properties.
It is important to note that the authors found that stacking did increase censoring over the original
approach, but unsurprisingly also comes at the cost of reconstruction error. In other words, stacking
should preferably be combined with a very careful and stable censoring algorithm, which in our case
is handled by the addition of dampening. Stacking together with dampening serves the basis for our
algorithm.

4.3   ALFR-DS

In Algorithm 1 a new algorithm is proposed called ALFR-DS (“Adversarial Learned Fair Represen-
tations using Dampening and Stacking”). This algorithm differs from basic ALFR, as discussed in
Edwards & Storkey (2016), on three key aspects:
       • A different loss function for the actor and adversary is used, instead of the same function
         L(e, d, h) as given in Section 3 for both.
       • An inner loop for normal backpropagation is used, and an extra outer loop which incorpo-
         rates stacking is added. An extra termination condition is added which allows us to find
         solutions in the restricted hypothesis space Ē, as defined in Section 3.1.
       • The actor and adversary are trained concurrently instead of interleaved.
                                             ′              ′ ′
In the description of the algorithm, Lact           adv
                                      e,d (X ) and Le,h (X , S ) is used to denote the loss functions
                                   ′       ′
defined in Section 3 applied to X and S . Moreover θ and θadv refer to the model parameters
                                                         act

of the actor (e and d) and subsequently the adversary (h). The fixed learning rate η can be replaced
with a parameter-dependent dynamic one: in all of the experiments the Adam optimizer has been
found to work the best Kingma & Ba (2014).
The role of dampening in the algorithm is to act like a “fuzzy” turn-taking mechanism: whenever
the adversary is weak, δ will be close to 0 in our algorithm. This means the actor will hardly use
the loss of the adversary in updating the censored representations, i.e. it will act like a normal auto-
encoder. Since representation learning in a normal auto-encoder is stable, it gives the adversary time
to learn and catch up. Whenever the adversary is strong, δ will be close to 1, meaning the adversary
will hardly update itself. This allows the auto-encoder to incorporate the loss of the adversary and


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


learn a new censored representation. In other words, the actor can catch up. This is how dampening
attempts to stabilize the learning process: it gives either the actor or the adversary time to catch up,
resulting in only informative updates of the model. In the experiments no extra stabilizing methods
such as gradient clipping were needed.
The width and depth of the encoder that is added to the stack can be varied at any moment. In
our implementation, every subsequent encoder after the first uses the same input and output size. In
order to be able to censor nonlinear relations in the data at every step, every encoder is given a single
hidden layer. It is important to note that the adversary h can have any neural architecture, depending
on the desired censoring strength of the resulting model. It is also important to note that a strong
adversary typically means a longer training period for convergence.
The termination condition scoreX,S,e (h) ≤ T tells us when an encoder is contained within the
desired hypothesis space given adversary h. Although not explicitly mentioned in the algorithm, it
is sometimes beneficial to fully train h on the training data X, S without additionally training the
encoder after termination of the inner loop. This is to ensure that the adversary is fully converged
before an assessment about the censoring capabilities of the model is made. Under the reasonable
assumption that score is chosen in such a way that it eventually decreases as Ladv
                                                                               e,h decreases, and that
Ladv
  e,h decreases after a completion  of the  inner loop, it can be concluded  that scoreX,S,e (h) ≤ T
will eventually hold. In other words, ALFR-DS will eventually find a solution in the constrained
hypothesis space. In order to encourage that Ladv e,h decreases after a completion of the inner loop,
the hidden size of each encoder that is added to the stack can be decreased, or the inner loop can be
terminated early. However, since it is often undesirable that the model complexity of the encoder
grows arbitrarily large, an extra deadline criterion is used to allow early stopping. Whenever an
early termination occurs, a solution with the desired censoring capabilities was not found within the
complexity bounds of the model.

5     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

This section consists of two different experiments that were conducted. Motivated by the image
anonymization task proposed in Edwards & Storkey (2016), the aim of the first experiment is to
closely compare ALFR with ALFR-DS on a widely used image dataset (MNIST; Deng (2012)).
The second experiment is more general and aims to compare several variants of ALFR, ALFR-DS
and other preprocessing algorithms from the widely used IBM AI Fairness 360 package Bellamy
et al. (2018) on several widely used fairness-related datasets.

5.1   MNIST

The dataset contains 60,000 handwritten images with corresponding labels. The goal is to censor all
the 8s in the dataset, i.e. the protected variable si is set to 1 whenever the label is 8, and 0 otherwise.
Even though this task does not serve a direct practical use, it is a great benchmark for its inherent
challenging properties. In particular, the protected variable is unevenly distributed and the task is
very nonlinear in nature. Moreover, due to its wide spread it allows for easy replication.
In this experiment the goal is to compare ALFR-DS to ALFR in its ability to reconstruct and censor.
In order to ensure a fair comparison, every model was trained for 30 epochs. For ALFR-DS, 3
variants were considered: ALFR-DS(1) which runs the inner loop of Algorithm 1 once for 30
epochs, ALFR-DS(2) which runs the inner loop twice for 15 epochs, and ALFR-DS(3) which runs
the inner loop three times for 10 epochs. Both ALFR-DS and ALFR used the same Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) adversary. However, we observed that ALFR typically performs better against a
weak adversary, so we also considered a variant of ALFR against an adversary using simple Logistic
Regression (LR). These two variants are referred to as ALFR (MLP) and ALFR (LR). For ALFR
several values for α were tried, but only report for α = 1 since ALFR-DS outperforms ALFR for
all nontrivial choices of α in both censoring and reconstruction. Both ALFR-DS and ALFR were
given the same number of target dimensions to embed to. In order to measure how well a model
censors, each model was trained on one slice of the data, after which another slice was used for
evaluation. Two new classifiers, one using LR and one using an MLP, were freshly trained on these
new representations and were asked to predict protected variable S. The resulting accuracy scores
were used as a benchmark (lower is better). Additionally, a normal auto-encoder was trained that did


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


      0.08       Algorithm                                                      LR           MLP
                 ALFR-DS(1)
      0.07       ALFR-DS(2)                                     ALFR-DS(1)   0.91 ± 0.01   0.98 ± 0.01
                 ALFR-DS(3)                                     ALFR-DS(2)   0.9 ± 0.0     0.95 ± 0.01
      0.06       ALFR (LR)                                      ALFR-DS(3)   0.91 ± 0.0    0.93 ± 0.02
                 ALFR (MLP)
      0.05       Uncensored                                     ALFR (LR)    0.92 ± 0.03   0.95 ± 0.01
                                                                             0.93 ± 0.02   0.95 ± 0.01
MSE


                                                                ALFR (MLP)
      0.04                                                      Uncensored   0.96 ± 0.0    0.99 ± 0.0
      0.03
      0.02
      0.01

             0      5         10    15     20    25      30
                                   Epoch

Figure 1: Left shows the reconstruction error (MSE) over 30 epochs for the MNIST task. Top-right
lists all the accuracy scores of different adversaries with increasing strength trained on the final
representation, where lower is better. Bottom-right shows some examples of the original MNIST
digits (black outline at the top) which were both censored by ALFR-DS(3) (green outline in the
middle) or by ALFR (LR) (red outline at the bottom).

not use an adversary and called this Uncensored (which is equivalent of using ALFR with α = 0).
All experiments were repeated 10 times to account for naturally occurring deviations in the results.
In Figure 1 the result of the experiment can be seen, which also provides a visual output of ALFR-
DS(3) versus ALFR (LR). In one instance ALFR-DS censors an 8 to a 3 and in another instance
an 8 to a 6. From this visual inspection, it is clear that a lot more information is lost about the
original images with ALFR. Moreover, an “imprint” of an 8 across most images in the censored
representations can be observed. The “spikes” in the reconstruction graph occur at the times in
which a new encoder is added to the stack; in this case the loss briefly rises since each new encoder
is initiated randomly. It is also interesting to note is that for the first 3 to 5 epochs, the graphs of
ALFR-DS and Uncensored are almost identical due to the fact that especially in the early phases
dampening will be relatively small. The learned representations are still evolving a lot, meaning that
the adversary has no time to become competent at predicting S. Only when the representations start
to stabilize after approximately 5 epochs, a difference in the graphs can be observed.
The lowest theoretical accuracy that can be achieved due to the distribution of S is 0.9 for this task
and the highest possible accuracies are reported for Uncensored. Again ALFR-DS achieves superior
results in both censoring and reconstructing over ALFR. It is clear from the results that the number
of stacked encoders in ALFR-DS does come at the cost of reconstruction. Particularly, ALFR-DS(1)
is outperformed by ALFR-DS(3) in terms of censoring, however ALFR-DS(1) leaves much more of
the data intact. It is thus clear that a balance has to be struck between censoring and reconstruction,
which is normally handled by the algorithm with the use of the score function with accompanying
threshold T . In both tasks when it comes to censoring, ALFR-DS(2) and ALFR-DS(3) perform
similarly except when a strong nonlinear MLP adversary was tasked to predict S, in which case
it becomes clear that ALFR-DS(3) has greater censoring capabilities. It is noteworthy to observe
that ALFR(LR) outperforms ALFR(MLP) for censoring even though a weaker adversary was used
during training. The reason is that LR converges much faster, and thus gives a more informative loss
signal to the actor after each turn. Due to dampening, ALFR-DS does not have this problem and can
reliably be used against strong adversaries.


5.2      AIF360 B ENCHMARK

To really see how ALFR-DS performs in practice, it is compared to several preprocessing algorithms
on several datasets using AIF360. Finding the right comparison is non-trivial, since ALFR-DS
is designed to learn a censored representation for any target variable as opposed to one specific
variable. In practice this means that ALFR-DS does not have access to the target variable at training
time, putting it at a major disadvantage. Taking this into consideration, it is still worthwhile to
investigate how ALFR-DS compares.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


 Dataset                     Adult                                German                      Bank                  COMPAS
 Protected             Sex            Race                  Sex              Age              Age                 Sex            Race
 Metric          BA      ∆DP        BA    ∆DP          BA     ∆DP           BA   ∆DP         BA   ∆DP       BA      ∆DP        BA    ∆DP

 ALFR-DS(1)       69         17      68        8     63             5     62       10      60          3     66         14      64     15
                                                   ∗              ∗     ∗          ∗     ∗           ∗
 ALFR-DS(2)       68         15      66        8     58             4     58         8     58          3     65         13      64     13
                                                   ∗              ∗     ∗          ∗     ∗           ∗
 ALFR-DS(3)       67         14      67        6     51             2     57         7     57          3     63         11      63     12
                                                   ∗              ∗     ∗          ∗     ∗           ∗
 ALFR-S(1)        73         18      73        9     55             5     57         6     57          3     66         12      65     16
                                                   ∗              ∗     ∗          ∗     ∗           ∗
 ALFR-S(2)        70         17      68        8     55             5     53         7     51          1     61         11      62     12
                                                   ∗              ∗     ∗          ∗     ∗           ∗     ∗            ∗     ∗      ∗
 ALFR-S(3)        69         17      69        8     55             5     54         7     51          1     58           8     58     11
 DIR              75         17      76        9     65             6     68       11      83          5     67         15      67       8
                ∗            ∗     ∗         ∗     ∗              ∗     ∗          ∗     ∗           ∗     ∗            ∗     ∗        ∗
 LFR              50           0     50        0     50             0     50         0     51          2     50           1     50       1
 Uncensored       78         18      78        9     66             7     70       16      75          8     68         20      68     18

           Table 1: Results (%). Best are given in bold and discarded (< 60% BA) marked with *.

This experiment is conducted on several datasets and protected variables. For each combination, a
censored representation is learned on 80 percent of the data using the algorithm of choice. After-
wards a gradient boosting classifier was trained on these representations to predict the target variable.
The performance was evaluated on the remaining 20 percent. Due to imbalanced datasets, the bal-
anced accuracy (BA) was reported together with the demographic parity distance (∆DP ), which is
the proportional distance of positive outcomes between the privileged and unprivileged groups. To
strike a balance between censoring and accuracy, only results with a BA of 60% are considered.
This is to remove all cases where there is too much information removed (e.g. the trivial uni-label
function). From these candidates the one with the lowest ∆BP is elected as the winner.
To analyze the individual effects of stacking and dampening, an ablation study is performed where
ALFR-S(n) is default ALFR performed with n stacks, and ALFR-DS(n) ALFR-DS with n stacks.
Thus, vanilla ALFR is equal to ALFR-S(1) and ALFR-DS without stacking is equal to ALFR-
DS(1). Additionally, Learning Fair Representations (LFR) Zemel et al. (2013), and Disparate Im-
pact Remover (DIR) Feldman et al. (2015) are compared. Note that the removal of disparate impact
is equivalent to achieving demographic parity. The optimized stochastic preprocessing technique
from Calmon et al. (2017) was not benchmarked due to unavailability of the required preprocessing
and distortion functions for all datasets. The datasets that were used are UCI Adult (predict the
income of a person) Asunción & Newman (2007), German (predict defaults on consumer loans),
Bank Marketing (predict subscription of a term deposit) Moro et al. (2014), and the well-known
COMPAS dataset (predict recidivism).
In Table 1 the average percentage results of 10 runs are shown. In cases where careful censoring is
needed to stay above 60% BA, ALFR-DS(1) gives good results (German and Bank). In cases where
there is more room for censoring, ALFR-DS(3) performs better. Whenever accuracy outweighs fair-
ness, DIR tends to outperform ALFR-DS, but note that DIR is conditioned on the target variable and
in some cases (Adult) stays close to the uncensored representations. Only in the case of the COM-
PAS + race task does DIR outperform ALFR-DS in terms of censoring. ALFR-S(n) either seems to
censor too strongly (German, Bank), or not strong enough (Compas, Bank). Moreover, LFR seems
to give poor results overall, even after numerous attempts to optimize the hyperparameters. Over-
all, ALFR-DS(n) gives the best results when a careful balance between censoring and accuracy is
needed, where higher n implies a stronger censoring.


6      C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have given a novel algorithm that uses dampening to stabilize the interaction
between actor and adversary, and uses stacking to learn strong censored representations within a
restricted hypothesis space. This algorithm outperforms the current approach in both censoring and
reconstruction, as shown in our empirical results.
Since the aim is to learn meaningful representations which can be learned for fair downstream tasks,
we believe that a good comparison should be made with VAE’s that attempt to learn these disen-
tangled representation. Moreover, due to the empirical nature of this study, theoretical bounds on
reconstruction and censoring using stacking and dampening should be further explored.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial net-
 works. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Con-
 ference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 214–223. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
 arjovsky17a.html.
A. Asunción and D.J. Newman. UCI Machine Learning Repository. http://www.ics.uci.
  edu/˜mlearn/MLRepository.html, 2007. URL http://www.ics.uci.edu/$\
  sim$mlearn/{MLR}epository.html.
Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Kuntal Dey, Michael Hind, Samuel C. Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Kalapriya
  Kannan, Pranay Lohia, Jacquelyn Martino, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, Seema Na-
  gar, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, John T. Richards, Diptikalyan Saha, Prasanna Sattigeri,
  Moninder Singh, Kush R. Varshney, and Yunfeng Zhang. AI fairness 360: An extensible toolkit
  for detecting, understanding, and mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias. CoRR, abs/1810.01943,
  2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.01943.
Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Zhe Zhao, and Ed H. Chi. Data decisions and theoretical implications
  when adversarially learning fair representations. CoRR, abs/1707.00075, 2017. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1707.00075.
Flavio Calmon, Dennis Wei, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and
  Kush R Varshney. Optimized pre-processing for discrimination prevention. In I. Guyon,
  U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  9a49a25d845a483fae4be7e341368e36-Paper.pdf.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Con-
  ference, ITCS ’12, pp. 214–226, New York, NY, USA, 2012. Association for Computing Machin-
  ery. ISBN 9781450311151. doi: 10.1145/2090236.2090255. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/2090236.2090255.
Harrison Edwards and Amos Storkey. Censoring representations with an adversary. In International
  Conference in Learning Representations (ICLR2016), pp. 1–14, May 2016. URL https://
  iclr.cc/archive/www/doku.php%3Fid=iclr2016:main.html. 4th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016 ; Conference date: 02-05-2016 Through
  04-05-2016.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A. Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasub-
 ramanian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’15, pp. 259–268,
 New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450336642. doi:
 10.1145/2783258.2783311. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2783311.
Rui Feng, Yang Yang, Yuehan Lyu, Chenhao Tan, Yizhou Sun, and Chunping Wang. Learning fair
  representations via an adversarial framework. ArXiv, abs/1904.13341, 2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sher-
  jil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.    Generative adversarial nets. In
  Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2014.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2014/file/
  5ca3e9b122f61f8f06494c97b1afccf3-Paper.pdf.
Patrik Joslin Kenfack, Adil Mehmood Khan, Rasheed Hussain, and S. M. Ahsan Kazmi. Adversarial
  stacked auto-encoders for fair representation learning, 2021.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
  abs/1412.6980, 2014.   URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/
  corr1412.html#KingmaB14.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross B. Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
  object detection. CoRR, abs/1708.02002, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.
  02002.
Francesco Locatello, Gabriele Abbati, Tom Rainforth, Stefan Bauer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Olivier Bachem. On the fairness of disentangled representations. CoRR, abs/1905.13662, 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.13662.
Christos Louizos, Kevin Swersky, Yujia Li, Max Welling, and Richard S. Zemel. The variational
  fair autoencoder. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track
  Proceedings, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.00830.
David Madras, Elliot Creager, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Learning adversarially fair and
  transferable representations. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 3384–3393. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v80/madras18a.html.
Daniel McNamara, Cheng Soon Ong, and Robert C. Williamson. Provably fair representations.
  CoRR, abs/1710.04394, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.04394.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(6), jul 2021. ISSN 0360-0300.
  doi: 10.1145/3457607. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3457607.
Shira Mitchell, Eric Potash, Solon Barocas, Alexander D’Amour, and Kristian Lum. Algorithmic
  fairness: Choices, assumptions, and definitions. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application,
  8(1):141–163, 2021. doi: 10.1146/annurev-statistics-042720-125902. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-042720-125902.
Sérgio Moro, P. Cortez, and Paulo Rita. A data-driven approach to predict the success of bank
   telemarketing. Decis. Support Syst., 62:22–31, 2014.
Sahil Verma and Julia Rubin. Fairness definitions explained. In Proceedings of the International
  Workshop on Software Fairness, FairWare ’18, pp. 1–7, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Associa-
  tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450357463. doi: 10.1145/3194770.3194776. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3194770.3194776.
Yue Xing, Qifan Song, and Guang Cheng. On the algorithmic stability of adversarial training.
  In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26523–26535. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  df1f1d20ee86704251795841e6a9405a-Paper.pdf.
Abhay Yadav, Sohil Shah, Zheng Xu, David Jacobs, and Tom Goldstein. Stabilizing adversarial nets
  with prediction methods. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skj8Kag0Z.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair repre-
  sentations. In Sanjoy Dasgupta and David McAllester (eds.), Proceedings of the 30th In-
  ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 325–333, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun 2013. PMLR. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v28/zemel13.html.
Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating unwanted biases with adversar-
  ial learning. CoRR, abs/1801.07593, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.07593.



                                                11
