Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T RANSFORMER M ODULE N ETWORKS
FOR S YSTEMATIC G ENERALIZATION
IN V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Transformers achieve great performance on Visual Question Answering (VQA).
         However, their systematic generalization capabilities, i.e., handling novel combi-
         nations of known concepts, is unclear. We reveal that Neural Module Networks
         (NMNs), i.e., question-specific compositions of modules that tackle a sub-task,
         achieve better or similar systematic generalization performance than the conven-
         tional Transformers, even though NMNs’ modules are CNN-based. In order to
         address this shortcoming of Transformers with respect to NMNs, in this paper
         we investigate whether and how modularity can bring benefits to Transformers.
         Namely, we introduce Transformer Module Network (TMN), a novel NMN based
         on compositions of Transformer modules. TMNs achieve state-of-the-art system-
         atic generalization performance in three VQA datasets, improving more than 30%
         over standard Transformers for novel compositions of sub-tasks. We show that not
         only the module composition but also the module specialization for each sub-task
         are the key of such performance gain.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al., 2015) is a fundamental testbed to assess the ca-
pability of learning machines to perform complex visual reasoning. The compositional structure
inherent to visual reasoning is at the core of VQA: Visual reasoning is a composition of visual sub-
tasks, and also, visual scenes are compositions of objects, which are composed of attributes such
as textures, shapes and colors. This compositional structure yields a distribution of image-question
pairs of combinatorial size, which cannot be fully reflected in an unbiased way by training distribu-
tions.
Systematic generalization is the ability to generalize to novel compositions of known concepts be-
yond the training distribution (Lake & Baroni, 2018; Bahdanau et al., 2019; Ruis et al., 2020). A
learning machine capable of systematic generalization is still a distant goal, which contrasts with
the exquisite ability of current learning machines to generalize in-distribution. In fact, the most
successful learning machines, i.e., Transformer-based models, have been tremendously effective for
VQA when evaluated in-distribution (Tan & Bansal, 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021).
Yet, recent studies stressed the need to evaluate systematic generalization instead of in-distribution
generalization (Gontier et al., 2020; Tsarkov et al., 2021; Bergen et al., 2021), as the systematic
generalization capabilities of Transformers for VQA are largely unknown.
A recent strand of research for systematic generalization in VQA investigates Neural Module Net-
works (NMNs) (Bahdanau et al., 2019; 2020; D’Amario et al., 2021). NMNs decompose a question
in VQA into sub-tasks, and each sub-task is tackled with a shallow neural network called module.
Thus, NMNs use a question-specific composition of modules to answer novel questions. NMNs
alleviate the gap between in-distribution generalization and systematic generalization due to its in-
herent compositional structure. In our experiments, we found that CNN-based NMNs outperform
Transformers on systematic generalization to novel compositions of sub-tasks. This begs the ques-
tion of whether we can combine the strengths of Transformers and NMNs in order to improve the
systematic generalization capabilities of learning machines.


                                                  1
        Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Library of modules     Module architecture                   Example 1                               Example 2

                                                                    Answer 𝐴1                                      Answer 𝐴2
   Module A            Transformer Encoder
          Library of modules       Module architecture                    Example 1                                     Example 2
   Module B            Transformer Encoder    𝐾
                                                                      Module E                                      Module B
                               … Transformer Encoder                               Answer 𝐴1                                      Answer 𝐴2
   Module C    Module A
                                                                      Module A                                      Module D
   Module D    Module B           Transformer Encoder    𝐾
                                                                      Module C       Module E                       Module A        Module B
   Module E    Module C                      …
                                                                                     Module A                       Module A        Module D
     …         Module D                                                      Sub-task_C(Arg1)
                                                                                     Module C
                                                                             Sub-task_A(Arg2)                                       Module A
                                                                             Sub-task_E(Arg3)
               Module E                                                                                                    Sub-task_A(Arg1)
                                                                                                                                    Module A
                                                                                                                           Sub-task_A(Arg2)
                 …                                             Image 𝐼1      Program 𝑃1 Sub-task_C(Arg1)                   Sub-task_D(Arg3)       𝐿
                                                                                                Sub-task_A(Arg2)           Sub-task_B(Arg4)
                                                                                                Sub-task_E(Arg3)
                                                                                                           Image   𝐼2                         Sub-task_A(Arg1)
                                                                                                                            Program 𝑃2 Sub-task_A(Arg2)
                                                                            Image 𝐼1 𝑄1 Program 𝑃1
                                                                             Question
                                                                                                                                              Sub-task_D(Arg3)   𝐿
                                                                                                                                              Sub-task_B(Arg4)
                                                                                                                          Image 𝐼2 𝑄2
                                                                                                                            Question
                                                                                                Question 𝑄1                                    Program 𝑃2

              (a) Library and module architecture               (b) Examples of question-specific networks
                                                                                                                                               Question 𝑄2


               X, 13, 90, 79 X, 13, 126, 79
      Figure 1: Overview of Transformer Module Network (TMN). (a) TMN has a library of neural mod-
      ules that tackle a sub-task, and each module is implemented with a small stack of Transformer
      encoders. (b) X,
                     The13,  90, 79
                         modules       X, 13, 126,
                                   are composed  into 79
                                                      a question-specific network. This network takes as
Fig. 1input an image and a program that corresponds to a question. The total number of Transformer
      layers is the number of Transformer layers of each module (K) × the program length (L).
            Fig. 1
        In this paper, we introduce Transformer Module Network (TMN), a novel NMN for VQA based on
        compositions of Transformer modules. In this way, we take the best of both worlds: the capabilities
        of Transformers given by attention mechanisms, and the flexibility of NMNs to adjust to questions
        based on novel compositions of modules. TMN allows us to investigate whether and how modularity
        brings benefits to Transformers in VQA. An overview of TMNs is depicted in Fig. 1.
        To foreshadow the results, we find that TMNs achieve state-of-the-art systematic generalization
        accuracy in the following three VQA datasets: CLEVR-CoGenT (Johnson et al., 2017), CLO-
        SURE (Bahdanau et al., 2020), and a novel test set based on GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019)
        that we introduce for evaluating systematic generalization performance with natural images, which
        we call GQA-SGL (Systematic Generalization to Linguistic combinations). Remarkably, TMNs im-
        prove systematic generalization accuracy over standard Transformers more than 30% in the CLO-
        SURE dataset, i.e., systematic generalization to novel combinations of known linguistic constructs
        (equivalently, sub-tasks). Our results also show that both module composition and module special-
        ization to a sub-task are key to TMN’s performance gain.

        2     R ELATED WORK
        We review previous works on systematic generalization in VQA. We first revisit the available bench-
        marks and then introduce existing approaches.
        Benchmarking VQA. Even though systematic generalization capabilities are the crux of VQA,
        attempts to benchmark these capabilities are only recent. The first VQA datasets evaluated in-
        distribution generalization, and later ones evaluated generalization under distribution shifts that do
        not require systematicity. In the following, we review progress made towards benchmarking sys-
        tematic generalization in VQA:
        –In-distribution generalization: There is a plethora of datasets to evaluate in-distribution gener-
        alization, e.g., VQA-v2 (Goyal et al., 2019) and GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019). It has been
        reported that these datasets are biased and models achieve high accuracy by relying on spurious
        correlations instead of performing visual reasoning (Agrawal et al., 2018; Kervadec et al., 2021).
        –Out-of-distribution generalization: VQA-CP (Agrawal et al., 2018) and GQA-OOD (Kervadec
        et al., 2021) were proposed to evaluate generalization under shifted distribution of question-answer
        pairs. While this requires a stronger form of generalization than in-distribution, it does not require
        tackling the combinatorial nature of visual reasoning, and models can leverage biases in the images
        and questions.


                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


–Systematic generalization: CLEVR-CoGenT (Johnson et al., 2017) and CLOSURE (Bahdanau
et al., 2020) are datasets that require systematic generalization as models need to tackle novel com-
binations of visual attributes and sub-tasks. Since these datasets include only synthetic images,
we introduce GQA-SGL, a novel test set based on GQA to evaluate systematic generalization with
natural images.
Approaches for Systematic Generalization. We now revisit Transformer-based models and NMNs
for systematic generalization in VQA as they are the basis of TMNs:
–Transformer-Based Models: Currently, most approaches to VQA are based on Transform-
ers (Vaswani et al., 2017), e.g., Tan & Bansal (2019); Chen et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2021), and
pre-training is at the core of these approaches. These works focus on in-distribution generalization,
and it was not until recently that Transformers for systematic generalization have been investigated.
To the best of our knowledge, in VQA the only related work is MDETR (Kamath et al., 2021), which
uses a novel training approach that captures the long tail of visual concepts and achieves state-of-the-
art performance on many vision-and-language datasets, including CLEVR-CoGenT. As we show in
the sequel, our approach shows better systematic generalization capabilities in CLEVR-CoGenT and
CLOSURE without requiring pre-trained Transformer encoders.
–Neural Module Networks (NMNs): They represent a question in the form of a program in which
each sub-task is implemented with a neural module. Thus, modules are composed into a network
specific for the question (Andreas et al., 2016). Some of the most successful modular approaches
include NS-VQA (Yi et al., 2018), which uses a symbolic execution engine instead of modules based
on neural networks, and the Meta-Module Network (MMN) (Chen et al., 2021), which introduces a
module that can adjust to novel sub-tasks. While these approaches are effective for in-distribution
generalization, they fall short in terms of systematic generalization. Vector-NMN (Bahdanau et al.,
2020) is the state-of-the-art NMN on systematic generalization and outperforms all previous mod-
ular approaches. We present evidence that the systematic generalization capabilities of modular
approaches can be improved by using the attention mechanisms of Transformer architectures.

3   T RANSFORMER M ODULE N ETWORKS (TMN S )

In this section we introduce TMNs, i.e., our novel Transformer-based model for VQA that composes
neural modules into a question-specific Transformer network. Unlike previous NMNs, TMNs regard
the tokens that represent the input image as a workspace shared among the modules, which transform
the token representations. This architectural change is not straightforward and thus we need to
architect NMNs taking into account the philosophy of tokens to leverage the attention mechanism.
Question-specific Composition of Modules. Figure 1 provides an overview. TMNs use a library of
modules, and each module tackles a different sub-task we defined (e.g., FILTER, COUNT). TMNs
represent the question in VQA with a program, which is a sequence of sub-tasks each of which is
implementable with a module from the library. For instance, a question “How many red squares are
there?” can be converted to a program {FILTER(square), FILTER(red), COUNT}, and then
the modules corresponding to the sub-tasks are composed to form a network to answer the question.
In TMN, each module is a stack of Transformer encoders. Unlike the standard Transformers, which
are a stack of a fixed number of Transformer encoders (typically 12) regardless of the input question,
TMN composes the Transformer modules into a question-specific network, and thus, the total num-
ber of encoder layers in TMN varies according to the question. Let K be the number of Transformer
encoder layers in each module, and let L be the number of sub-tasks in the program. Then, TMN
has a total of K × L layers to implement a program of length L.
We follow the same approach in previous works that directly use the program rather than the raw
question (Bahdanau et al., 2020; 2019; D’Amario et al., 2021). This allows to analyse systematic
generalization in isolation by focusing only on visual reasoning aspects, and omits the performance
of the language parser.
Transformer-based Architecture. The aforementioned question-specific composition of modules
is preceded by a feature extractor and followed by an output classifier, as shown in Fig. 2(a).
We use a feature extractor to obtain the visual features of the input image. We follow the common
procedure in Transformers: The visual features are transformed into the visual feature embeddings


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Answer : 2

    Classifier                                                               ICLR
                                                                 (Stack)                            (Tree)
          COUNT Module                          Library of
                                                modules
                                  2
                                       null

          FILTER Module                                             Answer
                                       red
                                  1

          FILTER Module                                         Module (6)               Answer
                                                   …
          0    1   2   3   …      0   square                  AND / OR (5)
 Head
token    Embedding                                              Module (4)             Module (6)
                               Embedding                        Module (3)                    AND / OR (5)
              Feature
              extractor                                         Module (2)             Module (2)            Module (4)
                               FILTER(square)
                               FILTER(red)                      Module (1)             Module (1)            Module (3)
                               COUNT
              Image               Program                    Image     Program      Image   Program Image         Program

               (a) TMN Architecture                                   (b) Stack and Tree modular structures

Figure 2: TMN Architecture and Modular Structures.
                                                45 x 70 (a) Given an image and72  a program
                                                                                     x 70 related to
a question, TMNs construct a question-specific Transformer network as a composition of modules
                                                23, 13
that tackle a sub-task. Each module takes as input the representations of the visual features, the head
token and the module’s argument from the program. A classifier outputs an answer from the final
representation of the head token. (b) We investigate two modular structures. Stack structure simply
stacks all the modules. Tree structure runs two threads and then merges their outputs with a module
(AND/OR in this example). The numbers in ( ) denotes the order of each sub-task in the program.


and then summed with the position embedding, which yields the input visual representations of the
first module. The initial head token representation is the average of all the visual representations.
Then, the first Transformer module in the question-specific network takes as input the sequence of
tokens consisting of the representations of the visual features, the head token, and the module’s ar-
gument coming from the program. The Transformer module outputs the transformed representations
of the head token and visual features. This output is fed into the next module, which also receives
its corresponding argument coming from the program. Unlike Vector-NMN, whose modules always
receive the initial visual representations, in TMN only the first module receives the initial visual rep-
resentations. Also, due to the versatility of Transformer architectures, in TMN we can easily change
the number of Transformer encoders in each module according to the complexity of the sub-task.
Finally, a classifier outputs an answer from the final representation of the head token.
Stack and Tree Modular Structures. We further analyze the effect of modular structures. Some
modules with two inputs may be useful for constructing a network corresponding to a complex
program. For instance, a logical sub-task (AND or OR) or sub-tasks that compare two objects. For
programs containing such sub-tasks, we investigate two modular structures exemplified in Fig. 2(b).
Stack and tree structures are widely studied in previous works (Andreas et al., 2016; Hu et al.,
2017). The stack structure simply stacks all modules and executes the modules in sequence. The
tree structure runs two threads in parallel and then merges their outputs with a module (AND/OR
in this example), which takes two sets of representations of visual features and a head token as an
input and outputs the transformed representations of the first set in our case. We compare these two
structures in the experiments.


4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We use three datasets for VQA: two exising datasets and a novel test set we built. We compare our
TMN with two Transformer-based baselines and several state-of-the-art models on those datasets.
Datasets. To evaluate the models for systematic generalization to novel combinations of known
visual attributes or linguistic constructs, we use the following three datasets.


                                                                4
                        Extractor
                           Extractor                                                                      Extractor
                                                                                                             Extractor
                         Stack of of
                            Stack                                                                                                    Stack of of
                                                                                                                                        Stack
  Image
    Image                 Transformer Answer
                       Transformer       Answer                                       Image
                                                                                        Image                                      Transformer
                                                                                                                                      Transformer   Answer
                                                                                                                                                      Answer
                        Encoders
  Under review as a conference    paper at ICLR 2023
                           Encoders                                                                                                 Encoders
                                                                                                                                       Encoders
  What What
        colorcolor                    …                                             FILTER(circle)
                                                                                         FILTER(circle)
                      What What
                             colorcolor       …                                                         FILTER circle
                                                                                                            FILTER    COLORCOLOR
                                                                                                                   circle
is the
    is circle?
        the circle?                                                                 COLORCOLOR


 Question
   Question                                                                         Program
                                                                                       Program


                      Extractor
                         Extractor Emb
                                     Emb                                                                  Extractor
                                                                                                             Extractor             Emb
                                                                                                                                     Emb
                                                        Stack of of
                                                           Stack                                                                             Stack of of
                                                                                                                                                Stack
   Image
     Image                                               Transformer Answer
                                                      Transformer      Answer         Image
                                                                                        Image                                                 Transformer Answer
                                                                                                                                           Transformer      Answer
                                                       Encoders
                                                          Encoders                                                                          Encoders
                                                                                                                                               Encoders
  What What
        colorcolor                                                                  FILTER(circle)
                                                                                         FILTER(circle)
                                     …
is the
    is circle?
        the circle?
                      What What
                             colorcolor   …   Emb
                                                Emb                                 COLORCOLOR          FILTER circle
                                                                                                            FILTER    COLORCOLOR
                                                                                                                   circle          Emb
                                                                                                                                     Emb
 Question
   Question                                                                         Program
                                                                                       Program


                                   (a) Transformer                                                         (b) Transformer w/ PR

  Figure 3: Transformer-based Baseline Methods. (a) Standard Transformer (Transformer) takes an
  image and a question as inputs. (b) Standard Transformer with programs (Transformer w/ PR)
  takes a program as an input instead of the question. Emb denotes visual/word embeddings. These
  approaches use the same visual inputs and Transformer encoder structure.


  –CLEVR-CoGenT: CLEVR is a diagnostic dataset for VQA models (Johnson et al., 2017) that
  consists of synthetic 3D scenes with multiple objects and automatically generated questions, associ-
  ated with a ground-truth program formed by multiple sub-tasks. This dataset comes with additional
  splits to test systematic generalization, namely, the Compositional Generalization Test (CLEVR-
  CoGenT). CLEVR-CoGenT is divided in two conditions where objects appear with limited color
  and shape combinations, that are inverted between training and testing. Using this dataset, we can
  test systematic generalization to novel combinations of visual attributes.
  –CLOSURE: This is a test set for models trained with CLEVR, and provides 7 benchmarks (Bah-
  danau et al., 2020). The benchmarks test the systematic generalization to novel combinations of
  known linguistic constructs, which can be considered as sub-tasks, e.g., “is the same size as” can
  be a sub-task SAME SIZE. CLOSURE uses the same synthetic images in CLEVR but contains
  questions which require the models to recombine the known sub-tasks in a novel way.
  –GQA-SGL: GQA is a VQA dataset that consists of complex natural images and questions, as-
  sociated with ground-truth programs (Hudson & Manning, 2019). GQA-SGL (Systematic Gener-
  alization to Linguistic combinations) is a novel test set we built based on GQA to test systematic
  generalization to novel combinations of known linguistic constructs with natural images. We gen-
  erate new questions with ground-truth programs by combining the existing programs as shown in
  Fig. 4 in the Appendix A. To build the test set, we use the test-dev set from the balanced split. For
  the train set, in all experiments we always use the balanced split that controls bias. See Appendix A
  for details.
  Methods and Settings. We compare TMNs with two Transformer-based baseline methods shown in
  Fig. 3. In (a), standard Transformer (Transformer) takes an image and a question as the inputs. In (b),
  standard Transformer with programs (Transformer w/ PR) takes a program as an input instead of the
  question and treat it as a sequence of tokens. TMNs also take the program as an input and executes
  each module with corresponding arguments as shown in Fig. 2. Thus, comparing Transformer w/ PR
  with TMNs allow us to assess the effectiveness of our Transformer modules and question-specific
  compositions of the modules. We treat VQA as a classification task and train the models with cross-
  entropy loss across the TMNs and our baselines.
  –Architecture: We use vanilla Transformer encoder for both standard Transformers and our TMNs
  for fair comparison. Standard Transformers consist of 12 Transformer layers. In TMNs, the number
  of Transformer layers in each module is 1 for CLEVR-CoGenT and CLOSURE, and 2 for GQA-
  SGL because of the difference in the complexity of their sub-tasks. Transformer encoders in all
  models have a hidden state size of 768 and 12 attention heads.
  –Sub-tasks and programs: For CLEVR-CoGenT and CLOSURE, we use the sub-tasks and pro-
  grams defined in the dataset. For GQA-SGL, we follow the definitions proposed in Chen et al.
  (2021).
  –Visual features: For CLEVR-CoGenT and CLOSURE, we use grid features extracted by a
  ResNet-101 pre-trained with ImageNet to obtain the visual feature of H × W × 2048 dimensions,
  where H and W are the height and the width of the grid feature map. We add a positional encod-
  ing to the grid features and flatten them with a linear projection. We treat the flattened features as
  a sequence of tokens and thus the number of the tokens is H × W (150 on these datasets). The


                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


input images in GQA contain various objects and are much more complex than those in CLOSURE.
Therefore, for GQA-SGL, we use the popular regional features (Anderson et al., 2018) extracted
by a Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) (with a ResNet-101 backbone) pre-trained on Visual Genome
dataset (Krishna et al., 2016). We consistently keep 36 regions for each image. Each region has
2048-dimensional visual feature and 5-dimensional spatial location feature.
–Embeddings: The input representation of the program is a sum of word embeddings, segment
embeddings and position embeddings. They represent a sub-task or an argument (e.g., FILTER or
circle), a thread index, and word position, respectively. For the standard Transformer, we adopt
BERT tokenizer and the standard sentence embeddings described in (Li et al., 2020).
–Hyperparameters: We use the Adam optimizer for all cases. Learning rates for standard Trans-
formers and TMNs are 2e-5 and 1e-5 for CLEVR-CoGenT, 2e-5 for CLEVR, and 1e-5 and 4e-5 for
GQA. We search best learning rates for each model. We train all the models with batch size of 128
on 4 Tesla V100 GPUs for 20 epochs except standard Transformer on CLEVR, where we use 30
epochs to achieve convergence. Training of standard Transformers and TMNs finished in 3 and 4
days, respectively. We use this experimental setup and hyperparameter tuning for all experiments.
–Other methods: We also experiment with other state-of-the-art methods, including Vector-
NMN (Bahdanau et al., 2020), MDETR (Kamath et al., 2021) and MMN (Chen et al., 2021)
(LXMERT (Tan & Bansal, 2019) in Appendix G). We use the hyperparamters described in the orig-
inal papers. For a fair comparison, we train Vector-NMN and MMN using their publicly available
code on the same training set as the rest of the methods. We also use the ground-truth programs as
in TMN. MDETR was already trained on the same training set as the rest of the methods, and hence,
we use the publicly available trained model. Also, we report the performance of NS-VQA (Yi et al.,
2018) from its original paper and Akula et al. (2021).


5     R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

In this section, we first report the systematic generalization performance to novel combinations of vi-
sual attributes or linguistic constructs with synthetic images (CLEVR-CoGenT and CLOSURE) and
complex natural images (GQA-SGL). Then, we analyze the effect of module composition, module
specialization, and pre-training.


5.1   S YSTEMATIC G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE

Tables 1 and 2 show the mean and standard deviation accuracy of TMNs and the rest of approaches
for both in-distribution and systematic generalization (see Appendix B, C, D and J for further de-
tails). In the following, we first introduce the results in the three datasets, and then, we discuss
them:
CLEVR-CoGenT. It evaluates the systematic generalization performance to novel combinations
of known visual attributes. All models are trained on CLEVR-CoGenT condition A. Our results
show that both standard Transformers and TMNs largely outperform the state-of-the-art modular
approaches (Vector-NMN and NS-VQA). TMNs’ systematic generalization performance also sur-
passes MDETR, which is the state-of-the-art Transformer-based model proposed to capture long-
tail visual concepts. TMNs achieve superior performance over the standard Transformer but their
performances are slightly lower than the Transformer with programs (Transformer w/ PR). As ex-
pected, Transformer w/ PR outperforms standard Transformer as the use of program facilitates visual
grounding.
CLOSURE. It evaluates the systematic generalization performance to novel combinations of
known linguistic constructs. All models are trained on CLEVR. Our results show that standard
Transformers struggle with novel compositions of known linguistic constructs even when the pro-
gram is provided (Transformer w/ PR). TMNs achieve much better performance than standard Trans-
formers and MDETR, and also outperform the other modular approaches (Vector-NMN and NS-
VQA). Remarkably, TMN-Tree improves systematic generalization accuracy over standard Trans-
formers more than 30% in this dataset. Tree structure seems effective for CLOSURE because the
questions often have tree structure.

                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Results on systematic generalization to novel combinations of known visual attributes and
linguistic constructs. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) across at least three repetitions
when possible (only one trained model is provided in NS-VQA and MDETR). All methods are tested
on in-distribution (CLEVR-CoGenT validation condition A and CLEVR validation) and systematic
generalization (CLEVR-CoGenT validation condition B and CLOSURE, indicated in yellow). We
trained and test Vector-NMN on CLEVR-CoGenT in our environment while its performances on
CLEVR and CLOSURE are cited from the original paper (Bahdanau et al., 2020). “Overall” at the
right end is the mean value of accuracies on CoGenT-B and CLOSURE.
                             Visual attributes            Linguistic constructs
                                                                                        Overall
  Methods               CoGenT-A CoGenT-B                CLEVR        CLOSURE
                         (In-Dist.)    (Syst. Gen.)     (In-Dist.)    (Syst. Gen.)   (Syst. Gen.)
  Transformer           97.5 ± 0.18 78.9 ± 0.80        97.4 ± 0.23 57.4 ± 1.6           68.2
  Transformer w/ PR     97.4 ± 0.56 81.7 ± 1.1         97.1 ± 0.14 64.5 ± 2.5           73.1
  TMN-Stack (ours)      97.9 ± 0.03 80.6 ± 0.21        98.0 ± 0.03 90.9 ± 0.49          85.3
  TMN-Tree (ours)       98.0 ± 0.02 80.1 ± 0.72        97.9 ± 0.01 95.4 ± 0.20          87.8
  Vector-NMN            98.0 ± 0.2     73.2 ± 0.2      98.0 ± 0.07 94.4                 83.8
  NS-VQA                99.8           63.9            99.8           76.4              70.2
  MDETR                 99.7           76.2            99.7           53.3              64.8



Table 2: Results on an application to complex natural images with novel combinations of known
linguistic constructs. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) on GQA test-dev and GQA-
SGL across at least three repetitions. We use a pre-trained object detector as a feature extractor.
The numbers in ( ) denote the mean accuracy on only four question types contained in GQA-SGL
(verify, query, choose, and logical). Systematic generalization performance is indicated in yellow.
                                         GQA                     GQA-SGL
             Methods
                                    (In-Distribution)     (Systematic generalization)
             Transformer           54.9 ± 0.004 (67.6)            47.7 ± 2.1
             Transformer w/ PR     54.7 ± 0.22 (67.0)             52.2 ± 3.2
             TMN-Stack (ours)      52.8 ± 0.10 (64.7)            50.7 ± 0.94
             TMN-Tree (ours)       53.5 ± 0.24 (65.2)             53.7 ± 1.7
             MMN                   55.6 ± 0.12 (67.8)             51.0 ± 1.5


GQA-SGL. We evaluate the systematic generalization performance to novel combinations of
known linguistic constructs with natural images. All models are trained on GQA. In Table 2, we
evaluate the exact matching between the predicted and ground-truth answers, on both GQA and
GQA-SGL. TMN-Tree achieves superior performance on systematic generalization with a smaller
drop of in-distribution accuracy compared to standard Transformers. Although MMN is the recently
proposed NMN for GQA and achieves great in-distribution performance, TMN-Tree outperforms
MMN on systematic generalization.
Discussion of the Results. Our results in CLOSURE and GQA-SGL show that TMNs (i.e., in-
troducing modularity to Transformers) improve the systematic generalization performance to novel
combinations of known linguistic constructs (i.e., novel compositions of sub-tasks) of Transformers
and NMNs. The performance gain in CLOSURE is relatively larger than that in GQA-SGL tests.
One reason to explain this is the complexity of the questions: the maximum program length is 26
in CLOSURE, while it is 9 in GQA. CLOSURE provides more complex questions which require
stronger systematic generalization capabilities. Results in CLEVR-CoGenT show that TMNs do
not improve systematic generalization of Transformers for novel compositions of visual attributes.
This may be expected as D’Amario et al. (2021) demonstrated that the visual feature extractor is
the key component for generalization to novel combinations of visual attributes, and Transformer
and TMNs have the same visual feature extractor. Finally, we observe that TMNs achieve the best
accuracy across all tested methods in CLOSURE and GQA-SGL, and competitive accuracy with the
best performing method in CLEVR-CoGenT.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Effect of specialization of modules. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) on
CLEVR and CLOSURE across three repetitions with different libraries of modules. “Individual”
denotes that a module is assigned to a single sub-task. “Semantic group” and “Random group”
denote that a module is assigned to a group including sub-tasks that are semantically similar or
randomly selected, respectively. “Order” denotes that a module is selected by the order of a sub-task
in a program.
   Library            The number     Specialization        CLEVR                CLOSURE
   of modules         of modules      of modules       (In-Distribution)   (Syst. Generalization)
   Individual             26              ✓            98.0 ± 0.030             90.9 ± 0.49
   Semantic group         12              ✓            98.1 ± 0.014             93.7 ± 0.55
   Random group           12              ✓            97.9 ± 0.059             93.0 ± 0.29
   Order                  12                           92.2 ± 1.5                68.4 ± 1.8


Table 4: Ablation analysis. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) on CLEVR and CLO-
SURE across three repetitions. We add imitations of properties of TMN, i.e., Variable number of
layers (VL) and Split tokens (ST) to the standard Transformer w/ PR. SoM stands for the specializa-
tion of the modules.
                                        Properties          CLEVR              CLOSURE
  Methods
                                    VL ST SoM (In-Distribution) (Syst. Generalization)
  Transformer w/ PR                                     97.1 ± 0.14             64.5 ± 2.5
  Transformer w/ PR + VL             ✓                  94.0 ± 1.8              60.2 ± 2.9
  Transformer w/ PR + VL + ST ✓             ✓           56.8 ± 0.042           43.6 ± 0.59
  TMN-Stack                          ✓      ✓      ✓    98.0 ± 0.030           90.9 ± 0.49



5.2   A NALYSIS

Behavioral Analysis.      We analyze the behavior of our trained modules, i.e., how Transformer
modules work, by visualizing attention maps in Appendix H. The qualitative results indicate that the
modules learn their functions properly. We also analyze the Transformer w/ PR in Appendix I.
Module Specialization. While the question-specific composition of modules is a key property of
NMNs, a recent work reports that a degree of modularity of the NMN also has large influence on
systematic generalization (D’Amario et al., 2021). Here we also investigate this aspect for TMNs.
Table 3 shows the mean accuracy of TMN-Stack with four different libraries of modules, each with
a different degree of specialization. “Individual” denotes that each module is assigned to a single
sub-task (26 sub-tasks defined in CLEVR in total). This is the library used in the previous sections.
“Semantic group” denotes that each module tackles a group of sub-tasks that are semantically sim-
ilar. “Random group” denotes that each module tackles a group of sub-tasks randomly selected.
“Order” denotes that each module is always placed in the same position of the question-specific
network, independently of the sub-task performed in that position. If there are more sub-tasks in
the program than modules in the library, the modules are repeated following the same order. In this
way, we compare the importance of modules tackling sub-tasks with the importance of having a
question-specific network. See Appendix E for further details about each library.
Results shows that the systematic generalization accuracy largely drops when the modules are not
specialized, even if the number of modules is the same (compare “Order” with “Semantic group”
and “Random group”). The degree of modularity (Individual vs Semantic group) and how sub-tasks
are grouped (Semantic vs Random) also affects the systematic generalization performance. These
results suggest that question-specific composition of modules is not enough and specialization of
modules is crucially important. Finally, note that the results of Semantic group and Random group
also show that TMN performs better than the standard Transformer (93.7 vs 64.5) even if the total
number of parameters that all modules have is the same as the number of parameters of the standard
Transformer (i.e., TMN has 12 modules of one layer each, while Transformers have 12 layers).
Ablation Analysis. We investigate the contribution of TMN’s specialization of modules (SoM) to
TMNs’ superior performance over standard Transformer. Besides SoM, TMNs also have a variable


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Effect of pre-training. Mean accuracy (%) on CLEVR-CoGenT validation condition B and
CLOSURE with two different feature extractors, which are an object detector pre-trained on Visual
Genome (VG) and a ResNet-101 (without pre-training on VG).
                                     CLEVR-CoGenT                   CLOSURE
            Methods
                                  w/o VG w/ VG ∆              w/o VG w/ VG    ∆
            Transformer            78.9    87.5   8.6          57.4    62.1  4.7
            Transformer w/ PR      81.7    88.7   6.9          64.5    64.5 0.005
            TMN-Stack (ours)       80.6    86.9   6.3          90.9    92.7  1.7
            TMN-Tree (ours)        80.1    86.4   6.4          95.4    96.4  1.0



number of layers, while standard Transformer have a fixed number of layers. We analyze if it is
this difference in number of layers or the SoM that is causing TMNs’ higher accuracy. To do so,
we add a property named Variable number of layers (VL) to the Transformer w/ PR. With the VL,
the Transformer w/ PR uses as many encoder layers as the program length (e.g., 18 layers are used
to output an answer for an input program with a length of 18). VL can be regarded as an imitation
of the question-specific compositions of the modules in TMN, but each layer is not specialized for
specific sub-tasks. Another key difference between TMNs and Transformers besides SoM is that
TMN modules takes as argument tokens related to the sub-task as indicated by the program, while
every layer of standard Transformer takes all input tokens in the program, because Transformers’
layers are not specialized to sub-tasks. Splitting the program tokens may help the model to steer the
computations that should be executed at each layer. To investigate this, we add this property, named
as Split Tokens (ST), to the Transformer w/ PR.
Table 4 shows that any of the aforementioned properties do not improve the systematic general-
ization performance without the specialization of modules to sub-tasks, i.e., SoM. Even with Split
tokens, the performance does not improve because the layers can not be specialized and splitting the
token can spoil the flexibly of the standard Transformer.
Pre-training. We analyze how the additional image data from other domains affects systematic
generalization to novel combinations of visual attributes or linguistic constructs, i.e., CLEVR-
CoGenT and CLOSURE, respectively. Table 5 shows the mean accuracy with two different visual
features, namely, regional features extracted by an object detector pre-trained on Visual Genome
(VG) and grid features extracted by a ResNet-101 without pre-training on VG. Across all the tested
models, we observe, as expected, that the performance gains from pre-training the visual feature
extractor are larger for generalization to novel visual combinations and smaller for novel linguistic
combinations. This highlights the need to control pre-training in order to ensure a fair comparison
of different methods for systematic generalization. See Appendix F and G for further experiments.


6   C ONCLUSIONS

We have compared the systematic generalization capabilities of TMNs with the most promising
approaches in the literature, i.e., Transformers and NMNs, on three VQA datasets. TMNs achieve
state-of-the-art systematic generalization performance across all tested benchmarks. We have shown
that the question-specific composition of Transformer modules and the specialization of the modules
to each sub-task are the key of the performance gains. Also, our results highlight that a fair compar-
ison for systematic generalization requires controlling that all compared methods are pre-trained in
the same way. We hope that our investigation unleash the potential of modular approaches for sys-
tematic generalization as they motivate promising future work towards creating large-scale modular
architectures.
Limitations. TMNs have similar limitations as NMNs, i.e., it is challenging to decompose a ques-
tion into sub-tasks. We have used the sub-tasks and the programs provided in the datasets generated
by humans. This makes it difficult to apply NMNs and TMNs to other datasets that do not contain
the programs. Another limitation is that we only investigated two types of systematic generalization
(novel compositions of visual attributes and linguistic constructs). These limitations are key open
questions that we will tackle in future work.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Reproducibility Statement. The source code and new dataset used in this study are included in
the supplementary materials for review and will be made publicly available on GitHub.com upon
acceptance. URLs of other existing assets (datasets, source code and trained models) used in this
study are provided in the reference section. Experimental setup is described in Section 4.

R EFERENCES
Aishwarya Agrawal, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Don’t just assume; look
  and answer: Overcoming priors for visual question answering. In Proc. of the 31st IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2018), pp. 4971–4980, 2018.
Arjun Reddy Akula, Varun Jampani, Soravit Changpinyo, and Song-Chun Zhu. Robust visual rea-
  soning via language guided neural module networks. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
  and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (NeurIPS
  2021), 2021.
Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould, and
  Lei Zhang. Bottom-up and top-down attention for image captioning and visual question answer-
  ing. In Proc. of the 31st IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR 2018), pp. 6077–6086, 2018.
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural module networks. In
  Proc. of the 29th IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR
  2016), pp. 39–48, 2016.
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zit-
  nick, and Devi Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering. In Proc. of the 15th IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2015), 2015.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Shikhar Murty, Michael Noukhovitch, Thien Huu Nguyen, Harm de Vries, and
  Aaron Courville. Systematic generalization: What is required and can it be learned? In Proc. of
  the 7th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2019), 2019.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Harm de Vries, Timothy J. O’Donnell, Shikhar Murty, Philippe Beaudoin,
  Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron C. Courville. CLOSURE: assessing systematic generalization of
  CLEVR models. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1912.05783v2, 2020. The CLOSURE dataset is avaialble
  at https://zenodo.org/record/3634090#.YoYf2lTP0UF and the official source
  code of Vector-NMN is available at https://github.com/rizar/CLOSURE (Accessed
  on Sept. 21st, 2022).
Leon Bergen, Timothy J. O’Donnell, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Systematic generalization with edge
  transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (NeurIPS 2021), pp.
  1390–1402, 2021.
Wenhu Chen, Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Yu Cheng, William Wang, and Jingjing Liu. Meta module
 network for compositional visual reasoning. In Proc. of the 2021 IEEE Winter Conference
 on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV 2021), pp. 655–664, 2021. The official source
 code and trained model of Meta Module Network are available at https://github.com/
 wenhuchen/Meta-Module-Network (Accessed on Sept. 21st, 2022).
Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Vanessa D’Amario, Tomotake Sasaki, and Xavier Boix. How modular should neural module net-
  works be for systematic generalization? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  34 (NeurIPS 2021), pp. 23374–23385, 2021.
Nicolas Gontier, Koustuv Sinha, Siva Reddy, and Christopher Pal. Measuring systematic generaliza-
  tion in neural proof generation with transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020), pp. 22231–22242, 2020.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Aishwarya Agrawal, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi
  Parikh. Making the V in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual ques-
  tion answering. In Proc. of the 32nd IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR 2019), pp. 398–414, 2019.
Ronghang Hu, Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Learning to
  reason: End-to-end module networks for visual question answering. In Proc. of the 16th IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2017), pp. 804–813, 2017.
Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. GQA: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proc. of the 32nd IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2019), pp. 6700–6709, 2019. The GQA dataset is available
  at https://cs.stanford.edu/people/dorarad/gqa/index.html (Accessed on
  Sept. 21st, 2022).
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary vi-
  sual reasoning. In Proc. of the 30th IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR 2017), pp. 2901–2910, 2017. The CLEVR and CLEVR-CoGenT datasets
  are available at https://cs.stanford.edu/people/jcjohns/clevr/ (Accessed on
  Sept. 21st, 2022).
Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas
  Carion. MDETR - modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. In Proc.
  of the 18th IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2021), pp. 1780–
  1790, 2021. The official source code and trained model of MDETR are available at https:
  //github.com/ashkamath/mdetr (Accessed on Sept. 21st, 2022).
Corentin Kervadec, Grigory Antipov, Moez Baccouche, and Christian Wolf. Roses are red, violets
  are blue... but should VQA expect them to? In Proc. of the 34th IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2021), pp. 2776–2785, 2021.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David Shamma, Michael Bernstein, and Fei Fei Li. Visual
  Genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. Inter-
  national Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 123:32–73, 2016.
Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional skills
  of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In Proc. of the 35th International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML 2018), pp. 2873–2882, 2018.
Gen Li, Nan Duan, Yuejian Fang, Ming Gong, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. Unicoder-VL: A
  universal encoder for vision and language by cross-modal pre-training. In Proc. of the 34th AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-20), pp. 11336–11344, 2020.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  28 (NIPS 2015), pp. 91–99, 2015.
Laura Ruis, Jacob Andreas, Marco Baroni, Diane Bouchacourt, and Brenden M Lake. A bench-
  mark for systematic generalization in grounded language understanding. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020), pp. 19861–19872, 2020.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. LXMERT: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from trans-
  formers. In Proc. of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP
  2019), pp. 5100–5111, 2019. The official source code and trained model of LXMERT are avail-
  able at https://github.com/airsplay/lxmert (Accessed on Sept. 21st, 2022).
Dmitry Tsarkov, Tibor Tihon, Nathan Scales, Nikola Momchev, Danila Sinopalnikov, and Nathanael
 Schärli. *-CFQ: Analyzing the scalability of machine learning on a compositional task. In Proc.
 of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21), pp. 9949–9957, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017), pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum.
  Neural-symbolic VQA: Disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (NeurIPS 2018), pp. 1039–1050, 2018.
Pengchuan Zhang, Xiujun Li, Xiaowei Hu, Jianwei Yang, Lei Zhang, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and
  Jianfeng Gao. VinVL: Revisiting visual representations in vision-language models. In Proc. of
  the 34th IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2021), pp.
  5579–5588, 2021.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                GQA                                                                           GQA-SGL

  Verify      Does <A> <Spatial referring> <B> … <Attribute>?                              Does <A> <Matching referring> <B> … <Attribute>?

              What <A> <Matching referring> <B> …?
  Query                                                                                    What <A> <Spatial referring> <B> <Spatial referring> <C>?
              What is <A> <Spatial referring> <B> …?
A PPENDIX
 Choose       Is <A> <Spatial referring> … <B> or <C>?                                     Is <A> <Matching referring> … <B>, <C> or <D>?

              Are there both <A> and <B> …?
                                                                                           Are there both <Attribute 1> <A> and <Attribute 2> <B> ...?
ALogical
      GQA-SGL D                    <A> or <B> …?
                                 ATASET
              Is there <Attribute>



                                GQA                                                                           GQA-SGL

  Verify      Does <A> <Spatial referring> <B> … <Attr>?                                   Does <A> <Matching referring> <B> … <Attr>?

              What <A> <Matching referring> <B> …?
  Query                                                                                    What <A> <Spatial referring> <B> <Spatial referring> <C>?
              What is <A> <Spatial referring> <B> …?

 Choose       Is <A> <Spatial referring> … <Attr 1> or <Attr 2>?                           Is <A> <Matching referring> … <B>, <C> or <D>?

              Are there both <A> and <B> …?
  Logical                                                                                  Are there both <Attr 1> <A> and <Attr 2> <B> ...?
              Is there <Attr> <A> or <B> …?



Figure 4: GQA-SGL test dataset for systematic generalization with natural images. GQA-SGL
is a novel test set we built based on GQA to evaluate systematic generalization performance. We
generate new questions with ground-truth programs that belong to four question types (verify, query,
choose, and logical) by combining the existing programs. <A,...,D> and <Attr> denote an object
(e.g., chair) and an attribute (e.g., blue). <Spatial referring> and <Matching referring> are a
referring expression such as “ is right of ” and “ is the same color as ”, respectively.


                                                             GQA                                                  GQA-SGL

                                             Does the palm tree to the left of the
                                             flag look blue? no
                                                                                                      Does the piece of furniture that is the same
        verify                                                                                        color as the umbrella look open? no
                                             What is sitting in front of the table that
                                             looks yellow and black? luggage

                                             Are the colorful books to the right of a
                                             radio? yes
                                                                                                      What color is the animal to the left of the
        query                                                                                         books near the water bottle? orange
                                             What is the animal that looks
                                             orange doing? lying

                                             Does the blue umbrella look closed or
                                             open? closed
                                                                                                      Is the device that is the same color as the
        choose                                                                                        umbrella large or small? small
                                             Does the napkin have the same color as
                                             the notebook? no

                                             Are there any grinders or traffic lights in
                                             the photograph? yes
                                                                                                      Are there both a straight street and a
        logical                              Are there any traffic signs or fire                      blue house in this photo? yes
                                             hydrants that are not made of metal? no


            Figure 5: Examples of test questions from GQA and GQA-SGL for the same images.

We generate GQA-SGL, a novel GQA split to test Systematic Generalization to the novel Linguistic
combinations of models trained on GQA. GQA-SGL contains 200 new questions with their ground-
truth programs. 97.4% of the original GQA questions can be divided into four question types: verify,
query, choose, and logical. Fig. 4 describes the GQA-SGL data generation process. On the left, we
first list out all ground-truth programs that belong these question types. The arguments in parenthesis
<·> denote either objects (e.g., A and B), attributes (e.g., Attr), or referring expression. Those can
be spatial referring, where an object or group of objects is selected based on the relation with another
object or group of objects (e.g., the object A which is left to objects B); matching referring where an
objects/group is selected depending on some matching properties with another object/group; and or
or where either or one between two objects/groups of objects are selected.
On the right of Fig. 4, we generate new ground-truth programs by combining attributes and referring
expressions which never appeared in GQA. We emphasize the systematic shift between GQA and
GQA-SGL linguistic construct by highlighting referring expressions and attributes through different
colors.
We generate 50 questions for each question type as shown in Fig. 5.


                                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Supplemental results on CLEVR-CoGenT. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%)
for each question type in CLEVR-CoGenT Condition B across at least three repetitions.

                      Methods                    Exist             Count
                      Transformer             87.8 ± 0.69       73.3 ± 0.13
                      Transformer w/ PR       90.4 ± 0.90       76.8 ± 0.99
                      TMN-Stack (ours)       88.4 ± 0.069       75.1 ± 0.27
                      TMN-Tree (ours)         87.8 ± 0.62       74.3 ± 0.83
                      Vector-NMN              84.4 ± 0.35       70.4 ± 0.44
                      MDETR                       85.4              75.2

 Methods               Compare Integer      Compare Attribute     Query Attribute
 Transformer             88.6 ± 0.41          85.8 ± 0.68           73.2 ± 1.7
 Transformer w/ PR       89.8 ± 0.45           88.3 ± 1.1           76.3 ± 1.6
 TMN-Stack (ours)        88.1 ± 0.20          86.3 ± 0.22          76.6 ± 0.28
 TMN-Tree (ours)         89.0 ± 0.66          87.8 ± 0.69          75.3 ± 0.75
 Vector-NMN              81.3 ± 0.52          78.1 ± 0.79          66.5 ± 1.05
 MDETR                       81.3                 82.6                 68.9



Table 7: Supplemental results on CLOSURE. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) on each
CLOSURE test across at least three repetitions.
                 Methods                and mat spa      or mat        or mat spa
                 Transformer             77.0 ± 5.2    19.1 ± 0.55      25 ± 11
                 Transformer w/ PR       77.6 ± 6.9    39.7 ± 1.9      36.4 ± 5.8
                 TMN-Stack (ours)       98.4 ± 0.19    77.8 ± 1.5      72.7 ± 2.6
                 TMN-Tree (ours)        98.5 ± 0.03    89.5 ± 0.62     90.1 ± 0.8
                 Vector-NMN              86.3 ± 2.5    91.5 ± 0.77     88.6 ± 1.2
                 MDETR                      8.63           34.1           18.4


  Methods                embed spa mat      embed mat spa       compare mat    compare mat spa
  Transformer              97.0 ± 1.3         55.2 ± 4.4          65.7 ± 2.8      62.7 ± 2.3
  Transformer w/ PR        59.7 ± 2.8         78.1 ± 5.0          85.7 ± 4.4      74.4 ± 6.6
  TMN-Stack (ours)        98.8 ± 0.00        92.7 ± 0.84          77.8 ± 1.5      72.7 ± 2.6
  TMN-Tree (ours)         98.7 ± 0.16        92.8 ± 0.42         99.0 ± 0.03     99.3 ± 0.11
  Vector-NMN              98.5 ± 0.13        98.7 ± 0.19         98.5 ± 0.17      98.4 ± 0.3
  MDETR                       99.3               77.4                69.3            66.0


Table 8: Supplemental results on GQA-SGL. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) for four
question types in GQA-SGL across at least three repetitions. We use a pre-trained object detector as
a feature extractor.
                                           Four question types in GQA-SGL
             Methods
                                    verify        query        choose         logical
             Transformer          50.0 ± 1.6 35.3 ± 5.0 50.0 ± 7.5 55.3 ± 4.1
             Transformer w/ PR 51.6 ± 7.7 45.6 ± 5.6 56.0 ± 6.6 55.6 ± 5.4
             TMN-Stack (ours)     51.6 ± 4.1 49.6 ± 5.0 44.8 ± 3.7 56.4 ± 7.1
             TMN-Tree (ours)      56.0 ± 7.3 48.0 ± 5.5 47.2 ± 3.2 64.0 ± 4.6
             MMN                  46.7 ± 4.7 50.7 ± 5.0 47.3 ± 1.9 59.3 ± 3.4


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    S UPPLEMENTAL R ESULTS ON CLEVR-C O G EN T
We report the systematic generalization performance for each question type on CLEVR-CoGenT in
Table 6. All methods are trained on CLEVR-CoGenT condition A and tested on CLEVR-CoGenT
validation condition B.

C    S UPPLEMENTAL R ESULTS ON CLOSURE
We report the systematic generalization performance for each test in CLOSURE in Table 7. All
methods are trained on CLEVR and tested on CLOSURE tests.

D    S UPPLEMENTAL R ESULTS ON GQA-SGL
We report the systematic generalization performance for each question type on GQA-SGL in Table
8. All methods are trained on GQA balanced split.

E    L IBRARIES OF M ODULES
We design three libraries of modules for TMN, “Individual”, “Semantic group”, and “Random
group”, as shown in Table 9. Unlike these libraries, a module in “Order” library is selected by
the order of a sub-task in a given program and thus in this library the modules are not specialized
for specific sub-tasks.

F   E FFECT OF R EGIONAL F EATURES
We compare the systematic generalization performances on CLEVR-CoGenT with grid features
and regional features, as shown in Table 10. We use ResNet-101 and region of interest pooling to
extract regional features, while we use only the same ResNet-101 to extract grid features. In case
of the standard Transformer and our TMNs, the performance gaps are less than 1.5%. In case of
the standard Transformer with ground-truth programs, the performance gap is slightly larger than it
(3.6%).

G    E FFECT OF P RE -T RAINING WITH I MAGE –T EXT PAIRS
Table 11 reports the results of TMN-Tree and state-of-the-art Transformer-based models
(MDETR (Kamath et al., 2021) and LXMERT (Tan & Bansal, 2019)) on GQA and GQA-SGL.
The table also indicates the pre-training datasets with image-text pairs. The methods use different
pre-training datasets, and hence, they cannot be compared in a fair manner. Yet, we observe that
TMN-Tree strike a balance between amount of pre-training data for the Transformer encoders and
systematic generalization performance.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Libraries of modules. “Individual” library has 26 modules, while “Semantic group” and
“Random group” libraries have 12 modules.
   Module number           Individual            Semantic group         Random group
         0                  scene                   scene               query color
         1                  count                   count               query shape
         2                  exist                   exist                   union
         3                intersect               intersect              same shape
         4                  relate                 relate               equal shape
         5                  union                   union              greater than
         6                  unique                 unique             equal material
                                                greater than           filter shape
          7             greater than              less than              intersect
                                               equal integer               unique
                                                 equal color          same material
                                              equal material         filter material
          8               less than
                                                 equal shape                count
                                                 equal size               same size
                                                filter color             equal size
                                             filter material          query material
          9             equal color
                                                filter shape                scene
                                                 filter size            equal color
                                                 query color             query size
                                              query material              less than
          10           equal integer
                                                 query shape                exist
                                                 query size                relate
                                                 same color             filter size
                                               same material          equal integer
          11          equal material
                                                 same shape            filter color
                                                  same size              same color
          12             equal shape
          13              equal size
          14            filter color
          15          filter material
          16            filter shape
          17             filter size
          18             query color
          19           query material
          20             query shape
          21              query size
          22              same color
          23            same material
          24              same shape
          25               same size



Table 10: Effect of regional features. Mean and standard deviation of accuracy (%) on CLEVR-
CoGenT validation condition B with grid features and regional features.
                    Methods              Grid features   Regional features
                    Transformer          78.9 ± 0.80       77.4 ± 0.68
                    Transformer w/ PR     81.7 ± 1.1       78.2 ± 0.44
                    TMN-Stack (ours)     80.6 ± 0.21       79.4 ± 0.37
                    TMN-Tree (ours)      80.1 ± 0.72       80.9 ± 0.25


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 11: Comparison with pre-trained state-of-the-art VQA methods. Mean accuracy (%) on four
question types (verify, query, choose, and logical) in GQA test-dev and GQA-SGL. The pre-training
refers to datasets with image-text pairs used during training besides GQA. All methods except TMN-
Tree are pre-trained with a large amount of image-text pairs. For the methods with †, we use official
trained models. VG, COCO, Fk, GQAu and VQA denote Visual Genome, MS COCO, Flickr30k,
GQA unbalanced split, and VQA-v2, respectively.
                 Methods                Pre-training data       GQA        GQA-SGL
                 TMN-Tree (ours)                -               65.2         53.7
                 MDETR †              VG, COCO, Fk, GQAu        73.9         59.0
                 LXMERT †              VG, COCO, VQA            68.9         58.0


Input
image


                                   Attention map                                     Attention map



              filter_shape                                     filter_material
                (sphere)                                           (metal)


              filter_color
Program
                (yellow)


                                                                   exist



                 count



               Classifier                                        Classifier


Answer            ‘3’                                              ‘yes’


Figure 6: Visualization of TMN’s behavior with examples in CLEVR. The left program is {scene,
filter shape(sphere), filter color(yellow), count} and the right program is
{scene, filter material(metal), exist}. Attention maps of modules corresponding to
the sub-tasks are shown in grey scale.


H       B EHAVIOURAL A NALYSIS OF M ODULES

Figure 6 shows an visualization of how Transformer modules work, obtained by using exam-
ples in CLEVR, i.e., in-distribution case. In the left example, we give TMN-Stack an in-
put image with a program {scene, filter shape(sphere), filter color(yellow),
count}. Three modules corresponding to the program operate their sub-tasks sequentially and
then a classifier outputs an answer. We visualize the attention map in each module, where
darker grey represents higher attention scores. We average attention scores across all atten-
tion heads. We can see that filter shape(sphere) and filter color(yellow) mod-
ules highly attend to regions with sphere and yellow objects, respectively. More precisely, the
queries of the regions highly attend to the keys of sphere and yellow which are the in-
put for each module, and the representations of the regions change by adding the values of
sphere and yellow. Although filter color(yellow) module executes its sub-task after
filter shape(sphere), filter color(yellow) also attends to a yellow cube as well
as yellow spheres. In the right example, we give an another image with a program {scene,
filter material(metal), exist}. These results indicate that the modules learn their


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 12: Effect of model size on Transformers. We compare Transformers and Transformers w/ PR
with the different number of encoder layers.
                                   The number          CLEVR                  CLOSURE
          Methods
                                    of layers      (In-Distribution)     (Syst. Generalization)
                                        12         97.4 ± 0.23                 57.4 ± 1.6
          Transformer                    6         96.8 ± 0.0068               60.6 ± 3.8
                                         3         91.8 ± 0.40                 56.1 ± 2.0
                                        12         97.1 ± 0.14                 64.5 ± 2.5
          Transformer w/ PR
                                         6         95.7 ± 0.40                 63.5 ± 2.7


functions properly. Figure 7 shows a behavioural analysis on an example in CLOSURE, i.e.,
novel combinations of known linguistic constructs. In this example, we give TMN-Tree an in-
put image with a program {scene, filter shape(cube), scene, filter size(large),
filter shape(cube), unique, same material, filter shape(sphere), union,
count}. scene represents the beginning of a thread and this program contains two threads.
TMN-Tree operates the threads individually and merges them with union (OR). For simplicity,
we overlay attention maps on the input image. The result show that the each module works properly
as we expect even though this example is much more complex than the ones shown in Fig. 6 and
also the sequence of the sub-tasks are unseen in the training.

I   B EHAVIOURAL A NALYSIS OF T RANSFORMER W / PR
Figure 8 and 9 show how Transformer w/ PR works on the same example in CLOSURE shown in
Fig. 7 and an example in CLEVR similar to the CLOSURE example. Both examples contain union
(OR), however the CLEVR example is in-distribution while the CLOSURE example requires the
model to handle novel combinations of known linguistic constructs, i.e., systematic generalization.
We visualize the attention map of the head token for the visual regions and the input sequence of the
tokens. The results show that the Transformer w/ PR first attends to the input program then changes
where to attend in the visual regions.
In Fig. 9, i.e., in-distribution case, the model attends to the token almost from left to right (i.e., order
of sub-tasks) and after reaching the last token it stop to attend the program. Specifically, the model
first attends to the regions with metal cube from layer 2 to 3 and the regions of sphere at layer 5, then
attends to the both regions at layer 6 after attending the union at the previous layer. Finally, the
model attends to the count. This result indicates that the Transformer w/ PR learns how to operate
the input programs to output the correct answers.
In Fig. 8, i.e., systematic generalization case, the input program contains same material in
addition to union. Both sub-tasks appear in the training while the combination is novel. Fig. 8
shows that the model tried to operate the input program in the same manner as the CLEVR example
shown in Fig. 9 but failed to lead a correct answer. Specifically, at the same layer as the CLEVR
example, the model attends to the union and count, however the attended regions are not correct.
After that the model seems to operate same material that should be operated before union.
These results indicate that Transformer w/ PR struggles to operate the programs that contain the
novel combinations of the sub-tasks.

J   A BLATION S TUDIES FOR T RANSFORMERS
We test Transformers and Transformers w/ PR with the different number of encoder layers to in-
vestigate the effect of model size. We train all models in the same way we described in the main
paper. Table 12 shows that the performance of Transformers with fewer layers slightly drops except
Transformer with 6 layers. These results show that we cannot improve the systematic performance
by simply changing the number of layers.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       filter_shape(cube)          filter_size(large)                            filter_color(


                                                    filter_shape(cube)                            filter_shap


                                                      same_material                                 same_mate


                                                   filter_shape(sphere)                                  ‘no’
                                                                                                    Correct : ‘y


                             union


                             count


                              ‘3’

Figure 7: Visualization of TMN-Tree’s behavior with an example in CLOSURE. The
program is {scene,        filter shape(cube),           scene,     filter size(large),
filter shape(cube), unique, same material, filter shape(sphere), union,
count}. Attention maps of modules corresponding to the some sub-tasks are shown over the input
image.

                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Layers        Visual attentions                                  Linguistic attentions

                                      scene filter_ cube   scene filter_ large filter_ cube unique same_    filter_ sphere union count
                                            shape                size          shape               material shape
  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9


  10


  11


  12



  Prediction: 1 (correct: 3 - fail)


Figure 8: Visualization of behavior of Transformer w/ PR with an example in CLO-
SURE. The program is {scene, filter shape(cube), scene, filter size(large),
filter shape(cube), unique, same material, filter shape(sphere), union,
count}.


                                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Layers       Visual attentions                            Linguistic attentions

                                     scene filter_ metal filter_   cube   scene filter_ sphere   union   count
                                           material      shape                  shape
      1


      2


      3


      4


      5


      6


      7


      8


      9


      10


      11


      12



      Prediction: 4 (correct)


Figure 9: Visualization of behavior of Transformer w/ PR with an example in CLEVR.
The program is {scene, filter material(metal), filter shape(cube), scene,
filter shape(sphere), union, count}.


                                                        21
