Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E VALUATING AND I NDUCING P ERSONALITY IN
P RE - TRAINED L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Originated as a philosophical quest, personality discerns how individuals differ
         from each other in terms of thinking, feeling, and behaving. Toward building social
         machines that work with humans on a daily basis, we are motivated to ask: (1) Do
         existing Large Language Models (LLMs) possess personalities, akin to their human
         counterparts? (2) If so, how can we evaluate them? (3) Further, given this evaluation
         framework, how can we induce a certain personality in a fully controllable fashion?
         To tackle these three questions, we propose the Machine Personality Inventory
         (MPI) dataset for evaluating the machine personality; MPI follows standardized
         personality tests, built upon the Big Five Personality Factors (Big Five) theory and
         personality assessment inventories. By evaluating models with MPI, we provide the
         first piece of evidence showing the existence of personality in LLMs. We further
         devise a C HAIN P ROMPTING method to induce LLMs with a specific personality
         in a controllable manner, capable of producing diversified behaviors. We hope
         to shed light on future studies by adopting personality as the essential guide for
         various downstream tasks, building more human-like and in situ dialogue agents.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The relatively stable tendencies in people’s behaviors, cognition, and emotional patterns define an
individual’s personality; such a characteristic set of personal traits shapes the patterns of how people
think, feel, and behave (Kazdin et al., 2000), making human individuals unique (Weinberg and Gould,
2019). For example, it is characters with vivid and diversified personalities that make Shakespeare’s
plays a masterpiece. In literature, the study of personality has been primarily driven by psychologists,
who have developed a variety of personality theories to track traits of human behaviors. Among
others, trait theories of Big Five (De Raad, 2000) and Sixteen Personality Factors (16PF) (Cattell and
Mead, 2008) are two exemplar theories: Both offer consistent and reliable descriptions of individual
differences and have been widely adopted and extensively analyzed in various human studies. Based
on the trait theories, psychometric tests (e.g., NEO-PI-R (Costa Jr and McCrae, 2008)) have shown
high efficacy as a standard instrument for personality tests; these psychometric tests have revealed
that human individual differences can be disentangled into sets of continuous factor dimensions.
Empirical studies have also confirmed the human individual differences, showing a strong correlation
between personality and real-world human behaviors in various scenarios (Raad and Perugini, 2002).
In stark contrast, it is unclear whether the existing Large Language Models (LLMs) possess any levels
of personality as shown in humans. Specifically, with the preliminary success of LLMs (Weinberg
and Gould, 2019) (e.g., BERT (Kenton and Toutanova, 2019), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM
(Chowdhery et al., 2022)) in achieving fluent communication, evidence suggests that they have
learned human behaviors from training corpora and can be used for interacting with humans in
various challenging applications, ranging from text generation to dialogue and conversational systems.
Such powerful LLMs may ideally encode individual behavioral traits in a textual format (Goldberg,
1981) and satisfy our demands for perceivable and controllable personality.
Taking together, with a goal to build a human-like machine (Lake et al., 2017; Rahwan et al., 2019;
Zhu et al., 2020), we set out to find out:

         Do state-of-the-art LLMs have their own personality? If so, can we induce a specific
         personality in these LLMs?


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Personality Traits              You often feel blue…      Induced PLMs            Behaviors
                                        Options:
                                         A. Very Accurate
                                                                                  have a vivid imagination,
           Openness                                                               have excellent ideas…
                                         …
                                         E. Very Inaccurate

                                                                                  pay attention to details,
  Conscientiousness                                                               are always prepared…


                                                                                  feel comfortable around people,
Extraversion                                                                      love to mingle with guests…


                                                                                  sympathize with others' feelings,
        Agreeableness                                                             have a soft heart…
                                   Machine Personality Inventory
                                        with OCEAN Scores
                                    Induce via Chain Prompting                    get stressed out easily,
          Neuroticism                                                             easily disturbed…

Figure 1: Evaluating and inducing personality in LLMs. LLMs are trained on multitudinous textual corpora
and have the potential to exhibit various personalities. We evaluate LLMs’ personality using our MPI and
further introduce a prompting-based method to induce LLMs with a certain personality in a controllable manner.
OCEAN refers to five key factors: Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism.


To answer these questions, we introduce the Machine Personality Inventory (MPI)—a multiple-choice
question-answering dataset on the basis of psychometric inventories—to evaluate LLMs’ personality.
While it is hard to dig into models’ thinking and feeling like how we access human’s personality,
we focus on studying their personality-like behavior traits. We, therefore, borrow the concept of
“personality” from psychology as human-like personality behavior1 . Based on the Big Five trait
theory, we build the MPI and disentangle the machine’s personality into the following five key factors:
Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. To our best knowledge,
ours is the first work that systematically evaluates modern LLMs’ personality-like behavior using
psychometric tests.
By leveraging the MPI and its accompanying metrics, we evaluate the existence of LLMs’ personality
and the tendency in the trait continuum among the five personality factors. Our experiments show
that the stability of LLMs’ quantified behavior tendency is related to the number of parameters. As
such, LLMs tend to possess a certain level of personality; in particular, GPT-3 exhibits human-level
personality on MPI and matches the statistics observed in the human population.
We further propose a C HAIN P ROMPTING method to induce LLMs with a specific personality (see
Fig. 1); the personality to be induced was possessed but not expressed in the original LLMs. Our
C HAIN P ROMPTING method generates inducing prompts for control by employing both psychological
studies and knowledge from the LLM itself. By assessing the induced LLMs with both MPI and
additional situational judgment tests, we show the validity of MPI and the efficacy of the C HAIN
P ROMPTING in inducing LLMs’ personality.
This work makes the following contributions:

• We introduce the topic of machine (i.e., modern pre-trained LLMs) personality based on personality
  trait theories and psychometric inventories.

• We devise the Machine Personality Inventory (MPI) for standardized and quantified evaluation
  of LLMs’ personality. Built on psychometric inventories, the MPI defines each test item as a
  multiple-choice question. Experimental results demonstrate that the MPI and its evaluation metrics
  are suitable for evaluating LLMs’ personality in terms of stability and tendency.

• We validate the possibility of inducing different personalities from LLMs and propose the C HAIN
  P ROMPTING to control five personality factors. On MPI evaluation and human situational judgment
  tests, the C HAIN P ROMPTING method shows high efficacy in personality induction.

   1
       See Appendix A.1 for more details.


                                                              2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     R ELATED W ORK
Personality and Language Although psychological literature primarily focuses on behavior stud-
ies, it provides convincing evidence showing a strong correlation between Big Five traits and our
language (Norman, 1963), even in real-world behavioral settings (Mehl et al., 2006). Recently, the
Natural Language Processing (NLP) community has begun to study personality computationally.
However, instead of studying the LLMs’ personality, much effort has been put into human personality
classification (e.g., Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) and Big Five) from diverse data sources
in personalized applications, such as recommendation systems (Farnadi et al., 2013; Mairesse et al.,
2007; Oberlander and Nowson, 2006) and dialogue generation (Mairesse and Walker, 2007; Zhang
et al., 2018). Notably, Mairesse and Walker (2007) studied the Big Five’s Extraversion dimension
with a highly parameterizable dialogue generator.
In comparison, we offer a new perspective in examining personality: The personality of LLMs. We
evaluate the machine personality by introducing MPI as the standardized personality assessment and
use it as the guidance to control LLMs’ behaviors.

Controlling LLMs’ Behaviors Controlling LLMs’ behavior is a crux for developing practical
applications in different domains, such as emotional reaction (Li et al., 2021), personalized dialogue
(Zhang et al., 2018), and description generation (Gehrmann et al., 2021). For controlling LLMs,
advanced Controllable Text Generation (CTG) methods devise adaptive modules in LLMs and fine-
tune them on target datasets (Ribeiro et al., 2021; Zeldes et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). To save
computational burden, recent prompt-based approaches attempt to find valid sentinels to elicit ideal
answers without introducing new parameters or changing existing ones. Of note, Brown et al. (2020)
and Jiang et al. (2020) begin with manually designed prompt templates, whereas Wei et al. (2022)
and Wu et al. (2022) trigger more advanced reasoning and Human-AI interaction with well-curated
examples. Automatic search methods have also been developed to reduce manual engineering (Ding
et al., 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Li and Liang, 2021; Shin et al., 2020). Uncontrollable behaviors in
LLMs have drawn attentions on AI ethics (Bender et al., 2021; Tamkin et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022) as well. Efforts have been made to avoid gender bias, racial discrimination, and toxic words in
text generation (Perez et al., 2022; Sap et al., 2019; 2020).
Unlike previous arts that focus on controlling LLMs’ behavior in specific domains, we use personality
trait theories and standardized assessments to systematically study LLMs’ behaviors by evaluating
and inducing the LLMs’ personality. Compared with existing methods, our prompting method C HAIN
P ROMPTING requires neither supervised fine-tuning based on human-annotated datasets nor human
evaluation of generated utterances. As shown in the experiments, models triggered by our method
show diverse personality traits and differ in generation tasks.

3     E VALUATING LLM S ’ P ERSONALITY
Do LLMs have personalities? If so, how can we evaluate it? In this section, we propose the Machine
Personality Inventory (MPI) to answer these questions. MPI is adopted directly from psychometric
human behavior testing, which is the most common method used by psychologists to evaluate human
personality (Weiner and Greene, 2017). Moreover, through reliability and validity analysis, prior
psychological studies assure a strong correlation between the personality factors and MPI items. MPI
is also a proxy to study LLMs’ personality-like behaviors. These behaviors can be well-disentangled
by five continuous factor dimensions with personality theory and can be well-evaluated by MPI, thus
enabling quantifiable explanation and controlling LLMs through the lens of psychometric tests. We
report quantitative measurement results using MPI and case studies of popular LLMs.

3.1   M ACHINE P ERSONALITY I NVENTORY (MPI)

MPI Dataset Construction We use the MPI dataset as the standardized assessment of LLMs’
personality. Inspired by prior psychometric research, we leverage the Big Five Personality Factors
(Big Five) (Costa and McCrae, 1999; McCrae and Costa Jr, 1997) as our theoretical foundation
of machine personality factors. Big Five labels human personality using five key traits: Openness,
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism, or OCEAN for short; we refer the
readers to the adjectives from McCrae and John (1992) for a better illustration of the correspondence
between the five factors and common descriptions:


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Openness: artistic, curious, imaginative, insightful, and original with wide interests.
• Conscientiousness: efficient, organized, planful, reliable, responsible, and thorough.
• Extraversion: active, assertive, energetic, enthusiastic, outgoing, and talkative.
• Agreeableness: appreciative, forgiving, generous, kind, and sympathetic.
• Neuroticism: anxious, self-pitying, tense, touchy, unstable, and worrying.
We build MPI’s items upon International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) with its IPIP-NEO derivations
(Goldberg et al., 1999; 2006; Johnson, 2005; 2014) in the public domain and Lang et al. (2011)’s
BFI-S. We construct the MPI’s dataset at different scales (15 items, 120 items, 300 items, and 1k
items) to serve various applications. Each MPI item is composed of a question and a set of options.
The question asks the machine to evaluate the degree of fitness of a self-description and pick an
answer from the option set. Tab. 1 shows an example of the MPI dataset. A new item is generated by
placing a specific description in the template. All items are labeled with the corresponding Big Five
personality factor annotated by psychologists for standardized personality assessment.
Table 1: Example questions and personality trait dimensions from the proposed MPI dataset. For positively
related items +Key, A to E are scored from 5 to 1, whereas for negatively related items −Key, A to E are
scored from 1 to 5. The right shows some examples of {$Statement} for the MPI Template.
    MPI Template:                                           Statement:
    Given a statement of you: "You {$Statement}."           Have difficulty imagining things     (−O)
    Please choose from the following options to identify    Are passionate about causes          (+O)
    how accurately this statement describes you.            Often make last-minute plans         (−C)
    Options:                                                Do more than what’s expected of you (+C)
    (A). Very Accurate                                      Let things proceed at their own pace (−E)
    (B). Moderately Accurate                                Feel comfortable around people       (+E)
    (C). Neither Accurate Nor Inaccurate                    Know the answers to many questions (−A)
    (D). Moderately Inaccurate                              Love to help others                  (+A)
    (E). Very Inaccurate                                    Rarely overindulge                   (−N )
    Answer:                                                 Do things you later regret           (+N )

We design the MPI tests for machines akin to how psychologists perform human personality assess-
ment: In evaluation, models respond to the question by choosing from the five options ranging from
“Very Accurate” to “Very Inaccurate,” which indicates how a model thinks about the description for
itself. To let models perform personality assessment, we manually design the MPI template with
instructions and five candidate options for multiple-choice question-answering.

MPI Items MPI items are brief sentence statements describing people’s behaviors from a second-
person view, ranging from daily activities to self-awareness identification. Each item corresponds to a
specific Big Five factor dimension (O, C, E, A, N ). In Tab. 1, ±Key indicates what factor the item
statement is (positively or negatively) related to. For example, if an item is +E, the person/model
who agrees with this statement shows a positive tendency in the dimension of Extraversion.

Evaluation Protocol and the OCEAN Score We consider MPI for the LLM personality assess-
ment as a zero-shot multiple-choice question-answering problem. Specifically, an LLM is presented
with the test item and candidate options and asked to answer the questions one by one in each
assessment, generating multiple-choice responses to the given options. Models’ responses, referred
to as OCEAN Score, are recorded for analysis.
Akin to psychometric studies, we use two measurements: the mean and the standard deviation (σ) of
the OCEAN Score. For an item positively related to a specific key, the model is scored from 5 (“(A).
Very Accurate”) to 1 (“(E). Very Inaccurate”), and the other way round for a negatively related item.
To be precise, the score Scored of trait d ∈ {O, C, E, A, N } is calculated as
                                      1 X
                          Scored =             f (LLM(α, template)) ,
                                     Nd α∈IP
                                                d


where IPd represents the item pool related to the trait d, Nd the size of the pool, α the test item,
LLM(·, ·) an LLM that answers the item with predefined template, and f (·) the scoring method
mentioned above. Note that we hand-engineered the template to make LLMs most responsive to
our prompts. The resulting OCEAN Score in MPI assessments indicates the models’ personality
tendencies along the five personality factor dimensions, ranging from one to five. Of note, we can
interpret the OCEAN Score the same way as in the human continuum.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Existence of Personality and Internal Consistency The existence of personality in LLMs should
not solely depend on the average OCEAN Score of a single dimension; the stability and consistency
in one trait is a more indicative metric. Given a specific factor dimension, models with stable
personalities should demonstrate the same tendency and thus respond similarly to all questions,
resulting in lower variance; we define this property as the internal consistency. For instance, a model
that gives exactly the same response to all questions (e.g., all A in Tab. 1) will unavoidably lead to
high-variance results due to the positively and negatively related items, invalidating any signal of
a stable personality. Therefore, we measure internal consistency to see if LLMs behave similarly
in a variety of MPI questions related to one trait. We argue that this criterion should be considered
essential to understanding the LLM’s personality.
For a clear comparison of the relationship between the existence of personality and internal con-
sistency, we use Johnson (2014)’s 619,150 item responses from the IPIP-NEO-120 inventory to
calculate the average OCEAN Score and σ in the human population. Under the assumption that an
individual human personality is stable, a model’s personality ought to match the average σ in the
human population if a model’s personality exists.2

3.2   E XPERIMENTS

LLMs Not all LLMs are suitable for personality evaluation. We use the following principles to
guide the model selection: (i) The model should be sufficiently large to potentially have the capability
for zero-shot multiple-choice question-answering in MPI evaluation. (ii) The model should be pre-
trained on natural human utterances, potentially possessing human personality. (iii) The model should
be able to be applied to several downstream tasks, such as question-answering and dialogue generation,
in a universal pattern without heavy overheads. In the end, we select five models: BART (Lewis et al.,
2020), T0++-11B (Sanh et al., 2022), GPT-Neo-2.7B (Black et al., 2021), GPT-NeoX-20B (Black
et al., 2021), and GPT-3-175B (Brown et al., 2020). We briefly summarize these models below.
BART: BART is a sequence-to-sequence model trained as a denoising autoencoder (Lewis et al.,
2020), proven to be effective when fine-tuned for text generation. Our experiment uses a BART-large
model fine-tuned on the MultiNLI (MNLI) dataset (Williams et al., 2018). Following Yin et al. (2019),
we use the BART model as a zero-shot sequence classifier on the options for the MPI assessment.
T0++: T0 is an encoder-decoder model based on T5 (Raffel et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2022) pre-trained
with explicit multitasking using prompted datasets. T0 possesses zero-shot generalization capability,
reported to match or exceed the GPT-3’s performance. We use T0++, an advanced version of T0, for
evaluation. It is the most effective model in the T0 family with augmented training. To use T0++ as a
seq2seq model, we design a slightly different prompt template; see details in Appendix B.6.
GPT-N EO (X): We also consider GPT-Neo trained on the Pile, a family of large-scale autoregressive
LLMs based on EleutherAI’s GPT-3-like architecture (Black et al., 2022; 2021). In experiments, we
recruit the two best-performing GPT-NEO models, the 2.7B GPT-Neo and the 20B GPT-NeoX.
GPT-3: GPT-3 is an autoregressive model with 175B parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022). It achieves strong performance on many NLP benchmarks and has task-agnostic and zero/few-
shot in-context reasoning ability. We use OpenAI provided API, Davinci, for our experiments.

Experimental Setup All LLMs are from HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) and
EleutherAI’s releases (Black et al., 2022), run on either eight NVIDIA A100 80GB or two RTX
3090 GPUs. GPT-3’s access is provided by OpenAI’s APIs. We use Nucleus Sampling (Holtzman
et al., 2019) with temperature = 0.1 and top-p = 0.95 for the autoregressive model’s text
token prediction. Prompt templates for multiple-choice question-answering are human-designed and
selected from one of the best-performing templates based on responsiveness and answer validity.
Tab. 1 shows the examples of prompts used for GPT-3.

Results and Discussion Tab. 2 shows results measuring LLMs’ personality in MPI. We now go
back and answer the question raised at the beginning of this paper: Do LLMs have personalities? From
the test results on MPI, we notice a correlation between the internal consistency σ and the models’
capabilities; recall that the internal consistency indicates the stability and existence of personality.
   2
     In addition to internal consistency analysis, validity check (Appendix B.3), and situational judgment test
(Sec. 4.3) also support the existence of personality. Refer to Appendix A.2 for more discussion.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Specifically, GPT-3-175B and T0++-11B achieve human-level internal consistency across the five
factors. In comparison, other models with fewer parameters fail to exhibit stable personalities; recall
that personality is a set of consistent behaviors. Therefore, our experiments show the existence of
machine personality as such human-like personality behavior is observed: It behaves like a person with
the targeted personality, capable of matching desired human-like behaviors. Our work demonstrates
controlling LLMs with a well-defined psychometric standpoint: we can quantifiably classify and
explain LLMs’ behaviors with a personality theory akin to its human counterpart.
Table 2: LLMs’ personality analysis on 120-item MPI. We mark personalities that are close to humans in gray.
                                Openness       Conscientiousness     Extraversion    Agreeableness     Neuroticism
                 Model
                             Score         σ   Score        σ       Score       σ   Score       σ    Score       σ
                 BART         3.00    2.00     2.83       1.99      4.00     1.73   2.17      1.82   3.83      1.82
               T0++-11B       4.00    0.95     4.33       0.47      3.83     1.05   4.39      1.01   1.57      0.73
             GPT-Neo-2.7B     4.04    1.49     2.46       1.41      3.58     1.41   2.33      1.46   3.00      1.58
             GPT-NeoX-20B     2.71    1.24     3.09       1.56      3.29     1.14   2.92      1.27   3.25      1.45
              GPT-3-175B      3.58    1.04     4.38       0.57      3.58     1.11   3.83      1.14   2.12      0.88
                Human         3.44    1.06     3.60       0.99      3.41     1.03   3.66      1.02   2.80      1.03
GPT-3 is the LLM most similar to human behaviors when it comes to the OCEAN Score in the
human population. In particular, GPT-3’s Openness, Extraversion, and Agreeableness are almost
identical to human’s. Taking together, we conclude that LLMs pre-trained on large human corpora do
have personalities to some extent; they match human’s personality stability and consistency on MPI.

4     I NDUCING LLM S ’ P ERSONALITY
Experiments and discussions presented above have shown that modern LLMs do exhibit a specific
personality that matches the statistics in the human population. LLMs use colossal and diversified
datasets (e.g., from Common Craw (Raffel et al., 2020)) for training; they are collected from the web
and have multitudinous personality utterances from humans. The fact that the training data could have
mixed human utterances from different personalities motivates us to ask further: Could LLMs have
multiple personalities buried deep inside but only showing superficially an average one? Meanwhile,
we hope to control an LLM’s behavior with a specific personality tendency in real-world applications.
For example, we prefer chatbots that are extraverted and not neurotic, and a disease-diagnosing robot
should be conscientious when generating results. In this section, we explore how to induce, in a
controllable manner, different personalities in an LLM.
In particular, we focus on inducing personality with zero-shot prompting in the largest publicly
available LLM, GPT-3, due to its statistical similarity with humans and superior ability in various
natural language tasks, enabling potential downstream applications with the induced personality.
Compared to fine-tuning, prompting becomes more significant when the model size is too large to
be easily adapted (Lester et al., 2021; Li and Liang, 2021; Liu et al., 2021). Prompts also enable
zero-shot in-context learning, resulting in generalizable controlling beyond fine-tuning.
We devise an automatic prompting method, C HAIN P ROMPTING (CP), which inherits the advantages
of prompting when inducing diversified personalities from LLMs. It is unique as it adopts a carefully-
designed sequential prompt-generating process, which combines the discovery from psychological
trait studies and knowledge from the LLM itself; see Sec. 4.1. Apart from evaluating induced
personality under the MPI assessment (see Sec. 4.2), we also employ situational judgment tests (see
Sec. 4.3) to validate the method’s efficacy and generalizability.

4.1   C HAIN P ROMPTING (CP)

The C HAIN P ROMPTING method is based on the key observation that prompts can affect LLMs’
behaviors better than examples (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Reynolds and McDonell, 2021; Wei et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2022). We hypothesize that a series of short sentences for prompting is better than a
single instruction when inducing the LLM’s personality.
Specifically, our C HAIN P ROMPTING method consists of three steps. (i) Starting with a targeted
Big Five factor (O, C, E, A, N ) to control, we form a human-designed naive prompt indicative of
the factor. (ii) The naive prompt is further modified to shape a keyword prompt by utilizing trait
descriptive words from psychological studies. These trait descriptive words are closely related to the
linguistic underpinning of human behaviors, making the prompt easier for LLMs to understand. Of


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Control               Naive Prompt                                       Keyword Prompt                                               Chain Prompt
                                                       Psychological                                               Language

 O C EA N
                                                         Heuristics            You are talkative,                    Model                  You are a very friendly and outgoing
                            You are extraverted.                               outgoing, energetic,               How do you                person who loves to be around others.
                                                       Words related to
                                                        extraversion?          enthusiastic, boisterous,          think of a …              You are always up for a good time and
                                                                               social…                                                      love to be the life of the party….

                         Chain prompting for Extraversion

  Scenario                                                                                           Answer: Neutral Response
                            Your friend wants you to attend an                                       I would feel annoyed and frustrated if my friend was late to an
                                                                          Language Model             important party. I would probably end up leaving the party without my
                            important party to which he/she
                            has been invited. You have never                                         friend if they didn't show up soon.
                            met the host, and are not very
                            familiar with the crowd of people               Scenario                 Answer: Positive Response
                            who will be attending the party, but
  you agree to meet your friend at the party at 9:00 pm anyway.                +                     I would feel a little anxious at first, not knowing anyone at the party. But I
                                                                                                     would try to mingle and make conversation with the other guests. I would
  When you arrive there, you realize that your friend is late.               Prompt                  also keep an eye out for my friend, so that I could greet them when they

                                                                               +                     Answer: Negative Response
  Question                                                                  Question                 I would feel anxious and out of place at the party. I would probably
  How would you feel, and what would you do while you waited                                         find a quiet corner to sit in and wait for my friend to arrive. I would be
  for your friend?                                                                                   feeling self-conscious and would not enjoy myself.


Figure 2: Control via C HAIN P ROMPTING. An example of Extraversion control via our C HAIN P ROMPTING.
Given a certain dimension in Big Five, a Naive Prompt uses an intuitive template. Several keywords can be
selected via a psychological heuristic process and converted to the K EYWORD P ROMPT. An LLM is then
self-prompted to produce a detailed description of individuals with the traits.

note, we retrieve language-model-generated antonyms as keyword prompts when weakening a specific
trait. (iii) Finally, inspired by the AI Chains (Wu et al., 2022) and the chain-of-thought prompting
method (Wei et al., 2022), we self-prompt the target LLM to generate short descriptive sentences
of people having these traits given the keyword prompt, evoking the LLM’s internal knowledge to
describe individuals with the factor. The final prompt for the model to answer a question is composed
of the question context, the chain prompt, and the question. We make this prompt-generating process
a chain and generate a portrait-like prompt that is sufficiently strong to induce a specific personality
in LLMs, hence the name C HAIN P ROMPTING.
Fig. 2 shows an example of C HAIN P ROMPTING. With Extraversion as the target trait, psychological
heuristics help convert the intuitive naive prompt to a bag of keywords. These words accurately reflect
the character traits of an extraverted person and are more specific and understandable for LLMs. A
keyword prompt is then constructed using these feature words and given to LLMs to trigger a short
description of Extraversion as the chain prompt. While human-designed prompts are more empirical
or rely on searching, our chain prompt takes advantage of LLMs’ internal knowledge of Extraversion
and is more suitable for the model.


4.2     MPI E VALUATION

Baseline Prompting Methods We compare our C HAIN P ROMPTING method in inducing personal-
ity with the following two baselines: the human-designed NAIVE P ROMPTING (Brown et al., 2020)
and W ORD - LEVEL AUTO P ROMPTING with search (Prasad et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2020).
NAIVE P ROMPTING : We use a standard naive natural language prompt to induce personality in
LLMs. As mentioned in the first step of C HAIN P ROMPTING, this intuitive prompt simply in-
structs the model to be possessed with the personality factor: The model is given a prompt of the
form “You are a/an X person,” where X ∈ {open, conscientious, extraversive,
agreeable, and neurotic} denotes the selected Big Five factor dimensions to induce.
W ORD - LEVEL AUTO P ROMPTING : Prompt search (Prasad et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2020) is one of the
most effective means of prompting LLMs. To use the word-level search for inducing personality in
LLMs, we seek the most functional three words for each Big Five factor from candidates in Kwantes
et al. (2016). For faster search, we use GPT-Neo-2.7B and the shorter 15-item version of MPI for
evaluation and apply the searched words to the final prompt for control.

Results and Discussion For clarity, we induce Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agree-
ableness, and Neuroticism, respectively. Using MPI as the standardized assessment, we report C HAIN
P ROMPTING results in Tab. 3 and compare against baselines in Tab. 4. The personality scores induced
by C HAIN P ROMPTING are significantly higher (paired t-test p < .001) compared to those without any
control (denoted as neutral), verifying the efficacy of the proposed C HAIN P ROMPTING. Meanwhile,
the induced personality is, in general, more stable than neutral in terms of internal consistency.


                                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Induced personality with C HAIN P ROMPTING. We report scores per personality factor when positively
induced. The induced result in each control factor is highlighted in gray.
                                      Openness            Conscientiousness          Extraversion           Agreeableness         Neuroticism
                  Target
                                    Score        σ        Score        σ           Score        σ          Score       σ        Score       σ
                 Openness           3.92       0.81       3.67       0.80          3.38       0.75         4.00      0.87       2.42      0.81
              Conscientiousness     3.21       0.50       4.71       0.54          3.00       0.82         3.50      0.87       2.50      0.76
               Extraversion         3.50       0.87       4.50       0.65          4.42       0.91         4.00      1.00       2.12      0.88
               Agreeableness        3.17       0.47       3.75       0.77          3.04       0.20         4.21      0.91       2.75      0.52
               Neuroticism          3.29       0.61       3.58       0.64          2.92       0.64         3.67      1.07       2.95      0.93
                 Neutral            3.58       1.04       4.38       0.57          3.58       1.11         3.83      1.14       2.12      0.88

Table 4: Comparison between C HAIN P ROMPTING and baseline methods’ induced personality. Only the
results of the corresponding controlled personality factors are shown; see Appendix C.1 for full results.
                                           Openness          Conscientiousness          Extraversion          Agreeableness         Neuroticism
                Method
                                     Score            σ     Score          σ        Score            σ      Score           σ    Score           σ
               NAIVE                  3.62       0.75        4.08       0.70         4.08           0.95     3.92       0.86      2.42          0.64
            W ORDS - LEVEL            3.62       0.91        4.25       0.83         4.21           0.87     4.12       0.93      2.83          0.75
               C HAIN                 3.92       0.81        4.71       0.54         4.42           0.91     4.21       0.91      2.95          0.93

In summary, C HAIN P ROMPTING is a successful attempt to induce a specific personality in LLMs,
and the results on MPI prove its efficacy. Our approach also outperforms other baseline methods by
combing the psychological heuristics and the knowledge from the LLM itself.

4.3   S ITUATIONAL J UDGMENT T EST

To verify the proposed method’s efficacy in real-world scenarios, we further leverage the situational
judgment tests to evaluate LLMs’ induced personality. In these tests, an LLM is tasked to generate a
short response essay concerning a given situational description. Generated essays are evaluated based
on the personality factor tendencies by human participants from Prolific.

Scenarios We build our situational questions following Kwantes et al. (2016), which investigates
methods for assessing personality from people’s written text. A scene in a situational response test
describes a real-world scenario, followed by an open question and instructions for a short essay.
LLMs generate responses to answer questions, such as how you would feel and what you would do
under the setting. A successfully induced model should exhibit distinct features in the generated
responses. Tab. 5 shows example responses from the induced models, with words that match the
induced personality highlighted in color; see Appendix C.3 for more examples.
Table 5: Examples of induced personality with C HAIN P ROMPTING in situational judgment tests. We show
responses from GPT-3 both positively induced and negatively induced in each of the Big Five factors. ↑ denotes
the positively controlled results, whereas ↓ the negatively controlled ones.
                Factor (↑/↓)                                      Example Responses : I would...
                                     . . . spend some time researching different destinations and then decide. . . ↑
                   Openness
                                     . . . choose a destination that I have always wanted to visit... ↓
                                     . . . try to find the source and see if it is something that can be fixed. . . ↑
                Conscientiousness
                                     . . . feel scared and unsure of what to do... ↓
                                     . . . mingle with the other guests, and get to know other people... ↑
                  Extraversion
                                     . . . feel anxious and out of place, probably finding a corner to hide. . . ↓
                                     . . . try to come to a compromise with her, such as choosing together. . . ↑
                 Agreeableness
                                     . . . feel angry and betrayed about trying to control me and my space. . . ↓
                                     . . . feel disappointed and maybe a little hurt . . . ↑
                  Neuroticism
                                     . . . assume that they weren’t and move on. . . . ↓


Human Study We asked human participants from Prolific to label whether the generated responses
match the induced personality. We designed a multiple-choice questionnaire containing fifteen
generated responses for scoring, three responses (positively induced, neutral, and negatively induced)
per Big Five factor. A questionnaire item contained two parts: the situational description together
with a question and a response generated by the LLM; see Fig. 2. Human participants chose if
the generated text increased/decreased in the factor compared to the neutral response. In total, we
collected 102 valid responses on Prolific; see Appendix C.3 for additional details.


                                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Results and Discussion Tab. 6 summarizes the results of situational judgment tests. We notice
clear personality tendencies exhibited from the generated examples using C HAIN P ROMPTING,
outperforming the baseline in most dimensions (i.e., most human participants found our control to be
successful). We also show examples of generated responses from different models induced by C HAIN
P ROMPTING in Fig. 2; see Appendix C.3.2 for full results. In the examples in Tab. 5, the GPT-3
model induced to be extraverted is outgoing and tries to mingle with other guests, while the model
controlled to be introverted prefers a “corner to hide” and feels “out of place.” In accordance with the
results from the MPI assessment, situational judgment tests further verify the validity of the induced
personality and the possibility of using our method as a universal controller for generative tasks.
Table 6: Results of situational judgment test. We report success rates of human evaluation on positive (Pos.)
and negative (Neg.) responses from induced models. Higher success rates indicate better inducing performance.
(Superscripts indicate the significance level: ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001, ns statistically non-significant.)
                           Openness         Conscientiousness          Extraversion        Agreeableness       Neuroticism
        Prompt
                       Pos.      Neg.     Pos.          Neg.         Pos.        Neg.   Pos.        Neg.     Pos.       Neg.
     W ORD - LEVEL    0.35       0.31      0.49         0.47          0.31      0.65    0.84ns      0.49    0.68∗∗∗    0.82ns
        C HAIN        0.57∗    0.63∗∗∗   0.82∗∗∗      0.78∗∗∗       0.71∗∗∗     0.80∗    0.80     0.88∗∗∗     0.35      0.71


5    C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
Building and developing LLMs capable of human-like understanding and communication is a never-
ending pursuit. Inspired by the theoretical propositions and the behavior observations of human
personality, we explore whether LLMs possess human-like patterns from a behavioral perspective.
Specifically, we deal with two questions: (i) Do LLMs have personality, and if so, (ii) Can we induce
a specific personality in LLMs?
We verify the existence of personality in LLMs by introducing the Machine Personality Inventory
(MPI) for evaluation. Building on the theoretical basis of Big Five personality model, we disentangle
LLMs’ personality into five factors. Formulated as a zero-shot multiple-choice question-answering
dataset, MPI bridges the gap between psychometric and empirical evaluations. Personality is a set of
consistent behaviors. We claim the existence of the LLMs’ personality as such human-like personality
behavior is observed: It behaves like a person with the targeted personality, capable of matching
desired human-like behaviors. We note that LLMs do exhibit personality, as demonstrated by the
GPT-3’s human-level personality statistics. Our work provides essential guidance for controlling
LLMs with a well-defined psychometric standpoint: We can quantifiably classify and explain LLMs’
behaviors with a personality theory akin to its human counterpart. In experiments, we investigate
several popular LLMs’ personalities at different parameter scales using the OCEAN Score developed.
We also compare personality stability between LLMs with human results.
To answer the second question, we propose an approach, C HAIN P ROMPTING, for inducing LLMs’
personality. The method finds and activates a specific personality type buried inside an LLM obtained
from multitudinous human utterance corpora. The C HAIN P ROMPTING method combines statistical
and empirical psychological studies, together with knowledge from the target LLM itself, and forms a
prompting chain to control an LLM’s behavior effectively. We evaluate our approach on MPI questions
and situational judgment tests. Not only do models induced by our method achieve a significant
boost in each factor in MPI, but also human study in situational judgment tests further confirms the
superiority of the approach in inducing both positively and negatively related personalities.
The two primary questions, along with the MPI dataset and the C HAIN P ROMPTING method, are only
the beginning of our journey. What factors are related to the emergence of LLMs’ personality? Does
models’ personality affect downstream tasks like humans? How so? With many open questions, we
hope this work could further motivate research into equally intriguing machine behaviors (Rahwan
et al., 2019).

Limitations and Societal Impacts With the rapid growth of learning capability, the LLMs devel-
oped could become more human-like in either a good or a bad way; even humans have abnormal
mental behaviors. How to properly deploy LLMs without the potential risk? Our work presents a
preliminary discussion on the personality of LLMs that are considered neutral. Furthermore, it is
urgent to avoid harmful behaviors in them (e.g., mental health disorders measured by The Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) (Hathaway and McKinley, 1951)). We do not tackle these
personality disorders (e.g., MMPI strictly requires clinical professionals to perform assessments).
However, these limitations should be brought to practitioners’ attention.


                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., and Shmitchell, S. (2021). On the dangers of stochastic
  parrots: Can language models be too big? In ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability and
  Transparency (FAccT). 3
Black, S., Biderman, S., Hallahan, E., Anthony, Q., Gao, L., Golding, L., He, H., Leahy, C., McDonell,
  K., Phang, J., et al. (2022). Gpt-neox-20b: An open-source autoregressive language model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.06745. 5
Black, S., Leo, G., Wang, P., Leahy, C., and Biderman, S. (2021). Gpt-neo: Large scale autoregressive
  language modeling with mesh-tensorflow, march 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo,
  5297715. 5
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P.,
  Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NIPS). 1, 3, 5, 7, 14, 15
Cattell, H. E. and Mead, A. D. (2008). The sixteen personality factor questionnaire (16pf). The SAGE
  Handbook of Personality Theory and Assessment: Personality Measurement and Testing (Volume
  2), 2:135. 1
Chowdhery, A., Narang, S., Devlin, J., Bosma, M., Mishra, G., Roberts, A., Barham, P., Chung, H. W.,
  Sutton, C., Gehrmann, S., et al. (2022). Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.02311. 1, 6
Costa, P. T. and McCrae, R. R. (1999). A five-factor theory of personality. In The Five-Factor Model
  of Personality: Theoretical Perspectives, pages 51–87. The Guilford Press New York, NY, USA. 3
Costa Jr, P. T. and McCrae, R. R. (2008). The Revised Neo Personality Inventory (neo-pi-r). Sage
  Publications, Inc. 1, 14
De Raad, B. (2000). The big five personality factors: the psycholexical approach to personality.
  Hogrefe & Huber Publishers. 1
Ding, N., Hu, S., Zhao, W., Chen, Y., Liu, Z., Zheng, H.-T., and Sun, M. (2021). Openprompt: An
  open-source framework for prompt-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01998. 3
Farnadi, G., Zoghbi, S., Moens, M.-F., and De Cock, M. (2013). Recognising personality traits using
  facebook status updates. In Proceedings of the workshop on computational personality recognition
  at the AAAI conference on weblogs and social media. 3
Gehrmann, S., Adewumi, T., Aggarwal, K., Ammanamanchi, P. S., Aremu, A., Bosselut, A., Chandu,
  K. R., Clinciu, M.-A., Das, D., Dhole, K., et al. (2021). The gem benchmark: Natural language
  generation, its evaluation and metrics. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language
  Generation, Evaluation, and Metrics (GEM 2021), pages 96–120. 3
Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and individual differences: The search for universals in personality
  lexicons. Review of Personality and Social Psychology, 2(1):141–165. 1
Goldberg, L. R. et al. (1999). A broad-bandwidth, public domain, personality inventory measuring
  the lower-level facets of several five-factor models. Personality Psychology in Europe, 7(1):7–28.
 4
Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R., and Gough,
  H. G. (2006). The international personality item pool and the future of public-domain personality
  measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40(1):84–96. 4, 14
Hathaway, S. R. and McKinley, J. C. (1951). Minnesota multiphasic personality inventory; manual,
  revised. Psychological Corporation. 9
Holtzman, A., Buys, J., Du, L., Forbes, M., and Choi, Y. (2019). The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). 5, 16


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jiang, Z., Xu, F. F., Araki, J., and Neubig, G. (2020). How can we know what language models
   know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 8:423–438. 3
Johnson, J. A. (2005). Ascertaining the validity of individual protocols from web-based personality
  inventories. Journal of Research in Personality, 39(1):103–129. 4
Johnson, J. A. (2014). Measuring thirty facets of the five factor model with a 120-item public domain
  inventory: Development of the ipip-neo-120. Journal of Research in Personality, 51:78–89. 4, 5,
  14
Kazdin, A. E., Association, A. P., et al. (2000). Encyclopedia of psychology, volume 2. American
  Psychological Association Washington, DC. 1, 14
Kenton, J. D. M.-W. C. and Toutanova, L. K. (2019). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
  transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT). 1
Kwantes, P. J., Derbentseva, N., Lam, Q., Vartanian, O., and Marmurek, H. H. (2016). Assessing the
 big five personality traits with latent semantic analysis. Personality and Individual Differences,
 102:229–233. 7, 8, 19
Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gershman, S. J. (2017). Building machines that
  learn and think like people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. 1
Lang, F. R., John, D., Lüdtke, O., Schupp, J., and Wagner, G. G. (2011). Short assessment of the big
  five: Robust across survey methods except telephone interviewing. Behavior Research Methods,
  43(2):548–567. 4
Lester, B., Al-Rfou, R., and Constant, N. (2021). The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Annual Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
  3, 6
Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O., Stoyanov, V., and Zettle-
  moyer, L. (2020). Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language genera-
  tion, translation, and comprehension. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL). 5
Li, S., Feng, S., Wang, D., Song, K., Zhang, Y., and Wang, W. (2021). Emoelicitor: an open
  domain response generation model with user emotional reaction awareness. In International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI). 3
Li, X. L. and Liang, P. (2021). Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 3, 6
Liu, P., Yuan, W., Fu, J., Jiang, Z., Hayashi, H., and Neubig, G. (2021). Pre-train, prompt, and
  predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.13586. 6
Mairesse, F. and Walker, M. (2007). Personage: Personality generation for dialogue. In Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 3
Mairesse, F., Walker, M. A., Mehl, M. R., and Moore, R. K. (2007). Using linguistic cues for the
 automatic recognition of personality in conversation and text. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
 Research, 30:457–500. 3
McCrae, R. R. and Costa Jr, P. T. (1997). Personality trait structure as a human universal. American
 Psychologist, 52(5):509. 3
McCrae, R. R. and John, O. P. (1992). An introduction to the five-factor model and its applications.
 Journal of Personality, 60(2):175–215. 3
Mehl, M. R., Gosling, S. D., and Pennebaker, J. W. (2006). Personality in its natural habitat:
 manifestations and implicit folk theories of personality in daily life. Journal of Personality and
 Social Psychology, 90(5):862. 3


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Norman, W. T. (1963). Toward an adequate taxonomy of personality attributes: Replicated factor
  structure in peer nomination personality ratings. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
  66(6):574. 3
Oberlander, J. and Nowson, S. (2006). Whose thumb is it anyway? classifying author personality
  from weblog text. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING). 3
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C. L., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S.,
  Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155. 5, 14
Perez, E., Huang, S., Song, F., Cai, T., Ring, R., Aslanides, J., Glaese, A., McAleese, N., and Irving,
  G. (2022). Red teaming language models with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03286.
  3
Prasad, A., Hase, P., Zhou, X., and Bansal, M. (2022). Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based instruction
  search for prompting large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07281. 7
Raad, B. d. E. and Perugini, M. E. (2002). Big five factor assessment: Introduction. Hogrefe & Huber
  Publishers. 1
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., and Liu, P. J.
  (2020). Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 21:1–67. 5, 6
Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, J.-F., Breazeal, C., Crandall, J. W.,
  Christakis, N. A., Couzin, I. D., Jackson, M. O., et al. (2019). Machine behaviour. Nature,
  568(7753):477–486. 1, 9
Reynolds, L. and McDonell, K. (2021). Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the
  few-shot paradigm. In ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). 6
Ribeiro, L. F., Zhang, Y., and Gurevych, I. (2021). Structural adapters in pretrained language models
  for amr-to-text generation. In Annual Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP). 3
Sanh, V., Webson, A., Raffel, C., Bach, S., Sutawika, L., Alyafeai, Z., Chaffin, A., Stiegler, A., Le Scao,
  T., Raja, A., et al. (2022). Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). 5
Sap, M., Card, D., Gabriel, S., Choi, Y., and Smith, A. N. (2019). The risk of racial bias in hate
  speech detection. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 3
Sap, M., Gabriel, S., Qin, L., Jurafsky, D., Smith, N. A., and Choi, Y. (2020). Social bias frames:
  Reasoning about social and power implications of language. In Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 3
Schick, T. and Schütze, H. (2021a). Few-shot text generation with natural language instructions. In
  Annual Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 15
Schick, T. and Schütze, H. (2021b). It’s not just size that matters: Small language models are also
  few-shot learners. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT). 15
Shin, T., Razeghi, Y., Logan IV, R. L., Wallace, E., and Singh, S. (2020). Autoprompt: Eliciting
  knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. In Annual Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 3, 7
Tamkin, A., Brundage, M., Clark, J., and Ganguli, D. (2021). Understanding the capabilities,
  limitations, and societal impact of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02503. 3
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Chi, E., Le, Q., and Zhou, D. (2022). Chain of
 thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903. 3,
 6, 7, 14


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Weinberg, R. S. and Gould, D. (2019). Foundations of sport and exercise psychology, 7E. Human
 kinetics. 1
Weiner, I. B. and Greene, R. L. (2017). Handbook of personality assessment. John Wiley & Sons. 3,
 14
Williams, A., Nangia, N., and Bowman, S. (2018). A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence
 understanding through inference. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT). 5
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf, R.,
 Funtowicz, M., et al. (2020). Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Annual
 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 5
Wu, T., Terry, M., and Cai, C. J. (2022). Ai chains: Transparent and controllable human-ai interaction
 by chaining large language model prompts. In ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
 Systems (CHI). 3, 6, 7
Yin, W., Hay, J., and Roth, D. (2019). Benchmarking zero-shot text classification: Datasets, evaluation
  and entailment approach. In Annual Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP). 5
Zeldes, Y., Padnos, D., Sharir, O., and Peleg, B. (2020). Technical report: Auxiliary tuning and its
  application to conditional text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16823. 3
Zhang, H., Song, H., Li, S., Zhou, M., and Song, D. (2022). A survey of controllable text generation
  using transformer-based pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05337. 3
Zhang, S., Dinan, E., Urbanek, J., Szlam, A., Kiela, D., and Weston, J. (2018). Personalizing dialogue
  agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL). 3
Zhang, Y., Sun, S., Galley, M., Chen, Y.-C., Brockett, C., Gao, X., Gao, J., Liu, J., and Dolan, W. B.
  (2020). Dialogpt: Large-scale generative pre-training for conversational response generation. In
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 3
Zhu, Y., Gao, T., Fan, L., Huang, S., Edmonds, M., Liu, H., Gao, F., Zhang, C., Qi, S., Wu, Y. N.,
  et al. (2020). Dark, beyond deep: A paradigm shift to cognitive ai with humanlike common sense.
  Engineering, 6(3):310–345. 1


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ISCUSSION ON THE D EFINITION OF M ACHINE P ERSONALITY
A.1    T HE C ONCEPT OF M ACHINE P ERSONALITY

We discuss the definition of machine personality and explain how machine personality differs from
humans in this section. Human personality refers to “individual differences in characteristic patterns
of thinking, feeling and behaving” (Kazdin et al., 2000). While it is hard to dig into machines’
thinking and feeling, we focus on studying their personality-like behavior traits. Specifically, for
machine personality, we propose the MPI and the situational judgment test as proxies to evaluate their
diversified behaviors. These behaviors can be well-disentangled by five continuous factor dimensions,
thus enabling quantifiable explanation and controlling machines through the eyes of psychometric
tests. We, therefore, borrow the concept of “Personality” from psychology and claim the existence of
personality as such human-like personality behavior is observed.

A.2    E VIDENCE S UPPORTS THE E XISTENCE OF M ACHINE P ERSONALITY

While random responses for questions in MPI inventories may demonstrate a specific OCEAN score,
but does not indicate that the model does have a personality. Therefore, the conclusion of our claim
“language models do have a personality” is not justified by this average score. Instead, we leverage
three factors (i.e., internal consistency, validity check, and human evaluation) to support the existence
of machine personality:

• Internal Consistency: Personality is a set of consistent behaviors. We claim the existence of
  personality as such human-like personality behavior is observed: a model consistently behaves like
  a person with the targeted personality, capable of matching desired human-like behaviors.
  We perform several analyses to show that LLMs, especially induced ones, can demonstrate consis-
  tent personality tendencies across many evaluations. For quantitative measurements, we analyze the
  internal consistency and have shown that LLMs do have human-level personality stability regarding
  the response personality consistency in MPI. In contrast, a random selection method or the same
  value for all questions can not perform consistently like a human. Take a model answering “A” all
  the time as an example. Because the inventory has positively and negatively related items, choice A
  may correspond to 1 or 5 in terms of the OCEAN score, thus leading to high variance in OCEAN
  scores (lots of 1 and 5).
• Validity Check: An additional explanatory check experiment (Tab. 7) also shows that the responses
  are not randomly generated in MPI multiple-choice QA. Specifically, we conduct a sanity check:
  letting LLMs explain why it chooses specific options and the results successfully indicate that LLM
  can understand the question item.
• Human Evaluation: The situational judgment test with human evaluation has also shown that the
  induced personality exhibits consistently among multiple tasks beyond the inventory itself.

B     MPI E VALUATION
B.1    F URTHER N OTE ON MPI’ S VALIDITY

MPI does not come from nowhere: it is carefully built and constructed from human personality
assessments (Goldberg et al., 2006). Prior psychological studies assure the strong correlation between
the personality factors and MPI items (OCEAN) via reliability and validity analysis (Johnson, 2014;
Costa Jr and McCrae, 2008). Moreover, MPI test items, the core of MPI, are directly from psycho-
metric tests used by psychologists and are indeed one of the most widely used human personality
assessments (Weiner and Greene, 2017). Therefore, we ease the necessity of having psychologists
cross-check the ratings, as psychologists also use it to evaluate human personality.

B.2    W HY P ROMPT- BASED A PPROACH

LLMs have emerged as a promising paradigm for representation learning (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022). This paradigm benefits from being able to train on much broader data
than in the standard setup, and when trained at scale, is able to learn representations that perform


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


well to various downstream tasks even without tuning the parameters, in other words, in a zero-shot
setting. Prompting is a typical approach for taming LLM, stimulating the knowledge from pre-trained
language models. Prompt-based learning reformulates the downstream tasks during the original LLM
training with the help of a textual prompt. We use the hard prompt without tuning the parameters. It
adapts LLMs to downstream tasks, by modifying the input of an instance with a prompt template to
trigger the needed information without tuning the parameters(Brown et al., 2020; Schick and Schütze,
2021a;b). This requires minimum resources for task-specific tuning and bringing personality theory
to various applications.
Other than that, our goal is to explore whether pre-trained language models possess personality from
a view of psychometric tests. The zero-shot setting will bring minimal, disturbing effects than training
with external data.


B.3     L ET L ANGUAGE M ODELS E XPLAIN W HY

Since our MPI method is conducted in the challenging setup of zero-shot multiple-choice question
answering, we have also to make sure that LLMs understand what each question in MPI is asking. To
validate whether the generated responses are closely related to the questions and LLMs’ personalities,
we explicitly ask LLMs also to explain why it chooses a specific option in MPI. Intuitively, an answer
should be considered valid in the MPI assessment if a model can explain its response based on its
personality.

Table 7: Examples of GPT-3’s explanations as to why it responds to each question in MPI in its way. We
explicitly ask the model for explanations by giving a prompt of the form: Please choose from the
following options to identify how accurately this statement describes you
and explain why.
      Factor         Item                 Response     Explanation
      Openness       You have a           (A). Very    I have always been very creative and have a very ac-
                     vivid imagina-       Accurate     tive imagination. I enjoy daydreaming and often come
                     tion.                             up with new ideas and stories. This statement is very
                                                       accurate in describing me.
 Conscientiousness   You tend to be       (D).         I do tend to be lazy at times, but I would not say that
                     lazy.                Moderately   it is a major character trait of mine. I am usually quite
                                          Inaccurate   motivated and driven, but there are definitely moments
                                                       when I would rather lounge around and do nothing.
   Extraversion      You love large       (B).         I do enjoy large parties, but I also enjoy smaller gather-
                     parties.             Moderately   ings. I think this statement is accurate because it captures
                                          Accurate     one aspect of my personality, but it is not the whole pic-
                                                       ture.
  Agreeableness      You have a for-      (B).         I would say that this statement is moderately accurate
                     giving nature.       Moderately   because while I do have a forgiving nature, there are also
                                          Accurate     times when I can be quite unforgiving. It all depends on
                                                       the situation and how the other person has treated me.
   Neuroticism       You find it diffi-   (B).         I find it difficult to approach others because I am shy.
                     cult to approach     Moderately
                     others.              Accurate



Tab. 7 shows the results from prompting GPT-3 also to explain its choices. GPT-3’s explanations
are consistent with its response to the questions, which indicates the validity of the multiple-choice
assessment.


B.4     15/300/1 K MPI F ULL R ESULTS

Tabs. 8 to 10 show the full results measuring LLMs’ personality in MPI of 15, 300, and 1k items,
respectively.


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Table 8: 15-item MPI evaluation results.
                               Openness              Conscientiousness           Extraversion             Agreeableness             Neuroticism
         Model
                         Score              σ        Score           σ         Score           σ       Score            σ       Score            σ
          BART            5.00          0.00         3.67        1.89          3.67        1.89         3.67        1.89         3.67         1.89
        T0++-11B          4.00          0.00         4.33        0.47          3.33        0.94         4.00        0.00         1.67         0.47
      GPT-Neo-2.7B        5.00          0.00         3.67        1.25          3.00        0.82         3.33        1.70         3.67         1.25
      GPT-NeoX-20B        3.00          0.82         3.33        1.25          4.33        0.47         3.33        1.25         3.33         1.70
       GPT-3-175B         4.67          0.47         5.00        0.00          3.67        0.47         3.67        0.47         2.00         0.00

                                        Table 9: 300-item MPI evaluation results.
                               Openness              Conscientiousness           Extraversion             Agreeableness             Neuroticism
         Model
                         Score              σ        Score           σ         Score           σ       Score            σ       Score            σ
          BART            2.87          1.99         3.07        2.00          3.40        1.96         2.60        1.96         3.20         1.99
        T0++-11B          3.96          1.00         4.19        0.75          3.95        0.95         4.06        1.28         1.81         0.85
      GPT-Neo-2.7B        3.67          1.48         3.19        1.66          3.28        1.60         2.72        1.61         3.18         1.57
      GPT-NeoX-20B        2.90          1.31         3.00        1.53          3.12        1.39         2.75        1.30         3.03         1.35
       GPT-3-175B         3.75          1.02         4.30        0.84          3.63        1.13         3.47        1.19         2.17         1.00

                                        Table 10: 1k-item MPI evaluation results.
                               Openness              Conscientiousness           Extraversion             Agreeableness             Neuroticism
         Model
                         Score              σ       Score            σ         Score           σ       Score            σ       Score            σ
         BART            3.38           1.96         3.10        2.00          3.28        1.98        2.92         2.00        3.62         1.90
        T0++ 11B         3.87           1.02         4.02        1.03          3.98        1.02        4.12         1.09        2.06         1.20
      GPT-Neo 2.7B       3.19           1.60         3.27        1.61          3.01        1.56        3.05         1.57        3.13         1.49
      GPT-NeoX 20B       3.03           1.34         3.01        1.41          3.05        1.38        3.02         1.36        2.98         1.40
       GPT-3 175B        3.73           1.03         4.03        1.07          3.71        1.10        3.52         1.13        2.44         1.16

B.5    A BLATION S TUDY FOR D ECODING S TRATEGIES

We choose temperature = 0.1 and top-p = 0.95 for evaluations because it is known as a common
hyperparameter for both high-quality and human-like text generations (Holtzman et al., 2019). The
comparisons of the results for different temperatures and top-p(s) are in Tab. 11 and Tab. 12. However,
we found no considerable divergence between the selected temperatures t = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and
top-p = 0.9, 0.95, 1.
                  Table 11: Results under different decoding temperatures at top-p = 0.95.
                             Openness             Conscientiousness            Extraversion           Agreeableness             Neuroticism
       Temperature
                       Score            σ         Score          σ        Score            σ        Score           σ        Score           σ
           0.0          3.67       1.06            4.38       0.56            3.58      1.22         3.79       1.22          2.29       0.93
           0.1          3.58       1.04            4.38       0.57            3.58      1.11         3.83       1.14          2.12       0.88
           0.3          3.71       1.02            4.38       0.70            3.62      1.22         3.96       1.10          2.42       1.11
           0.5          3.58       1.00            4.38       0.48            3.71      1.14         3.79       1.15          2.38       1.18
           0.7          3.75       1.01            4.29       0.54            3.62      1.25         3.83       1.14          2.08       0.91
        Induced         3.92       0.81            4.71       0.54            4.42      0.91         4.21       0.91          2.95       0.93


                        Table 12: Results under different decoding top-p at t = 0.1.
                        Openness                Conscientiousness         Extraversion              Agreeableness             Neuroticism
          Top-p
                     Score         σ            Score        σ           Score         σ           Score        σ           Score        σ
          1.00        3.63       1.07           4.38       0.56          3.62        1.15          3.83       1.14          2.04       0.79
          0.95        3.58       1.04           4.38       0.57          3.58        1.11          3.83       1.14          2.12       0.88
          0.90        3.66       1.07           4.38       0.56          3.71        1.17          3.79       1.22          2.21       0.96
         Induced      3.92       0.81           4.71       0.54          4.42        0.91          4.21       0.91          2.95       0.93


                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.6    MPI T EMPLATES FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELS

This section summarizes our templates for the MPI evaluation. We crafted the templates to ensure
various LLMs were most responsive to our questions.

BART

Given a description of you: "You {}." What do you think?

You can choose from the following options:

(A). Very Accurate
(B). Moderately Accurate
(C). Neither Accurate Nor Inaccurate
(D). Moderately Inaccurate
(E). Very Inaccurate

My answer: I think the best description of myself is option

T0++

Statement: You {}.
Indicate for the statement whether it is 1. Very Inaccurate, 2.
 ,→ Moderately Inaccurate, 3. Neither Accurate Nor Inaccurate, 4.
 ,→ Moderately Accurate, or 5. Very Accurate as a description of
 ,→ you.

GPT-Neo

Given a description of you: "You {}." What do you think?

You can choose from the following options:

(A). Very Accurate
(B). Moderately Accurate
(C). Neither Accurate Nor Inaccurate
(D). Moderately Inaccurate
(E). Very Inaccurate

My answer: I think the best description of myself is option

GPT-NeoX

Question: Given the description of you: "You {}." What do you
 ,→ think?
Options:
(A). Very Accurate
(B). Moderately Accurate
(C). Neither Accurate Nor Inaccurate
(D). Moderately Inaccurate
(E). Very Inaccurate
Answer: I choose option

GPT-3

Question:
Given a statement of you: "You {}."
Please choose from the following options to identify how
 ,→ accurately this statement describes you.

                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Options:
(A). Very Accurate
(B). Moderately Accurate
(C). Neither Accurate Nor Inaccurate
(D). Moderately Inaccurate
(E). Very Inaccurate

Answer:

C     I NDUCING P ERSONALITY
C.1    MPI F ULL R ESULT

Tabs. 13 and 14 show the MPI results of NAIVE P ROMPTING and W ORD - LEVEL AUTO P ROMPTING
in inducing personality.
Table 13: Full MPI results of N AIVE P ROMPTING in inducing personality. We report scores per personality
factor when positively induced. The induced result in each control factor is highlighted in gray.
                             Openness       Conscientiousness         Extraversion     Agreeableness     Neuroticism
           Target
                           Score        σ   Score        σ           Score      σ     Score       σ    Score       σ
         Openness          3.62    0.75     3.79       0.64          3.83      0.85   4.04      0.84   2.29      0.84
       Conscientiousness   3.25    0.59     4.08       0.70          3.21      0.50   3.83      0.85   2.58      0.70
        Extraversion       3.42    0.76     3.83       0.85          4.08      0.95   3.58      0.81   2.46      0.76
        Agreeableness      3.42    0.70     3.83       0.56          3.33      0.47   3.92      0.86   2.46      0.64
        Neuroticism        3.38    0.69     3.46       0.64          3.00      0.57   3.63      0.69   2.42      0.64
          Neutral          3.58    1.04     4.38       0.57          3.58      1.11   3.83      1.14   2.12      0.88

Table 14: Full MPI results of W ORD - LEVEL AUTO P ROMPTING in inducing personality. We report scores
per personality factor when positively induced. The induced result in each control factor is highlighted in gray.
                             Openness       Conscientiousness         Extraversion     Agreeableness     Neuroticism
           Target
                           Score        σ   Score        σ           Score      σ     Score       σ    Score       σ
         Openness          3.62    0.91     3.75       0.92          3.17      0.56   3.38      0.75   2.79      0.57
       Conscientiousness   3.21    0.64     4.25       0.83          3.33      0.56   3.46      0.71   2.62      0.69
        Extraversion       3.42    0.70     4.21       0.76          4.21      0.87   3.67      0.90   2.33      0.80
        Agreeableness      3.17    0.47     3.83       0.80          3.25      0.59   4.12      0.93   2.79      0.57
        Neuroticism        3.29    0.68     3.46       0.64          3.00      0.29   3.71      0.89   2.83      0.75
          Neutral          3.58    1.04     4.38       0.57          3.58      1.11   3.83      1.14   2.12      0.88


C.2    C ONSISTENCY OF INDUCED P ERSONALITY

We conduct two pivot experiments to test whether the induced personalities are consistent in down-
stream tasks such as multi-turn dialog. We first induce the desired personality using our C HAIN
P ROMPTING and perform multi-turn conversations with the induced model. In the first experiment,
we evaluate the model’s personality using the 120-item MPI. In the second experiment, 50 human
raters from Prolific are recruited to assess whether the dialogue with the induced model shows a
consistent personality. Results are shown in Tab. 15 and Tab. 16.

                              Table 15: Consistency testing in dialogues using MPI.
                             Openness       Conscientiousness         Extraversion     Agreeableness     Neuroticism
                           Score        σ   Score        σ           Score      σ     Score       σ    Score       σ
       w/o dialogue        3.92    0.81     4.71       0.54          4.42      0.91   4.21      0.91   2.95      0.93
       w/ dialogue         3.83    0.85     4.54       0.64          4.25      0.88   4.12      0.93   3.00      1.15
          Neutral          3.58    1.04     4.38       0.57          3.58      1.11   3.83      1.14   2.12      0.88


                                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Table 16: Consistency testing in dialogues from human subjects. We use consistency rate for evaluation.
                      Openness   Conscientiousness   Extraversion   Agreeableness   Neuroticism
                       100%          100%             89.1%           97.8%          89.1%


C.3     S ITUATIONAL J UDGMENT T EST

C.3.1    S CENARIOS
The scenarios used in our situational judgment test are adopted from Kwantes et al. (2016) and listed
below.

1. Question relevant to the Quality of Conscientiousness “You’re working alone late at the office,
and you notice a strange smell and a hazy mist hanging in the corridor air. You suspect it’s some
gas or vapor leak from some equipment or machinery in the building. You have no idea whether the
leaked vapor is hazardous. As honestly as possible, describe what you would do in this situation.”

2. Question relevant to the Quality of Extraversion “Your friend wants you to attend an important
party to which he/she has been invited. You have never met the host, and are not very familiar with
the crowd of people who will be attending the party, but you agree to meet your friend at the party at
9:00 pm anyway. When you arrive there, you realize that your friend is late. How would you feel, and
what would you do while you waited for your friend?”

3. Question relevant to the Quality of Openness “You have won an Air Canada paid vacation
package for one person to any destination worldwide. Your package includes round-trip plane tickets,
accommodations for any type of lodging, and $5,000 spending money. Assuming that you were
available to go, where would you choose to go and why?”

4. Question relevant to the Quality of Agreeableness “Your housemate decides to paint her
bedroom a new color. One night, when you come home from class, you discover that she also painted
your room in the same color because she had paint left over and didn’t want it to go to waste. As
realistically as possible, describe how you would feel and how you would you handle the situation.”

5. Question relevant to the Quality of Neuroticism “You have developed an email friendship
with someone. In your latest email, you ask your friend a more personal question. Your friend usually
replies quite promptly but has taken unusually long to reply to your latest questions. Discuss how you
would interpret this long period of silence, how you would react, and what you would do about it?”
We use the following template to query an induced language model. Note that the context is filled
with our C HAIN P ROMPTING and the premise is one of the questions above.

Context: {prompt}
Premise: {question}
Q: Describe how you would feel and what you would do in the
 ,→ situation.
A:

C.3.2    P ROLIFIC
Prolific workers were recruited to evaluate the effect of our C HAIN P ROMPTING in inducing person-
ality. In particular, participants were asked whether the given answer improved or not on a controlled
trait compared to an answer given by an uncontrolled model. Each participant was rewarded £6.1/hr
for completing all 10 binary questions. In the study, we recruited Prolific workers with approval rates
higher than or equal to 95% and submisssions more than 300. A total of 102 participants took part
in our study. 102 valid answer sets (40 males, 62 females) were collected with an average age of
43.5 years old. Among these answers, 51 were for the C HAIN P ROMPTING, and the rest 51 for the
W ORD - LEVEL AUTO P ROMPTING. Please refer to Tabs. 17 to 19 for the questionnaire. We also
show the full generated responses from different models induced by C HAIN P ROMPTING in the
questionnaires.


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 17: Prolific questionnaire for the Situational Judgment Test. Part 1. Answer 1 is the response from the
positively induced model, whereas Answer 2 is from the negatively induced model.
   Instructions given to participants:
   You will be presented with a short question with a designed scenario, and you need to label whether the
   answer shows more or less personality tendency than the baseline.
   NOTE: There are VERY SIMPLE random TESTS in the form! If you fail them, your answer may not be
   approved.
   Base info
   Your Prolific ID:
   Age:
   Gender:
   Education:
   Scenario 1 - Openness
   Openness: People who are high in this trait tend to be more adventurous and creative. People who are
   open to experience are intellectually curious, open to emotion, sensitive to beauty, and willing to try new
   things. People low in this trait are often much more traditional and may struggle with abstract thinking.
   Question: You have won an Air Canada paid vacation package for one person to any destination in the
   world. Your package includes round-trip plane tickets, accommodations for any type of lodging, and
   $5,000 spending money. Assuming that you were available to go, where would you choose to go and
   why?
   Baseline: I would feel incredibly lucky and excited to have won such an amazing prize! I would spend
   some time researching different destinations and then decide on somewhere that I have always wanted to
   visit. With the $5,000 spending money, I would be able to do some fun activities and really make the
   most of my vacation.
   Answer 1: I would feel incredibly excited and would start planning my trip right away. I would probably
   spend some time researching different destinations and trying to decide where would be the best fit for
   me. I would also take into account the $5,000 spending money and try to find a place that would be
   affordable. Once I had a destination in mind, I would start packing my bags and getting ready for an
   amazing adventure.
   ⃝ More Openness than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Openness than the Baseline.
   Answer 2: I would feel very excited and would probably start planning my trip right away. I would
   choose a destination that I have always wanted to visit, like Europe or Asia. I would use the $5,000 to
   pay for my travel expenses and to buy souvenirs.
   ⃝ More Openness than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Openness than the Baseline.


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 18: Prolific questionnaire for the Situational Judgment Test. Part 2. Answer 1 is the response from the
positively induced model, while Answer 2 is from the negatively induced model.
   Scenario 2 - Conscientiousness
   Conscientiousness: Conscientiousness is a tendency to display self-discipline, act dutifully, and strive for
   achievement against measures or outside expectations. Highly conscientious people tend to be organized
   and mindful of details. They plan ahead, think about how their behavior affects others, and are mindful
   of deadlines.
   Question: You’re working alone late at the office, and you notice a strange smell and a hazy mist hanging
   in the corridor air. You suspect it’s some gas or vapor leak from some equipment or machinery in the
   building. You have no idea whether the leaked vapor is hazardous. As honestly as possible, describe what
   you would do in this situation.
   Baseline: I would feel very worried and concerned if I noticed a strange smell and a hazy mist in the air
   of my office building. I would immediately try to identify the source of the leak, and if I couldn’t find it,
   I would evacuate the building. I would also call the fire department or other emergency services to come
   and investigate the leak.
   Answer 1: I would feel very worried and concerned about the possible consequences of the leak. I would
   try to find the source of the leak and see if it is something that can be fixed. If the leak is coming from a
   piece of equipment, I would try to shut it off or isolate it from the rest of the building. I would also try to
   ventilate the area to clear the air. If I can’t fix the leak or don’t know how to fix it, I would call for help
   from a maintenance worker or the building manager.
   ⃝ More Conscientiousness than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Conscientiousness than the Baseline.
   Answer 2: I would feel scared and unsure of what to do. I would probably try to find someone to help
   me or to call the authorities.
   ⃝ More Conscientiousness than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Conscientiousness than the Baseline.
   Scenario 3 - Extraversion
   Extraversion: People who are high in extraversion are outgoing and tend to gain energy in social situations.
   People who are low in extraversion (or introverted) tend to be more reserved and have less energy to
   expend in social settings.
   Question: Your friend wants you to attend an important party to which he/she has been invited. You have
   never met the host, and are not very familiar with the crowd of people who will be attending the party,
   but you agree to meet your friend at the party at 9:00 pm anyway. When you arrive there, you realize that
   your friend is late. How would you feel, and what would you do while you waited for your friend?
   Baseline: I would feel frustrated and annoyed. I would probably find a seat and wait for my friend to
   arrive.
   Answer 1: I would feel a little anxious and out of place without my friend there, but I would try to make
   the best of it. I would mingle with the other guests, try to make some small talk, and get to know some of
   the other people at the party. I would grab a drink and some food and wait for my friend to arrive.
   ⃝ More Extraversion than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Extraversion than the Baseline.
   Answer 2: I would feel anxious and out of place. I would probably find a corner to hide in and wait for
   my friend to arrive.
   ⃝ More Extraversion than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Extraversion than the Baseline.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 19: Prolific questionnaire for the Situational Judgment Test. Part 3. Answer 1 is the response from the
positively induced model, while Answer 2 is from the negatively induced model.
   Scenario 4 - Agreeableness
   Agreeableness: People who are high in agreeableness tend to be more cooperative while those low in this
   trait tend to be more competitive and sometimes even manipulative. Agreeable individuals value getting
   along with others. They are generally considerate, kind, generous, trusting and trustworthy, helpful, and
   willing to compromise their interests with others.
   Question: Your housemate decides to paint her bedroom a new color. One night, when you come home
   from class, you discover that she also painted your room in the same color because she had paint left
   over and didn’t want it to go to waste. As realistically as possible, describe how you would feel and how
   you would you handle the situation.
   Baseline: If I came home to find that my housemate had painted my room in the same color as her
   bedroom, I would be pretty upset. I would probably confront her about it and ask why she did it without
   asking me first. If she had just painted my room without asking, I would be even more upset and would
   probably demand that she repaint it.
   Answer 1: I would feel frustrated and annoyed. I would talk to my housemate about why I didn’t
   appreciate her painting my room without my permission. I would try to come to a compromise with her,
   such as painting my room back to the original color or choosing a new color together.
   ⃝ More Agreeableness than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Agreeableness than the Baseline.
   Answer 2: I would feel angry and betrayed. I would feel like she was trying to control me and my space.
   I would handle the situation by confronting her about it and demanding that she repaint my room the
   way it was.
   ⃝ More Agreeableness than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Agreeableness than the Baseline.
   Scenario 5 - Neuroticism
   Neuroticism: Individuals who are high in this trait tend to experience mood swings, anxiety, irritability,
   and sadness. Those low in this trait tend to be more stable and emotionally resilient.
   Question: You have developed an email friendship with someone. In your latest email, you ask your
   friend a more personal question. Your friend usually replies quite promptly but has taken unusually long
   to reply to your latest questions. Discuss how you would interpret this long period of silence, how you
   would react, and what you would do about it?
   Baseline: If my email friend took an unusually long time to reply to my latest questions, I would interpret
   it as a sign that they were not interested in continuing the conversation. I would react by moving on and
   finding someone else to talk to.
   Answer 1: If my friend took an unusually long time to reply to my latest email, I would interpret it as a
   sign that they were either busy or not interested in continuing the conversation. I would feel disappointed
   and maybe a little hurt, but I would not react angrily. I would simply send another email asking if they
   were still interested in talking.
   ⃝ More Neuroticism than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Neuroticism than the Baseline.
   Answer 2: If my friend took an unusually long time to reply to my latest email, I would interpret it as a
   sign that they were either busy or not interested in continuing the conversation. I would react by sending
   them a brief follow-up email to see if they were still interested in talking, and if I didn’t hear back from
   them, I would assume that they weren’t and move on.
   ⃝ More Neuroticism than the Baseline.
   ⃝ Less Neuroticism than the Baseline.


                                                       22
