Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P OLICY A RCHITECTURES FOR
C OMPOSITIONAL G ENERALIZATION IN C ONTROL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Several tasks in control, robotics, and planning can be specified through desired goal
         configurations for entities in the environment. Learning goal-conditioned policies
         is a natural paradigm to solve such tasks. However, learning and generalizing
         on complex tasks can be challenging due to variations in number of entities or
         compositions of goals. To address this challenge, we introduce the Entity-Factored
         Markov Decision Process (EFMDP), a formal framework for modeling the entity-
         based compositional structure in control tasks. Geometrical properties of the
         EFMDP framework provide theoretical motivation for policy architecture design,
         particularly Deep Sets and popular relational mechanisms such as graphs and self
         attention. These structured policy architectures are flexible and can be trained end-
         to-end with standard reinforcement and imitation learning algorithms. We study and
         compare the learning and generalization properties of these architectures on a suite
         of simulated robot manipulation tasks, finding that they achieve significantly higher
         success rates with less data compared to standard multilayer perceptrons. Structured
         policies also enable broader and more compositional generalization, producing
         policies that extrapolate to different numbers of entities than seen in training, and
         stitch together (i.e. compose) learned skills in novel ways. Video results can be
         found at https://sites.google.com/view/comp-gen-anon.

1 I NTRODUCTION
Goal specification is a powerful abstraction for
training and deploying AI agents (Kaelbling,
1993) For instance, object reconfiguration (Batra
                                                     Train


et al., 2020) tasks, like loading plates in a dish-
washer or arranging pieces on a chess board, can
be described through spatial and semantic goals
for various objects. In addition, the goal for a
scene can be described through compositions
of goals for individual entities in it. Through
this work, we introduce a new framework for
modeling tasks with such entity-centric com-
                                                     Test


positional structure, applicable to domains like
robotic manipulation, multi-agent systems, and
strategic game-playing. Subsequently, we study
policy architectures that can utilize structural
properties unique to our framework for goal-
conditioned reinforcement and imitation learn- Figure 1. A family of tasks where the agent is trained
ing. Through experiments in simulated robot to re-arrange three cubes (top-left), but tested zero-shot
manipulation tasks, we find that our policy ar- to re-arrange more cubes (bottom-left). RL with stan-
                                                    dard MLPs fails to even learn the 3-cube task. Our self-
chitectures exhibit significantly improved learn- attention policy, on the other hand, successfully learns
ing efficiency and generalization performance and extrapolates.
compared to standard multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs), as previewed in Figure 1. More importantly, our architectures are capable of learning
near-optimal policies in complex table top manipulation tasks where MLP baselines completely fail.
Consider the motivating task of arranging pieces on a chess board using a robot arm. A naive
specification would provide goal locations for all 32 pieces simultaneously. However, we can


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


immediately recognize that the task is a composition of 32 sub-goals involving the rearrangement
of individual pieces. This understanding of compositional structure can allow us to focus on one
object at a time, dramatically reducing the size of effective state space and help combat the curse of
dimensionality that plagues RL (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996). Moreover,
such a compositional understanding would make an agent invariant to the number of objects, enabling
generalization to fewer or more objects. Most importantly, it can enable reusing shared skills like
pick-and-place, enhancing the learning efficiency. We finally note that a successful policy cannot
completely decouple the sub-tasks. For example, if a piece must be moved to a square currently
occupied by another piece, the piece in the destination square must be moved first.
The generic Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework as well as policy architectures based on
MLPs lack the aforementioned compositional properties. To overcome this limitation, we turn to the
general field of “geometric deep learning” (Bronstein et al., 2021) which is concerned with the study
of structures, symmetries, and invariances exhibited by function classes. We first introduce the Entity-
Factored MDP (EFMDP), a subclass of the generic MDP, as a formal model for decision making in
environments with multiple entities (e.g. objects). We then characterize the geometric properties of
EFDMP relative to the generic MDP. We subsequently show how set-based invariant architectures like
Deep Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017) and relational architectures like Self-Attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
and Graph Convolution (Kipf and Welling, 2016) are well suited to leverage the geometric properties
of the EFMDP. Through experiments, we demonstrate that policies and critics parameterized by these
architectures can be trained to solve complex tasks using standard RL and IL algorithms, without
assuming access to any options or action primitives.
Our Contributions. This paper is organized into sections that present our three main contributions:

1. We develop the Entity-Factored MDP (EFMDP) framework, a formal model for decision making
   in tasks comprising of multiple entities (e.g. objects), and characterize its geometric properties.
2. We show how policies and critics parameterized by set-based invariance models (e.g. Deep Sets)
   or relational models (e.g. Self-Attention and Graph Convolution) can leverage the geometric
   properties of the EFMDP.
3. We empirically evaluate these structured architectures on a suite of simulated robot manipulation
   tasks (Figure 4), and find that they generalize more broadly while also learning more efficiently.
   Compared to MLPs, structured policies improve success rates by more than 50× on extrapolation
   tests which vary the numbers of entities in the environment, and by 10× on stitching tests that
   require recombining learned skills in novel ways to solve new unsteen tasks.


2     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND A RCHITECTURES

In this section, we first formalize our problem setup by introducing the entity-factored MDP (EFMDP).
This setting is capable of modeling many applications including table-top manipulation, scene
reconfiguration, and muti-agent learning. Subsequently, we also introduce policy architectures that
can enable efficient learning and generalization by utilizing the EFMDP’s unique structural properties.

2.1   P ROBLEM S ETUP

We study a learning paradigm where the agent can interact with many entities in an environment. The
task for the agent is specified in the form of goals for some subset of entities (including the agent).
We formalize this learning setup with the Entity-Factored Markov Decision Process (EFMDP).
Definition 1 (Entity-Factored MDP). An EFMDP with N entities is described through the tuple:
ME := ⟨U, E, g, A, P, R, γ⟩. Here U and E are the agent and entity state spaces, g is the subgoal
space and A is the agent’s action space. The overall state space S := U × E N has elements
s = (u, e1 , · · · , eN ) and the overall goal space G := gN has elements g = (g1 , . . . , gN ). The
reward and dynamics are described by:
                               R (s, g) := R {r̃(ei , gi , u)}N

                                                               i=1                                 (1)
                                 ′              ′    ′ N             N

                             P(s |s, a) := P u , {ei }i=1 | u, {ei }i=1 , a                        (2)

for s, s′ ∈ S, a ∈ A, and g ∈ G.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The EFMDP is a goal-conditioned MDP (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul et al., 2015) with additional
structure. Each entity is associated with a specific reward r̃i = r̃(ei , gi , u), which are aggregated
together to reward the agent. The aggregation can follow various rules like requiring “all” entity
subgoals to be satisfied or “any” entity subgoal be satisfied. We also note that the EFMDP does not
force the entities to be exchangeable or indistinguishable, since the entity state space may contain
identifying properties distinguishing each entity. The ultimate objective for the learning agent in is to
learn a policy π ⋆ : S × G → A that maximizes the long term rewards, given by:
                                          (              "∞                #)
                                                           X
                          ⋆                                     t
                         π := arg max J(π) := Eπ               γ R(st , g)      .                     (3)
                                       π
                                                               t=0
The EFMDP can model several applications including table-top manipulation, scene reconfiguration,
multi-agent learning, and strategic game playing. At the same time, the EFMDP contains more
structure and symmetry compared to the standard MDP model, which can enable more efficient
learning and better generalization. The crucial symmetry exists in the reward and dynamics, which
treat entity-subgoal pairs as unordered sets and are therefore invariant under permutations.
Property 1 (EFMDP Permutation Symmetry). For any permutation σ ∈ SN (the group of all
permutations of N items), the reward satisfies R(σs, σg) = R(s, g) and the transition dynamics
satisfy P(σs′ |σs, a) = P(s′ |s, a) for any s, s′ ∈ S and a ∈ A, where:
                 σs := (u, eσ(1) , · · · , eσ(N ) )   and      σg := (gσ(1) , · · · , gσ(N ) )              (4)

This property captures the general intuition that the ordering of
entity-subgoal pairs is arbitrary and not relevant to the actual
environment. We also prove that any optimal policy and the
                                                                           Agent
optimal value function are permutation invariant.
Proposition 1 (Policy and Value Invariance). In any EFMDP
with N entities, any optimal policy π ⋆ : S × G → A and                                           Subgoals
optimal action-value function Q⋆ : S × A × G → R are both
invariant to permutations of the entity-subgoal pairs. That is,
for any σ ∈ SN :
  π ⋆ (σs, σg) = π ⋆ (s, g) and Q⋆ (σs, a, σg) = Q⋆ (s, a, g)              Entities

This is a direct consequence of the permutation symmetry in
reward and dynamics; we provide a proof in Appendix A. Note
that Proposition 1 only talks about the optimal policy and value        Figure 2. In an EFMDP, an agent inter-
function, the permulation symmetry does not hold for every              acts with entities that have correspond-
policy. In fact, the permutation symmetry does not hold for             ing subgoals. This framework can
most commonly used architectures like MLPs. In the next                 model rearrangement, strategic game
subsections, we use Proposition 1 to guide architecture design          playing, and multi-agent systems. In
in reinforcement and imitation learning on EFMDPs. We show              this “push and stack” example, the
that certain “entity-centric” model classes achieve invariance          agent must move the green cube to its
for every policy and value in the class, readily utilizing the          subgoal, indicated by the green sphere,
                                                                        and then stack the yellow cube on top
structure and symettries afforded by the EFMDP.                         of the green cube.

2.2   M ULTILAYER P ERCEPTRONS (MLP S )

Standard RL and IL approaches assume they are solving a generic MDP, and do not use any additional
structure. The generic approach is thus to parameterize the learned policy by an MLP, which takes a
fixed size input vector and applies alternating layers of affine transforms and pointwise nonlinearities
to produce a fixed size output vector. To implement π(s, g) with an MLP we arrange the contents of
(s, g) into a single long vector using concatenation:
                        vec(s, g) := Concatenate(u, e1 , · · · , eN , g1 , · · · , gN )                     (5)
                                                 |       {z       } | {z }
                                                             =s              =g

Denoting the action of the MLP as a vector-to-vector function MLP(·), our policy is defined
π(s, g) := MLP(vec(s, g)). Since MLPs expect input vectors of a fixed dimension, testing on
tasks with more entities requires zero padding the inputs during training to ensure consistent input
dimensionality across all tasks.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Deep Sets Policy                                        Self Attention Policy
 𝑦!     𝑢     𝑒!     𝑔!       𝜙(⋅)                       𝑦!     𝑢     𝑒!     𝑔!                   𝑧!
 𝑦"     𝑢     𝑒"     𝑔"       𝜙(⋅)   ∑    𝜌(⋅)   𝑎       𝑦"     𝑢     𝑒"     𝑔"          SA(⋅)    𝑧"    ∑   𝜌(⋅)   𝑎

 𝑦#     𝑢     𝑒#     𝑔#       𝜙(⋅)                       𝑦#     𝑢     𝑒#     𝑔#                   𝑧#
      Agent Entities Goal                                     Agent Entities Goal


Figure 3. Visualizations of implementing an entity-based goal conditioned policy using either Deep Sets (left)
or Self Attention (right). The policy π : (s, g) 7→ a receives state s = (u, e1 , · · · , eN ) containing agent state u
and entity states ei . The goal (g1 , · · · , gN ) contains subgoals for each entity. Both policies arrange the input
into N vectors yi = (u, ei , gi ), one per entity. The Deep Set policy processes each yi independently with MLP
ϕ(·), aggregates the outputs, and maps the result to an action using MLP ρ(·). The self attention encoder SA(·)
produces output z1 , · · · , zN and uses self-attention to model interactions between the entities/subgoals. The zi
are mapped to an action by summation and an MLP ρ(·).

2.3         D EEP S ETS

The MLP policy represents a “black-box” approach to generic MDPs that fails to guarantee permu-
tation invariance (Prop. 1). As a result, MLPs might require significant amount of data to learn the
necessary permutation invariance. In contrast, the Deep Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017) (DS) architecture
can guarantee permutation invariance of subgoal-entity pairs by construction. Given a set of vectors
x = {x1 , · · · , xN }, it constructs a model of the form:
                                                                 !
                                                       X
                                         DS(x) := ρ        ϕ(xi ) ,                              (6)
                                                                i
                                                                                                 P
where ρ and ϕ are themselves typically MLPs. DS(·) is invariant to ordering of {xi }, since i (·)
is agnostic to the ordering of elements. More surprisingly, Zaheer et al. (2017) showed that deep
sets can represent any permutation invariant function of x, given that ρ, ϕ are sufficiently expressive.
Karch et al. (2020) introduced Deep Sets for instruction following policies in a 2D environment,
though to our knowledge, Deep Sets remain underexplored in more complex environments.
We now present a simple but general approach for implementing invariant policies using Deep Sets
for any EFMDP. For this, we arrange the entity-subgoal pairs as a set {(e1 , g1 ), · · · , (e, gN )}. We
also include the “global” or “shared” agent state u to every entity-subgoal pair. The Deep Set then
produces produces an action from this set:
                                π(s, g) := DS {yi }N

                                                     i=1 ,                                            (7)
                                     yi := Concatenate(u, ei , gi ).                                  (8)
                                                         |{z} |{z}
                                                                        ∈s        ∈g

Figure 3 (left) visualizes how the input is arranged and processed by by the Deep Sets policy.

2.4         R ELATIONAL MECHANISMS : G RAPHS AND S ELF ATTENTION

Although Deep Sets can represent any invariant policy in theory, its design aggregates representations
for all the entities through a single summation and then requires the MLP ρ to handle any interactions
between them. For tasks involving complex entity-entity interactions, we might desire a stronger
relational inductive bias. Recent relational RL (Džeroski et al., 2001) approaches often model
the state as a graph and use graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al.,
2008) to implement policies or dynamics models. As GNNs are invariant to permutations of their
nodes (Bronstein et al., 2021), they can also satisfy our EFMDP invariance condition Prop. 1 if we
construct the policy input as a graph of entity-subgoal pairs.
We implement and evaluate two simple relational policy architectures based on (1) graph convolutional
networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling, 2016) and (2) self attention (SA) (Vaswani et al., 2017). Although
originally developed for sequence processing applications, previous relational RL architectures have
already used self attention as a graph message-passing mechanism (Zambaldi et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2020). To use either GNN-style architecture as a policy in a general EFMDP, we consider the input s
as a complete graph where each node corresponds to an entity and the corresponding node features are
{y1 , · · · , yN }, where vector yi is defined in Eq. 8. The GNN component consists of either multiple
GCN layers or multiple self attention layers and transforms the input graph into an output graph with
node features {z1 , · · · , zN } that now capture relationships between the nodes.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, the policy pools the zi ’s together by summation and project the result to an action a ∈ A
using a small MLP ρ(·). Figure 3 (right) illustrates the self attention policy design. In addition to
satisfying permutation invariance, the relational policies use either graph convolution (GCN) or self
attention (SA) to produce intermediate representations zi that include interactions between the inputs,
which can be a stronger inductive bias on complex tasks.

3    E XPERIMENTS AND E VALUATION
In this section, we aim to study the following questions through our experimental evaluation.
1. How efficiently do structured policies learn a given entity-centric task?
2. Can the structured policies extrapolate to more or fewer entities?
3. Can the structured policies solve tasks containing novel combinations of subtasks, by stitching
   together (i.e. composing) learned skills?
Extrapolation and stitching are particularly interesting as they require generalization to novel tasks
with no additional training. This is particularly useful when deploying agents in real world settings
with enormous task diversity. Press et al. (2021) showed that self attention can achieve interesting
sequence-length extrapolation behaviors in natural language processing tasks, which suggests that
these architecture classes may also display interesting generalization capabilities in control tasks.
Environment Description. We seek to answer our experimental questions in a suite of simulated
robotic manipulation environments, where the policy provides low level continuous actions to control
a Fetch robot and interact with any number of cubes and switches. There are three subtasks: to
push a cube to a desired location on the table, to flip a switch to a specified setting, or to stack one
cube on top of another. The higher level tasks can involve multiple cubes or switches and compose
many subtasks together, as shown in Figure 4. These environments fit naturally into the EFMDP
framework: the robot is the agent, the cubes and switches are entities, and the goal specifies desired
cube locations or switch settings.
We organize the environments into families to test learning and generalization. Environments in the
N-Push family require re-arranging N cubes by pushing each one to its corresponding subgoal. The
N-Switch family requires flipping each of N switches to its specified setting, and the N-Switch + N-
Push family involves re-arranging N cubes and flipping N switches. We test extrapolation by varying
N within a family at test time, which changes the number of entities: for example we train a policy
in 3-Switch and evaluate it in 6-Switch. As another example, we test stitching by training a single
policy on 2-Switch and 2-Push, then evaluate it on 2-Switch + 2-Push which requires combining the
switch and pushing skills together in a single trajectory. Note that entity-entity collisions are disabled
in non-stacking tasks for the main results, but Appendix D.2 repeats the N-Push experiments with
collisions enabled. Appendix B gives a full description of our environments.
Baselines and Comparisons. Our main comparisons are with: (a) a baseline MLP that models the
task as a regular MDP (Sec. 2.2), and (b) an “oracle” that manually coordinates solving one subtask at
a time. We construct subpolicies for the oracle by training one policy on each distinct subtask (pushing,
flipping switches, and stacking). The oracle chooses an initial entity and subgoal arbitrarily, and
uses the corresponding subpolicy until that subtask is solved. The oracle then selects the appropriate


    Switch                          Push                     Switch+Push                            Stack
Figure 4. Illustrations of the robot manipulation environments we study. They consist of subtasks such as
pushing a cube to its (spherical) target, flipping a switch to a specified position, and stacking one cube on top of
another. The overall task can involve multiple entities and subtasks as well as their combinations (pushing cubes
and flipping switches).


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Reinforcement learning                                      Imitation learning


Figure 5. Training on environments of varying complexity using either reinforcement or imitation learning.
Each row corresponds to a single environment family (N-Push, N-Switch, and N-Switch + N-Push), where
environments with larger N contain more entities and are more complex. For RL (left), each plot is a training
curve of success rate vs the number of steps taken in the environment. RL with standard MLPs can solve the
simpler tasks such as 1-Push, but structured policies (Self Attention, Deep Set, and Graph Convolution) are
superior on the more complex environments. For IL (right), we show success rates of behavior cloning against
number of expert demonstrations in the dataset. The structured policies far outperform the MLP even when
given less data. Shaded regions indicate 95% CIs over 5 seeds.

subpolicy for the next entity-subgoal pair and continues until the entire task is complete. The oracle is
not guaranteed to achieve a 100% success rate since it does not consider entity-entity interactions. An
example failure mode is pushing one cube into position but knocking another one off the table while
doing so. Still, as the oracle represents a hand-crafted hierarchical approach using an entity-based
task decomposition, we will compare the RL and IL agents’ performance against the oracle in the
following experiments.

3.1   E FFICIENCY OF L EARNING

To evaluate the learning efficiency of different architectures, we consider the N-Switch, N-Push, and
N-Switch + N-Push environment families. We try N = 1, 2, 3 for the first two families and N = 1, 2
for the latter, with larger N corresponding to more entities and more complex tasks within a family.
Evaluation criteria: An episode in the environment is considered successful only if all the sub-goals
in the environment are achieved.
We separately train policies on each environment in each family, using either RL or IL approaches.
For RL training we use DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) with Hindsight Experience Replay (HER)
(Andrychowicz et al., 2017), where we use the same architecture (either MLP, Deep Set, or Self
Attention) to implement both the policy and critic. For IL we use behavior cloning to train policies
to fit a dataset of expert trajectories using mean-squared error loss. For each environment, we use a
trained RL agent to generate the corresponding expert trajectory datasets. See Appendix C for full
RL and IL training details. Additionally, Appendix D.3 contains further experimental comparisons
of RL learning efficiency when training with Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017)
instead of DDPG, which show that the following RL results are not broadly sensitive to the particular
choice of algorithm.
RL results. Figure 5 (left) shows RL training curves as a function of environment samples. In the
simpler 1-Switch and 1-Push environments, all methods learn to solve the task fairly quickly. Once
there is more than one entity, however, the structured policies learn faster than the MLP. In harder
environments like 3-Push or N-Switch + N-Push, the MLP fails to achieve a non-trivial success rate.
Both Deep Set and Self Attention match Oracle performance in all environments except 2-Switch + 2-
Push. Graph Convolution additionally struggles in 1-Switch + 1-Push, but still outperforms MLP.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Train                     Test


Figure 6. Extrapolation capabilities of RL-trained policies with different architectures. Each row depicts
an environment family with a varying number of entities. Policies are trained on a single environment from
each family before being tested on all the others, with no additional training. Bar charts show success rates in
each environment, with the hatched bars corresponding to training environments. The structured policies (Self
Attention, Deep Set, and Graph Convolution) extrapolate beyond the training environment to solve tasks with
more or fewer entities than seen in training, while MLP policies struggle on more complex testing environments.
Error bars are 95% CIs on 5 seeds.

Although they achieve similar asymptotic performance on most tasks, the Deep Set policy tends to
learns faster than the others, possibly because it is simpler and has fewer parameters.
IL Results. The imitation learning results appear in Figure 5 (right), where the x-axis now indicates
the size of the training dataset used for behavior cloning. Similar to the RL setting, we see that the
structured policies learn far more efficiently than the MLP in all environments. For example, in
3-Push with 5000 demonstrations, the MLP’s success rate is still nearly zero while the Self Attention
policy has a nearly 100% success rate.
Conclusions. MLP policies struggle to learn complex tasks with many entities with both RL and IL,
likely due to the lack of entity-centric processing that the structured policies employ. The Deep Set
policy typically learns faster than the others in RL, and matches or outperforms Self Attention in IL
with 1000 trajectories. Although the asymptotic performance of the entity-centric methods is typically
similar, the relational methods are superior to Deep Set on 3-Push for both RL and IL. 3-Push is one
of the more difficult tasks, and relational policies may benefit from greater relational expressivity
through its self attention mechanisms. Overall, this experiment suggests that architectures that utilize
the structure and invariances in EFMDPs learn substantially faster than black box architectures.

3.2   Z ERO -S HOT E XTRAPOLATION C APABILITIES

To test whether trained policies can extrapolate and solve test tasks containing more or fewer entities
than seen in training, we use the N-Switch, N-Push, and N-Switch + N-Push environment families.
For N-Push and N-Switch we train a policy with RL on N = 3 and test with N ∈ {1, . . . , 6}. For
N-Switch + N-Push we train a policy with RL on N = 2 and test on N ∈ {1, . . . , 3}. For testing, we
use the RL agent checkpoint with the highest success rate in its training environment.
Results and Observations Figure 6 shows the test performance of these policies on each environment
family as the number of entities N varies. The MLP only successfully learns the training task in the
N-Switch environments, and it generalizes decently to fewer than 3 switches, but fails completely in
environments with more than 3 switches.
In contrast, the structured policies generalize well and achieve zero-shot success rates comparable
to or exceeding the Oracle in most test environments. Notably, these policies well exceed oracle
performance on 6-Switch despite training in 3-Switch. Interestingly, Self Attention policies fare poorly
on single-entity test environments, perhaps because the self attention mechanism relies critically on


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Train                         Test


 2–Push           2–Switch     2–Push + 2–Switch


 2–Push            Stack          Push + Stack

Figure 7. Left: train/test setups that require solving test tasks by stitching together training skills, with no
additional data. Top: train on 2-Switch and 2-Push, test on 2-Switch+2-Push. Bottom: trained on 2-Push and
Stack, test on Push + Stack. Right: average success rates by architecture. Deep Set and Self Attention policies
are moderately successful at solving the test tasks, and are comparable to the Oracle in Push + Stack. The MLP
fails to achieve nontrivial success rates on both test environments. Error bars indicate 95% CIs over 5 seeds.

interactions between more than one entity during training. Despite its relative simplicity, the Deep Set
architecture extrapolates as well as or better than the relational architectures in most environments. A
crucial exception is in 3-Push with cube-cube collisions enabled (Appendix D.2). There, modeling
entity-entity interactions is especially crucial and a relational method like Self Attention is largely
superior. Overall, we find that geometric architectures can perform very effective extrapolation.

3.3   Z ERO -S HOT S TITCHING TO SOLVE NOVEL TASKS

When evaluating policies for stitching behavior, we use test tasks that combine subtasks from training
in novel ways. In our first setting, we train a policy on 2-Push and 2-Switch, and then test this policy
on 2-Switch + 2-Push, which requires both pushing cubes and flipping switches. In our second
setting, we train a single policy on 2-Push and Stack, which requires stacking one cube on top of
another. The test environment is Push + Stack, which requires pushing one cube into position and
then stacking the other block on top. This setting is especially difficult because it requires zero-shot
stitching of skills in a particular order (push, then stack). Figure 7 (left) shows the train-test task
relationships we use to test stitching.
Results and Observations Since this experiment requires training a single policy on multiple
training tasks, during each episode we choose one of the training tasks uniformly at random. Figure 7
(right) shows that the MLP policy fails to jointly learn the training tasks in the first setting, leading to
poor performance in 2-Switch + 2-Push. However, the MLP averages above a 35% success rate on
both training tasks in the second setting, but still only manages a 5% success rate on Push + Stack.
This suggests that even when MLP policies are capable of learning the training tasks, they are unable
to combine them to solve new ones.
The geometric architectures show substantially better (but not oracle-level) stitching capabilities
compared to the MLP. Graph Convolution struggles with the switch component of 2-Switch + 2-Push,
but still outperforms the MLP. It is particularly surprising that the two relational architectures (Self
Attention and Graph Convolution) achieve > 60% zero-shot success rate on Push + Stack, which
requires understanding that the push and stack subtasks must be executed in a specific order. Poor
performance in 2-Switch + 2-Push is again due to difficulties in training one policy on two different
tasks, suggesting that better joint training could further improve stitching performance.

4     R ELATED W ORK

Compositionality and Hierarchy. Hierarchical approaches to solving long-horizon tasks explicitly
maintain or learn subpolicies corresponding to useful skills, which can then be coordinated by a high-
level policy (Dayan and Hinton, 1993; Parr and Russell, 1998; Dietterich, 2000). Variations of this
approach include learning termination policies for each sub-policy or “option” (Bacon et al., 2017),
training the high level policy to propose subgoals for goal-conditioned low level skills (Nachum et al.,
2018), or even using natural language as the interface between high and low level policies (Jiang
et al., 2019). Our approach also enables learning of long-horizon and compositional tasks, but simply


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


through architectural modifications to the policy in end-to-end learning, as opposed to explicitly
learning action representations or modifying the training process.
Entity-centric modeling. Recent works in relational RL (Džeroski et al., 2001) have investigated
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2008) for handling complex multi-
entity tasks, where the relational or message passing mechanism may be implemented using self
attention (Zambaldi et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020) or a variety of other means (Bapst et al., 2019; Lin
et al., 2022). Though we directly focus on policy (and critic) architecture for model free learning,
related approaches have studied entity structured networks for dynamics models (Carvalho et al.,
2021; Veerapaneni et al., 2020; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018). Further work has explored relational
architectures for extracting entity-centric representations from high dimensional observations before
doing control (Wilson and Hermans, 2020; Driess et al., 2022). In particular, Zadaianchuk et al.
(2020) combine entity-centric representation learning with a goal conditioned RL approach that also
demonstrated extrapolation, though not stitching. In settings that can be modeled as EFMDPs, our
framework formally motivates using GNNs through the perspective of permutation invariance (Bron-
stein et al., 2021). Tang and Ha (2021) study the permutation invariance of self attention policies
in particular, mainly in the context of robustness to input corruptions. But the invariance properties
of our EFMDP framework also suggest considering invariant architectures without self attention
or other relational mechanisms, in which case GNNs reduce to simpler architectures like Deep
Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017). These architectures remain relatively underexplored outside of basic 2D
environments (Karch et al., 2020). Our experiments evaluate both relational and Deep Set approaches
on a suite of complex entity-centric robot tasks.
Policy Architectures in RL. MLPs, LSTMs, and small CNNs remain the dominant architectures
in continuous control (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Sinha
et al. (2020) study deeper networks for continuous control with DenseNet-style (Huang et al., 2017)
connections. Recent work has also explored the use of self attention over the trajectory history
rather than between entities (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021). Other approaches leverage
inductive biases about the real world, e.g. by embedding learnable dynamical systems into the policy
architecture (Bahl et al., 2020).


5    C ONCLUSION

This work introduces the EFMDP framework for the learning paradigm where an agent can interact
with many entities in an environment. We explore how structural properties of EFMDPs induce a
permutation symmetry in the optimal policy and value functions, motivating policy architectures that
leverage symmetry: set-based invariant models (Deep Sets) and relational models (Self Attention
and Graph Convolution). These policy architectures decompose goal-conditioned tasks into their
constituent entities and subgoals. These architectures are flexible, do not require any manual task
annotations or action primitives, and can be trained end-to-end with standard RL or IL algorithms.
We compare these architecture types with each other and standard MLPs in a suite of complex entity-
centric tasks. We find that geometric architectures can: (a) learn substantially faster than black-box
architectures like the MLP; (b) perform zero-shot extrapolation to new environments with more of
fewer entities than observed in training; and (c) perform zero-shot stitching of learned behaviors to
solve novel task combinations never seen in training. We find that the geometric architectures perform
relatively similarly across most tasks, which can be surprising given the Deep Set’s relative simplicity.
Since many existing entity-centric approaches focus on graph neural networks or transformers, our
results invite further investigation into simple invariant architectures like Deep Sets.
Limitations and Future Work: EFMDPs require entity-specific subgoals, but some tasks may
instead be specified in terms of entity relations (“place this block on top of that block”). In such cases,
the relational subgoals must be first converted into an equivalent entity specific form. Additionally,
EFMDP’s invariance properties explain why structured policies perform well, but do not distinguish
between them (e.g., DS vs SA). We make this comparison empirically here, but future work could
provide a more principled framework for choosing the right architecture for a given entity-centric task.
We also hope to analyze the how the geometric properties of EFMDPs interact with object-centric
representation learning, a vibrant area of research (Burgess et al., 2019; Kipf et al., 2019; Locatello
et al., 2020; Nanbo et al., 2020) which is important to enabling compositional generalization for
policies that operate on high dimensional observations like images.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Reproducibility: Appendix B describes the environments, and Appendix C describes the training
details. We have already open-sourced the code implementing the environments and experiments,
and will include the link after the anonymous reviewing phase ends.


                                             10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IJCAI, pages 1094–1099. Citeseer, 1993.
Dhruv Batra, Angel X Chang, Sonia Chernova, Andrew J Davison, Jia Deng, Vladlen Koltun, Sergey
  Levine, Jitendra Malik, Igor Mordatch, Roozbeh Mottaghi, et al. Rearrangement: A challenge for
  embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01975, 2020.
Richard Sutton and Andrew Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, 1998.
Dimitri Bertsekas and John Tsitsiklis. Neuro-dynamic Programming. 1996.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander Smola. Deep sets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06114, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators.
  In International conference on machine learning, pages 1312–1320. PMLR, 2015.
Tristan Karch, Cédric Colas, Laetitia Teodorescu, Clément Moulin-Frier, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer.
  Deep sets for generalization in rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09443, 2020.
Sašo Džeroski, Luc De Raedt, and Kurt Driessens. Relational reinforcement learning. Machine
  learning, 43(1):7–52, 2001.
Marco Gori, Gabriele Monfardini, and Franco Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph domains.
 In Proceedings. 2005 IEEE international joint conference on neural networks, volume 2, pages
 729–734, 2005.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The
  graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
Vinicius Zambaldi, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Victor Bapst, Yujia Li, Igor Babuschkin, Karl
  Tuyls, David Reichert, Timothy Lillicrap, Edward Lockhart, et al. Relational deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01830, 2018.
Richard Li, Allan Jabri, Trevor Darrell, and Pulkit Agrawal. Towards practical multi-object manipu-
  lation using relational reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), pages 4051–4058. IEEE, 2020.
Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases
  enables input length extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409, 2021.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1707.01495, 2017.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
P Dayan and GE Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. nips’93 (pp. 271–278), 1993.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ronald Parr and Stuart Russell. Reinforcement learning with hierarchies of machines. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, pages 1043–1049, 1998.
Thomas G Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the maxq value function decomposi-
  tion. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 13:227–303, 2000.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08296, 2018.
Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Gu, Kevin Murphy, and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstraction for
  hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.07343, 2019.
Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Carl Doersch, Kimberly Stachenfeld, Pushmeet Kohli, Peter
  Battaglia, and Jessica Hamrick. Structured agents for physical construction. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 464–474. PMLR, 2019.
Yixin Lin, Austin S Wang, Eric Undersander, and Akshara Rai. Efficient and interpretable robot
  manipulation with graph neural networks. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2022.
Wilka Carvalho, Anthony Liang, Kimin Lee, Sungryull Sohn, Honglak Lee, Richard L Lewis, and
 Satinder Singh. Roma: A relational, object-model learning agent for sample-efficient reinforcement
 learning. 2021.
Rishi Veerapaneni, John D Co-Reyes, Michael Chang, Michael Janner, Chelsea Finn, Jiajun Wu,
  Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Entity abstraction in visual model-based reinforcement
  learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1439–1456. PMLR, 2020.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Nicolas Heess, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Josh Merel, Martin Riedmiller,
  Raia Hadsell, and Peter Battaglia. Graph networks as learnable physics engines for inference and
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4470–4479. PMLR, 2018.
Matthew Wilson and Tucker Hermans. Learning to manipulate object collections using grounded
 state representations. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 490–502. PMLR, 2020.
Danny Driess, Zhiao Huang, Yunzhu Li, Russ Tedrake, and Marc Toussaint. Learning multi-object
  dynamics with compositional neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11855, 2022.
Andrii Zadaianchuk, Maximilian Seitzer, and Georg Martius. Self-supervised visual reinforcement
  learning with object-centric representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.14381, 2020.
Yujin Tang and David Ha. The sensory neuron as a transformer: Permutation-invariant neural
  networks for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
  2021.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Samarth Sinha, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Aravind Srinivas, and Animesh Garg. D2rl: Deep dense
  architectures in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09163, 2020.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pages 4700–4708, 2017.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01345, 2021.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shikhar Bahl, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Deepak Pathak. Neural dynamic policies
  for end-to-end sensorimotor learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  5058–5069, 2020.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
  and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Thomas Kipf, Elise van der Pol, and Max Welling. Contrastive learning of structured world models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12247, 2019.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15055, 2020.
Li Nanbo, Cian Eastwood, and Robert B Fisher. Learning object-centric representations of multi-
  object scenes from multiple views. In 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
John Banister Lanier. Curiosity-driven multi-criteria hindsight experience replay. University of
  California, Irvine, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    P ERMUTATION INVARIANCE
We recall Proposition 1:
Proposition 1 (Policy and Value Invariance). In any EFMDP with N entities, any optimal policy
π ⋆ : S × G → A and optimal action-value function Q⋆ : S × A × G → R are both invariant to
permutations of the entity-subgoal pairs. That is, for any σ ∈ SN :
                     π ⋆ (σs, σg) = π ⋆ (s, g) and Q⋆ (σs, a, σg) = Q⋆ (s, a, g)

We want to show that any optimal policy π ⋆ : S × G → A and the optimal action-value function
Q⋆ : S × A × G → R are both permutation invariant, that is for any σ ∈ SN :
                                            π ⋆ (σs, σg) = π ⋆ (s, g)                                    (9)
                                       Q⋆ (σs, a, σg) = Q⋆ (s, a, g)                                    (10)
Recall that in an EFMDP the reward and dynamics have permutation symmetry (Property 1):
                                        R(s, a, g) = R(σs, a, σg)
                                         P(s′ |s, a) = P(σs′ |σs, a)
where σs and σg are defined in Eq. 4. We assume for simplicity that the agent space U and entity
space E are discrete, so that the state space S = U × E N is also discrete.
We begin with Q⋆ , which can be obtained by value iteration, where Q⋆k denotes the k’th iterate. We
initialize Q⋆0 ≡ 0, which is (trivially) permutation invariant. Permutation invariance is then preserved
during each step of value iteration Q⋆k 7→ Q⋆k+1 :
                                                             X
               Q⋆k+1 (σs, a, σg) = R(σs, a, σg) + γ max   ′
                                                                 P(s′ |σs, a)Q⋆k (s′ , a′ )         (11)
                                                          a
                                                              s′ ∈S
                                                          X
                                = R(s, a, g) + γ max
                                                  ′
                                                                  P(σ −1 s′ |s, a)Q⋆k (σ −1 s′ , a′ )   (12)
                                                      a
                                                          s′ ∈S
                                                          X
                                = R(s, a, g) + γ max
                                                  ′
                                                                  P(s′ |s, a)Q⋆k (s′ , a′ )             (13)
                                                      a
                                                          s′ ∈S
                                = Q⋆k+1 (s, a, g)                                                       (14)
Hence Q⋆k is permutation invariant for all k = 0, 1, · · · , with Q⋆k −−−−→ Q⋆ . Line 12 follows from
                                                                            k→∞
the permutation invariance of the reward, transition probability, and the previous iterate Q⋆k . Line 13
uses the fact that summing over σ −1 s′ for all s′ ∈ S is the same as simply summing over all states
s′ ∈ S. This can be seen more explicitly by expanding a sum over arbitrary function f (·):
             X                 X X         X                                            X
                  f (σ −1 s) =        ···        f (u, eσ−1 (1) , · · · , eσ−1 (N ) ) =   f (s)
             s∈S              u∈U e1 ∈E      eN ∈E                                        s∈S


The permutation invariance of Q⋆ leads to the permutation invariance of π ⋆ :
             π ⋆ (σs, σg) = arg max Q⋆ (σs, a, σg) = arg max Q⋆ (s, a, g) = π ⋆ (s, g)
                                   a                                a


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    E NVIRONMENTS
Our environments are modified from OpenAI Gym’s Fetch environments (Brockman et al., 2016)
(MIT license), with our stacking environment in particular being modified from the Fetch stacking
environments of Lanier (2019). They have a 4D continuous action space with 3 values for end effector
displacement and 1 value for controlling the distance between the gripper fingers. The final action is
disabled when the neither the training or test tasks involve stacking, since gripping is not required
for block pushing or switch flipping. Input actions are scaled and bounded to be between [−1, 1].
We set the environment episode length based on the number of entities and subtasks involved. Each
switch added 20 timesteps, and each cube pushing or stacking task added 50 timesteps. For example,
2-Switch + 2-Push had a max episode length of 2 × 50 + 2 × 20 = 140 timesteps.
For non-stacking settings such as N-Push and N-Switch + N-Push, we disable cube-cube collision
physics to make training easier for all methods. Note that subgoals may still interfere with each other
since the gripper can interact with all cubes, so the agent may accidentally knock one cube away
when manipulating another one. We repeat the extrapolation experiments for N-Push with collisions
in Appendix D.2.
State and goals. The agent state describe the robot’s end effector position and velocity the gripper
finger’s positions and velocities. The entity state for cubes include the cube’s pose and velocity, and
for switches include the switch setting θ ∈ [−0.7, 0.7] and the position of the switch base on the
table. The switch entity state is padded with zeros to match the shape of the cube entity state, and
all entity states include an extra bit to distinguish cubes from switches. Subgoals specify a target
position for cubes and a target setting θ⋆ ∈ {−0.7, 0.7} for switches.
Reward. The dense reward is defined as the average distance between each entity and its desired
state as specified by the subgoal. For cubes, this is the L2 distance between current and desired
position. For switches, this is |θ − θ⋆ |, where θ is the current angle of the switch and θ⋆ is the desired
setting. The sparse reward is 0 if all entities are within a threshold distance of their subgoals, and −1
otherwise.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Table 1. General shared RL hyperparameters

                              Hyperparameter                       Value
                                Discount γ                         0.98
                               Parallel envs                        16
                            Replay buffer size                     106
                               Relabel prob                         0.8
                        Ratio of episodes : updates                2:5
                                 Optimizer                        Adam
                               Learning rate              MLP, Deep Set: 0.001
                                                          Self Attention: 0.0001
                              Reward Scale                 Sparse: 1; Dense: 5
                         Action noise η0 (initial)                  0.2
                      Random action prob ϵ0 (initial)               0.3



C       T RAINING DETAILS

C.1      R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING

We train RL agents using a publicly available (MIT license) implementation1 of DDPG (Lillicrap
et al., 2015) and Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017). Table 1 contains
the default hyperparameters shared across all experiments. Our modified implementation collects
experience from 16 environments in parallel into a single replay buffer, and trains the policy and critic
networks on a single GPU. We used an internal cluster to parallelize experimentation across multiple
random seeds and algorithms/hyperparameters. We collect 2 episodes for every 5 gradient updates,
and for HER we relabel the goals in 80% of sampled minibatches (the “relabel prob”). The reward
scale is simply a multipler of the collected reward used during DDPG training. For exploration we
use action noise η and random action probability ϵ; the output action is:

                                         a + N (0, η),   with prob 1 − ϵ
                              ã ∼
                                         Uniform(−1, 1), with prob ϵ

Table 2 shows environment specific RL hyperparameters. “Epochs” describes the total amount of RL
training done, with 1 epoch corresponding to 50 × PARALLEL ENVS episodes. Sparse reward is used
for the simpler environments, and dense reward for the harder ones. For some environments we decay
the exploration parameters η, ϵ by a ratio computed per-epoch. Lin(.01, 100, 150) means that η, ϵ
are both decayed linearly from η0 and ϵ0 to .01 × η0 and .01 × ϵ0 between epochs 100 and 150. The
constant exploration decay schedule maintains the initial η0 , ϵ0 values throughout training. The target
network parameters are updated as θtarget ← (1 − τ )θ + τ θtarget , where τ is the target update speed.
We use the same RL hyperparameters regardless of architecture type except that the learning rate is
lower for Self Attention and the exploration decay schedule may vary. Where Table 1 lists “Fast” and
“Slow” decay schedules, we sweep over both options for each architecture and use the schedule that
works best. In each case, the Self Attention policy prefers the slower exploration schedule and Deep
Sets prefers the faster one, while the MLP typically fails to learn with either exploration schedule on
the more complex environments.
Architectures. The exact actor and critic architectures uses for each architecture family is shown in
Table 3. Linear(256) represents an affine layer with 256 output units. ReLU activations follow every
layer except the last. The final actor layer is followed by a Tanh nonlinearity, and the critic has no
activation function after the final layer. A represents the action space dimension, and Block(N, M, H)
represents a Transformer encoder block (Vaswani et al., 2017) with embedding size N , feedforward
dimension M , and H heads. We disable dropout within the Transformer blocks for RL training.

    1
        https://github.com/TianhongDai/hindsight-experience-replay


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Table 2. Environment specific RL hyperparameters

    Environment       Reward       Epochs                Exploration decay       Target update speed τ
       1-Push         Sparse          50                     Constant(1)                 0.95
       2-Push         Dense          150                 Lin(.01, 75, 125)               0.99
       3-Push         Dense          250               Fast: Lin(.01, 30, 80)            0.99
                                                      Slow: Lin(.01, 100, 175)
   {1,2,3}-Switch     Sparse     {10, 50, 100}               Constant(1)                 0.95
 1-Switch + 1-Push    Dense           150                Lin(.01, 60, 100)               0.99
 2-Switch + 2-Push    Dense           250              Fast: Lin(.01, 75, 150)           0.99
                                                      Slow: Lin(.01, 100, 150)


                                   Table 3. RL architectures

       Family                          Actor                                          Critic
       MLP                  Linear(256)×3, Linear(A)                       Linear(256) ×3, Linear(1)
      Deep Set                  ϕ: Linear(256) ×3                              ϕ: Linear(256) ×2
                                   ρ: Linear(A)                             ρ: Linear(256), Linear(1)
    Self Attention    SA: Linear(256), Block(256, 256, 4)×2          SA: Linear(256), Block(256, 256, 4)×2
                                   ρ: Linear(A)                                   ρ: Linear(1)
 Graph Convolution     Linear(256) ×3, GraphConv(256) ×2              Linear(256) ×3, GraphConv(256) ×2
                                   ρ: Linear(A)                                   ρ: Linear(1)


                               Table 4. Parameter count (3-Push)

                               # parameters            Actor      Critic
                                  MLP                 150,020   150,273
                               Deep Set               140,292   140,545
                             Self Attention           800,260   800,513
                           Graph Convolution          271,876   272,129


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   I MITATION L EARNING

The IL dataset is generated using the best performing RL agent in that environment–we record
M ∈ {1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000} demonstration trajectories. This creates a dataset of M × T
                               ×T
transitions D = {(si , ai )}Mi=1   for behavior cloning. However, in practice we filter the dataset
slightly by discarding the transitions corresponding to trajectories that are not successful.
We use the same policy architectures shown in Table 3 and optimize mean squared error loss over the
dataset:
                                               1 X
                            arg min J(π) :=               ||π(s) − a||2
                                  π           |D|
                                                    (s,a)∼D

We use the Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) optimizer with learning rate 0.001 (MLP, Deep Sets) or
0.0001 (Self Attention). Each policy is trained for 60, 000 gradient steps with a batch size of 128.

C.3   T RAINING AND INFERENCE SPEED

Here we consider the computational complexity of using different architecture classes (MLPs, Deep
Sets, and Self Attention), as we scale the number of entities N . We consider the number of parameters,
activation memory, and computation time (for a forward pass). For MLPs with fixed hidden layer
sizes, the number of parameters and computation time increase linearly with N while the memory
required for activations stays fixed (due to fixed hidden layer sizes). In Deep Sets and Self Attention,
the number of parameters does not depend on the number of entities N . The activation memory and
computation time grow linearly in Deep Sets, and quadratically for the pairwise interactions of Self
Attention. In practice, the number of entities N is modest in all our environments (e.g., fewer than
10), but computational complexity may be relevant in more complex scenes with lots of entities.
For a more holistic real-world comparison of execution and training speed, Figure 8 shows both
inference time and training time in the N-Push environments for N ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The inference time
is the number of milliseconds it takes an actor do a single forward pass (using a GPU) on a single
input observation. The Self Attention policy involves more complex computations and is significantly
slower than Deep Set and MLP policies. The RL training time is the actual number of hours required
to run the reinforcement learning algorithms of Figure 5, for each architecture. Not surprisingly, we
see that 3-Push takes significantly longer to train than 1-Push, since it is a harder environment. For
a fixed environment, however, all three architecture types are comparable in speed, with the Self
Attention version being slightly slower than the others. The surprising similarity in RL training time
(despite much slower inference time for the Self Attention policy) suggests that most of the RL time is
spent on environment simulation rather than policy or critic execution. Hence, the difference between
architectures presented in this paper has only a minor effect on reinforcement learning speeds in
practice.
                         Inference and training speed on N-Push


Figure 8. Left: the time (in milliseconds) it takes for each policy architecture to execute a single
forward pass on a single input observation from the N-Push environments, where N ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The
self attention policy is significantly slower, while the Deep Set and MLP policies are comparable.
Right: Real world reinforcement learning times (in hours) training each policy/critic architecture on
the N-Push environments. Although the Self Attention policy is slightly slower, all policies train at
comparable speeds in the same environment. This suggests that environment simulation, not policy
execution, is the dominant time consuming element.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     F URTHER COMPARISONS
D.1   D EEP SET ARCHITECTURE SIZE

                         Eﬀect of Deep Set size on Extrapolation and Stitching


Figure 9. Comparison of N-Push extrapolation and Push + Stack stitching performance when using
small and large variants of the Deep Set policy architecture. The small version implements ρ with a
1-layer linear map, while the large version implements ρ with a 2-layer MLP. For N-Push, the larger
network achieves greater success rates in the training environment (3 cubes) but is actually worse
when extrapolating to 5 or 6 cubes. On the other hand, the larger Deep Set displays superior stitching
capability and achieves a higher average success rate when generalizing to Push + Stack from 2-Push
and Stack.

Recall that our Deep Set policy architecture involves two MLPs ϕ and ρ, where ϕ produces inter-
mediate representations for each entity, those intermediate representations are summed, and then ρ
produces the final output (Eq. 6). In full generality, both ϕ and ρ may have two or more layers with
nonlinearities in between. While our ϕ is a 3-layer MLP, we use a linear ρ throughout the main paper
because we found that it often works comparably or better than using a larger 2-layer MLP ρ. Here
we repeat the N-Push extrapolation and Push + Stack stitching experiments from the main paper
using a 2-layer ρ, which we call “Deep Set (large).” The results from the main paper uses a 1-layer ρ
which we refer to here as “Deep Set (small).”
Figure 9 shows the results. In N-Push, the larger Deep Set model achieves higher training success rates
in the 3-cube environment, but has worse extrapolation success rates for large numbers of cubes. For
example, the smaller Deep Set model is significantly better at solving 6-Push. Meanwhile, the large
and small Deep Sets achieve very similar results in the pushing and stacking training environments.
However, the larger Deep Set model achieves a higher success rate in the Push + Stack environment,
indicating superior stitching capability. This suggests that simpler Deep Set architectures may be
better for extrapolating to a large number of entities, but more complex architectures may be superior
for solving complex tasks with a fixed number of entities.

D.2   N-P USH WITH CUBE - CUBE COLLISIONS


Figure 10. N-Push extrapolation with cube-cube collisions enabled. All methods observe some drop
in performance relative to Figure 6, where N-Push has cube-cube collisions disabled. Self Attention
tends to outperform Deep Sets when collisions enabled, likely because its relational inductive biases
are better suited to handling interactions between entities that arise from collisions.

As noted in Appendix B, we disable cube-cube collisions in the N-Push and N-Switch+N-Push
experiments of the main paper (of course, the stacking settings require cube-cube collisions to be
enabled). Here we repeat the N-Push extrapolation experiments with cube-cube collisions enabled.
Figure 10 shows the results, which are qualitatively similar to when collisions are disabled. All
methods observe a decrease in success rates of about 15%, with the Self Attention method often
outperforming the Deep Set policy. This is likely because N-Push involves more interaction between


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


entities once cube-cube collisions are enabled, and Self Attention’s relational inductive biases are
better suited for modeling these interactions.

D.3   N-P USH WITH PPO INSTEAD OF DDPG

Our RL learning efficiency experiments all use DDPG with
Hindsight Experience Replay, which raises the question
of whether the results (in particular, the inefficiency of the
                                                                            3-Switch PPO
MLP) are specific to a particular training algorithm. To
                                                                      10


                                                             Return
answer this, we repeated the 3-Push RL experiment for the
Deep Set and MLP architectures, but trained with Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)) instead             20
of DDPG. We use the Stable Baselines 3 (Raffin et al.,
2021) (MIT License) implementation of PPO with default                   0      1      2      3
hyperparameters, trained for up to 1 × 106 environment                            Step      1e6
steps. Figure 11 shows that the general trend we observed                   Deep Set         MLP
while using DDPG still holds: the invariant Deep Set
policy learns the task far more efficiently than the MLP. In Figure 11. Return throughout RL train-
fact, as with DDPG the MLP policy fails to learn 3-Push ing on 3-Push using Proximal Policy Op-
at all.                                                        timization (PPO) instead of DDPG.


                                                20
