Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A S IMPLE A PPROACH FOR V ISUAL ROOM R EARRANGE -
MENT: 3D M APPING AND S EMANTIC S EARCH

 Brandon Trabucco                     Gunnar A. Sigurdsson            Robinson Piramuthu
 Carnegie Mellon University           Amazon Alexa AI                 Amazon Alexa AI
 btrabucc@cs.cmu.edu                                                  robinpir@amazon.com

 Gaurav S. Sukhatme                                               Ruslan Salakhutdinov
 University of Southern California and Amazon Alexa AI            Carnegie Mellon University
 gaurav@usc.edu                                                   rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu



                                           A BSTRACT
         Physically rearranging objects is an important capability for embodied agents.
         Visual room rearrangement evaluates an agent’s ability to rearrange objects in
         a room to a desired goal based solely on visual input. We propose a simple
         yet effective method for this problem: (1) search for and map which objects
         need to be rearranged, and (2) rearrange each object until the task is complete.
         Our approach consists of an off-the-shelf semantic segmentation model, voxel-
         based semantic map, and semantic search policy to efficiently find objects that
         need to be rearranged. Our method was the winning submission to the AI2-
         THOR Rearrangement Challenge in the 2022 Embodied AI Workshop at CVPR
         2022, and improves on current state-of-the-art end-to-end reinforcement learning-
         based methods that learn visual room rearrangement policies from 0.53% correct
         rearrangement to 16.56%, using only 2.7% as many samples from the environment.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Physically rearranging objects is an everyday skill for humans, but remains a core challenge for
embodied agents that assist humans in realistic environments. Natural environments for humans
are complex and require generalization to a combinatorially large number of object configurations
(Batra et al., 2020a). Generalization in complex realistic environments remains an immense practical
challenge for embodied agents, and the rearrangement setting provides a rich test bed for embodied
generalization in these environments. The rearrangement setting combines two challenging perception
and control tasks: (1) understanding the state of a dynamic 3D environment, and (2) acting over a
long horizon to reach a goal. These problems have traditionally been studied independently by the
vision and reinforcement learning communities (Chaplot et al., 2021), but the advent of large models
and challenging benchmarks is showing that both components are important for embodied agents.
Reinforcement learning (RL) can excel at embodied tasks, especially if a lot of experience can be
leveraged (Weihs et al., 2021; Chaplot et al., 2020b; Ye et al., 2021) for training. In a simulated
environment with unlimited retries, this experience is cheap to obtain, and agents can explore
randomly until a good solution is discovered by the agent. This pipeline works well for tasks like
point-goal navigation (Wijmans et al., 2020), but in some cases this strategy is not enough. As the
difficulty of embodied learning tasks increases, the agent must generalize to an increasing number of
environment configurations, and broadly scaled experience can become insufficient.
In the rearrangement setting, a perfect understanding of the environment simplifies the problem: an
object is here, it should go there, and the rest can be solved with grasping and planning routines.
Representing the information about the locations and states of objects in an accessible format is
therefore an important contribution for the rearrangement setting. Our initial experiments suggest
that accurate 3D semantic maps of the environment are one such accessible format for visual
rearrangement. With accurate 3D semantic maps, our method rearranges 15.11% of objects correctly,
and requires significantly less experience from the environment to do so. While end-to-end RL
requires up to 75 million environment steps in Weihs et al. (2021), our method only requires 2 million


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                     Rearrange
      Search

                                                                                                      (1) Locating


                                                                                               (2) Moving To Goal


    Map                                                                                 (3) Placing Object At Goal

Figure 1: Our method incrementally builds voxel-based Semantic Maps from visual observations and efficiently
finds objects using a Semantic Search Policy. We visualize an example rearrangement on the right with the initial
position of the pink object (laptop on the bed), followed by the agent holding the object (laptop), and finally the
destination position of the object (laptop on the desk).
samples and trains offline. Our results suggest end-to-end RL without an accurate representation of
the scene may be missing out on a fundamental aspect of understanding of the environment.
We demonstrate how semantic maps help agents effectively understand dynamic 3D environments
and perform visual rearrangement. These dynamic environments have elements that can move (like
furniture), and objects with changing states (like the door of a cabinet). We present a method that
builds accurate semantic maps in these dynamic environments, and reasons about what has changed.
Deviating from prior work that leverages end-to-end RL, we propose a simple approach for visual
rearrangement: (1) search for and map which objects need to be rearranged, and (2) procedurally
rearrange objects until a desired goal configuration is reached. We evaluate our approach on the
AI2-THOR Rearrangement Challenge (Weihs et al., 2021) and establish a new state-of-the-art.
We propose an architecture for visual rearrangement that builds voxel-based semantic maps of the
environment and rapidly finds objects using a search-based policy. Our method shows an improvement
of 14.72 absolute percentage points over current work in visual rearrangement, and is robust to the
accuracy of the perception model, the budget for exploration, and the size of objects being rearranged.
We conduct ablations to diagnose where the bottlenecks are for visual rearrangement, and find that
accurate scene understanding is the most crucial. As an upper bound, when provided with a perfect
semantic map, our method solves 38.33% of tasks, a potential for significant out-of-the-box gains as
better perception models are developed. Our results show the importance of building effective scene
representations for embodied agents in complex and dynamic visual environments.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Embodied 3D Scene Understanding. Knowledge of the 3D environment is at the heart of various
tasks for embodied agents, such as point navigation (Anderson et al., 2018a), image navigation (Batra
et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2019), vision language navigation (Anderson et al., 2018b; Shridhar et al.,
2020), embodied question answering (Gordon et al., 2018; Das et al., 2018), and more. These tasks
require an agent to reason about its 3D environment. For example, vision language navigation (An-
derson et al., 2018b; Shridhar et al., 2020) requires grounding language in an environment goal,
and reasoning about where to navigate and what to modify in the environment to reach that goal.
Reasoning about the 3D environment is especially important for the rearrangement setting, and has a
rich interdisciplinary history in the robotics, vision, and reinforcement learning communities.

Visual Room Rearrangement. Rearrangement has long been one of the fundamental tasks in
robotics research (Ben-Shahar & Rivlin, 1996; Stilman et al., 2007; King et al., 2016; Krontiris &
Bekris, 2016; Yuan et al., 2018; Correll et al., 2018; Labbé et al., 2020). Typically, these methods
address the challenge in the context of the state of the objects being fully observed (Cosgun et al.,
2011; King et al., 2016), which allows for efficient and accurate planning-based solutions. In contrast,
there has been recent interest in visual rearrangement (Batra et al., 2020a; Weihs et al., 2021; Qureshi
et al., 2021; Goyal et al., 2022; Gadre et al., 2022) where the states of objects and the rearrangement


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


goal are not directly observed. In these cases, the agent is provided a direct visual input, and the
environment is relatively complex and realistic. This latest iteration of rearrangement shares similarity
with various other challenging embodied AI tasks such as embodied navigation (Anderson et al.,
2018a; Batra et al., 2020b; Chaplot et al., 2020a; Shridhar et al., 2020; Francis et al., 2021; Min et al.,
2021; Pashevich et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021) and embodied question answering (Gordon et al.,
2018; Das et al., 2018), which require finding objects and reasoning about their state.

AI2-THOR Rearrangement Challenge. Our work builds on the latest rearrangement methods
and demonstrates how building accurate voxel-based semantic maps can produce significant gains.
We focus on the AI2-THOR Rearrangement Challenge (Weihs et al., 2021), which uses AI2-THOR,
an open-source and high-fidelity simulator used in many prior works (Gadre et al., 2022; Weihs
et al., 2021; Shridhar et al., 2020; Gordon et al., 2018). Prior works on this challenge have studied a
variety of approaches, including end-to-end RL in Weihs et al. (2021), and a planning-based approach
in Gadre et al. (2022). Our approach is the first to use voxel-based semantic maps to infer what
to rearrange from an experience goal as described by Batra et al. (2020a). Though both Gadre
et al. (2022) and our method use planning, Gadre et al. (2022) use a graph-based continuous scene
representation, and we use voxel-based semantic maps instead, which we show is more effective.

3D Mapping & Search. Agents that interact with an embodied world through navigation and ma-
nipulation must keep track of the world (mapping) (Thrun, 2002) and themselves (localization) (Thrun
et al., 2001)—both extensively studied in robotics by processing low-level information (Engel et al.,
2014), building semantic maps (Kuipers & Byun, 1991) and more recently, via techniques specifically
developed to handle dynamic and general aspects of the environment (Rünz & Agapito, 2017; Rosinol
et al., 2021; Wong et al., 2021). When semantics are more important than precision, such as for
embodied learning tasks, recent methods have looked at neural network-based maps (Gupta et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019a; Chaplot et al., 2020b; Blukis et al., 2021; Chaplot et al.,
2021). Our method builds on these and adopts the use of a voxel-based semantic map and pretrained
semantic segmentation model—a similar methodological setup to Chaplot et al. (2021); Min et al.
(2021); Blukis et al. (2021). However, our method diverges from these prior works by using multiple
voxel-based semantic maps to infer what to rearrange from an experience goal as described by Batra
et al. (2020a). These prior works have instead considered geometric goals in Chaplot et al. (2021) and
language goals in Min et al. (2021); Blukis et al. (2021), and ours is the first to consider an experience
goal (Batra et al., 2020a). Furthermore, while a search-based policy is used in Min et al. (2021), we
are the first to use search with an unspecified destination (the target object is not known a priori).

3    M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we present a simple approach for solving visual rearrangement problems. We begin the
section by discussing the visual rearrangement problem statement and metrics we use for evaluation.
We then discuss our methodological contributions. First, we propose to build multiple voxel-based
semantic maps representing the environment in different configurations. Second, we propose a policy
that efficiently finds objects that need to be rearranged. Third, we propose a method for inferring the
rearrangement goal from two semantic maps to efficiently solve visual rearrangement tasks.

Visual rearrangement definition and evaluation metrics. Consider the rearrangement setting
defined by Batra et al. (2020a), which is a special case of a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
augmented with a goal specification g = ϕ(s0 , S ∗ ). This goal specification encodes the set of states
S ∗ for which the rearrangement task is considered solved from initial state s0 . The agent typically
does not directly observe the set of goal states S ∗ , and this is reflected by the goal specification
function ϕ : S × 2S −→ G. We consider a setting where the rearrangement goal g is specified
visually and the agent initially observes the environment in its goal configuration. This setting is
especially challenging because the agent must remember what the environment initially looked like to
infer the set of goal states. Once the goal has been understood and rearrangement has been attempted,
we evaluate agents using metrics introduced by Weihs et al. (2021). We consider a Success metric
that measures the proportion of tasks for which the agent has correctly rearranged all objects and
misplaced none during rearrangement. This metric is strict in the sense that an agent receives a
success of 0.0 if at least one object is misplaced—even if all others are correctly rearranged. We
consider an additional %Fixed Strict metric that measures the proportion of objects per task correctly


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                          Semantic


                                                                                                                                 Map Disagreements
                                                                                                          Maps
                                                                                                                      Laptop
                                                                    Mapping
                                                                   Unshuffle Phase
                                                                                                                       Book


                                                                    Mapping
                                                         Walkthrough Phase                                            Pencil


                                            5 Layers


                                                                                          Depthwise Max
                                                                      Conv2d 3x3,64
                                                       GroupNorm
                                  Softmax



                                               ReLU
   Search                                                                                                            Rearrange



Figure 2: Our method builds voxel-based Semantic Maps from visual observations. Our Semantic Search Policy
helps build accurate maps by selecting navigation goals to efficiently find objects that need to be rearranged.
Once accurate maps are built, our method compares the Semantic Maps to identify disagreements between the
maps, and rearranges objects to resolve those disagreements using a deterministic rearrangement policy.

rearranged, equal to 0.0 per task if any were misplaced. This second metric is more informative
regarding how close the agent was to solving each task. Effective agents will correctly rearrange all
objects in the scene to their goal configurations, maximizing their Success and %Fixed Strict.

Building two semantic maps. Our approach builds off recent work that uses voxel-based semantic
maps in embodied settings (Blukis et al., 2021; Min et al., 2021; Chaplot et al., 2021). Our work
differs from these in that we use multiple voxel-based semantic maps to encode both the goal state and
current state of the environment. In particular, we build two semantic maps m0 , m1 ∈ RH×W ×D×C
that represent 3D grids with H × W × D voxels. Each voxel is represented with a categorical
distribution on C classes encoding which class is likely to occupy each voxel. Empty voxels are
assigned the zero vector. In an initial observation phase, our agent navigates the scene and builds
m0 , a semantic map encoding the goal configurations for objects in the scene. Likewise, in a second
interaction phase, our agent navigates the scene and builds m1 , a semantic map encoding the current
state of objects in the scene. At every timestep during each phase, pose, RGB, and depth images are
observed, and either m0 or m1 is updated depending on which phase the agent is currently observing.

Incorporating semantic predictions in the maps. Each semantic map is initialized to all zeros
and, at every timestep t, semantic predictions from Mask R-CNN (He et al., 2017) are added to the
map. Given the RGB image observation It , we generate semantic predictions from Mask R-CNN
consisting of the probability of each pixel belonging to a particular class. We filter these predictions
to remove those with a detection confidence lower than 0.9 and conduct an ablation in Section 4.3.
We follow Blukis et al. (2021); Min et al. (2021); Chaplot et al. (2021) and generate an egocentric
point cloud cego
              t   using the depth observation Dt . Each point in this point cloud is associated with a
pixel in the image It and a vector of class probabilities from Mask R-CNN. Given the current pose
xt , we then transform the egocentric point cloud cego
                                                    t    from the agent’s coordinate system to world
coordinate system. This transformation results in a geocentric point cloud cgeot    that is converted to
a geocentric voxel representation vtgeo ∈ RH×W ×D×C of the same cardinality as the maps. We
generate a voxelized mask vtmask ∈ RH×W ×D×1 that equals one for every occupied voxel in vtgeo
and zero otherwise. New semantic predictions are added to the maps with a moving average.

                        mi [t + 1] = mi [t] ⊙ (1 − vtmask (1 − ϵ)) + vtgeo (1 − ϵ)                                               (1)
The update in Equation 1 allows voxels to be updated at different rates depending on how frequently
they are observed. The hyperparameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1) controls how quickly the semantic maps are
updated to account for new semantic predictions, and is set to 0.5 in our experiments. An overview
of how our two semantic maps are built is shown in Figure 2. We’ve detailed how the semantic maps
are constructed from observations, and we will next describe how navigation goals are selected.


                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 3D Mapping and Semantic Search For Visual Rearrangement
Require: visual rearrangement environment e, initial voxel-based semantic maps m0 , m1 ∈
  RH×W ×D×C , search-based policy πθ (x|m), pre-trained semantic segmentation model g
  for each phase i ∈ {0, 1} do
     for each It , Dt , xt observed do
         vtgeo , vtmask ← project( g(It ), Dt , xt )                           ▷ project to voxels
         mi [t] ← mi [t − 1] ⊙ (1 − vtmask (1 − ϵ)) + vtgeo (1 − ϵ)                 ▷ update map
         if goal is reached or goal does not exist then
             goal ∼ πθ (x|mi [t])                                   ▷ emit a semantic search goal
         end if
         navigate to goal
     end for
  end for
  while a disagreement d between m0 and m1 is detected do
     navigate to d in m1 and rearrange d to match m0
  end while


Locating objects with a search-based policy. Building accurate maps requires locating and
observing every object in the scene so they can be added to the maps. This requires intelligently
selecting navigation goals based on where objects are likely to be. We learn a high-level policy
πθ (x|mi ) that builds off recent work in Min et al. (2021); Chaplot et al. (2021) and parameterizes a
distribution over 3D search locations in the environment. The input to the policy is a 3D semantic
map mi from whichever phase is currently active. The policy is a 5-layer 2D convolutional neural
network that processes a 3D semantic map mi and outputs a categorical distribution over voxels in mi ,
corresponding to 3D search locations. The policy is trained using maximum likelihood training with
an expert distribution p∗ (x) that captures the locations of the K objects the agent should rearrange in
the current scene. This expert distribution in Equation 2 is a Gaussian mixture model with a mode
centered at the location µk of each object, and a variance hyperparameter σ 2 for each mode.

                                                     K
                                                 1 X
                                      p∗ (x) ∝       N (x; µk , σ 2 I)                                      (2)
                                                 K
                                                    k=1


Once a policy πθ (x|mi ) is trained that captures a semantic prior for object locations, we use planning
to reach goals sampled from the policy. We build a planar graph that represents traversable space
derived from voxel occupancy in the semantic map, and use Dijkstra’s algorithm (Dijkstra, 1959)
to find the shortest path from the agent’s current location to the goal. We filter navigation goals to
ensure only feasible goals are sampled, and then allow sufficient time for each navigation goal to be
reached. Once the current goal is reached, we sample another goal and call the planner again.

Inferring the rearrangement goal from the maps. Once two semantic maps are built, we compare
them to extract differences in object locations, which we refer to as map disagreements. These
disagreements represent objects that need to be rearranged by the agent. To locate disagreements,
we first use OpenCV (Bradski, 2000) to label connected voxels of the same class as object instances.
We consider voxels with nonzero probability of class c to contain an instance of that class. Object
instances are then matched between phases by taking the assignment of object instances that minimizes
the difference in appearance between instances of the same class. We leverage the Hungarian
algorithm (Kuhn & Yaw, 1955), and represent appearance by the average color of an object instance
in the map. Once objects are matched, we label pairs separated by > 0.05 meters as disagreements.
Given a set of map disagreements {(x1 , x∗1 ), (x2 , x∗2 ), . . . , (xN , x∗N )} represented by the current pose
xi and goal pose x∗i for each object, we leverage a planning-based rearrangement policy to solve the
task. Our rearrangement policy navigates to each object in succession and transports them to their
goal location. By accurately mapping with a search-based policy, inferring the rearrangement goal,
and planning towards the goal, our method in Algorithm 1 efficiently solves visual rearrangement. 1

   1
       Code for reproducing our method is available at: https://github.com/brandontrabucco/mass


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Evaluation on the 2022 AI2-THOR 2-Phase Rearrangement Challenge. Our method attains
state-of-the-art performance on this challenge, outperforming prior work by 875% %Fixed Strict.
Results are averaged over 1000 rearrangement tasks in each of the 2022 validation set and 2022 test
set. Higher is better. A Success of 100.0 indicates all objects are successfully rearranged if none
are misplaced and 0.0 otherwise. The metric %Fixed Strict is more lenient, equal to the percent of
objects that are successfully rearranged if none are newly misplaced, and 0.0 otherwise.
                                               Validation                       Test
    Method                             %Fixed Strict     Success     %Fixed Strict        Success
    VRR + Map (Weihs et al., 2021)                1.18       0.40              0.53           0.00
    CSR (Gadre et al., 2022)                      3.30       1.20              1.90           0.40
    Ours w/o Semantic Search                    15.77        4.30       +795% 15.11     +900% 3.60
    Ours                                        17.47        6.30       +871% 16.56    +1175% 4.70


4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section we evaluate our approach and show its effectiveness. We first evaluate our approach
on the AI2-THOR Rearrangement Challenge Weihs et al. (2021) and show our approach leads to an
improvement of 14.72 absolute percentage points over current work, detailed in Subsection 4.1. This
benchmark tests an agent’s ability to rearrange rooms to a desired object goal configuration, and is
a suitable choice for measuring visual rearrangement performance. Next, we show the importance
of each proposed component, and demonstrate in Subsection 4.2 our voxel-based map and search-
based policy exhibit large potential gains as more performant models for perception and search are
developed in the future. Finally, we show in Subsection4.3 our approach is robust to the quality of
object detections and budget for exploration.

Description of the benchmark. In this benchmark, the goal is to rearrange up to five objects to
a desired state, defined in terms of object locations and openness. The challenge is based on the
RoomR (Weihs et al., 2021) dataset that consists of a training set with 80 rooms and 4000 tasks,
validation set with 20 rooms and 1000 tasks, and a test set with 20 rooms and 1000 tasks. We consider
a two-phase setting where an agent observes the goal configuration of the scene during an initial
Walkthrough Phase. The scene is then shuffled, and the agent is tasked with rearranging objects back
to their goal configuration during a second Unshuffle Phase. This two-phase rearrangement setting is
challenging because it requires the agent to remember the scene layout from the Walkthrough Phase,
to identify the rearrangement goal. Goals are internally represented by a set of valid object poses
S ∗ ⊂ (R3 ×SO(3))×(R3 ×SO(3)) · · ·×(R3 ×SO(3)), but the agent does not observe S ∗ directly.
At every time step t during either phase, the agent observes a geocentric pose xt , an egocentric RGB
image It , and an egocentric depth image Dt . The rearrangement goal is specified indirectly via
observations of the scene layout during the Walkthrough Phase. During training, additional metadata
is available such as ground-truth semantic labels, but during evaluation only the allowed observations
xt , It and Dt can be used. Once both the Walkthrough Phase and Unshuffle Phase are complete, we
measure performance using the %Fixed Strict and Success metrics described in Section 3.

4.1    E FFECTIVENESS AT V ISUAL R EARRANGEMENT

We report performance in Table 1 and show an improvement in %Fixed Strict from 1.9 to 15.11 over
the current state-of-the-art method, namely Continuous Scene Representations (CSR) (Gadre et al.,
2022). These results show our method is more effective than prior work at visual rearrangement.
Our success of 4.63% on the test set indicates our method solves 46 / 1000 tasks, whereas the best
existing approach, CSR, solves 4 / 1000 tasks. Furthermore, our method correctly rearranges 499 /
3004 objects in the test set, while CSR rearranges only 57 / 3004 objects in the test set.
The results in Table 1 support two conclusions. First, 3D Mapping is a helpful inductive bias. Ours is
currently the only method on the challenge to leverage 3D Mapping for identifying rearrangement
goals. The next best approach, CSR Gadre et al. (2022), represents the scene with a graph, where
nodes encode objects, and edges encode spatial relationships. We speculate determining which
objects need to be rearranged benefits from knowing their fine-grain 3D position, which our method


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Ablation of the importance of each component of our method. Our method produces
significant gains as perception and search models become more accurate. Results are averaged over
1000 rearrangement tasks in each of the 2022 validation set and 2022 test set. As in Table 1, higher is
better, and a Success of 100.0 indicates all objects are successfully rearranged if none are misplaced
and 0.0 otherwise. Our results show that as perception and search models continue to improve with
future research, we have an out-of-the-box improvement of 34.73 Success on the test set.
                                             Validation                         Test
      Method                        %Fixed Strict      Success    %Fixed Strict          Success
      CSR + GT T                               3.80        1.30              2.10            0.70
      CSR + GT BT                              7.90        3.00              5.90            2.20
      CSR + GT MBT                            26.00        8.80             27.00           10.00
      Ours + GT Semantic Search               21.24       7.60        +942% 19.79      +871% 6.10
      Ours + GT Segmentation                  66.66      45.60       +1004% 59.29    +1707% 37.55
      Ours + GT Both                          68.46      48.60       +1008% 59.50    +1742% 38.33


directly represents via semantic maps. Second, these results also suggest that our method more
successfully rearranges small objects. This is important (see additional results in Subsection 4.5)
because many common objects humans use are small—cutlery, plates, cups, etc.

4.2    C OMPONENT A BLATION

The goal of this experiment is to determine the importance of each component to our method. We
consider a series of ablations in Table 2 that replace different components of our method with ground
truth predictions. We first consider Ours + GT Semantic Search, where we substitute the predictions
of our search-based policy πθ with the ground truth locations of objects that need to be rearranged.
We also consider Ours + GT Segmentation, where we substitute the predictions of Mask R-CNN (He
et al., 2017) with ground truth semantic segmentation labels. The final ablation in the table Ours +
GT Both includes both substitutions at once. In addition to reporting our performance, we reference
the performance of CSR (Gadre et al., 2022) in a similar set of ablations. We consider CSR + GT T
which uses expert trajectories that observe all objects needing to be rearranged, CSR + GT BT which
also uses ground truth object detection labels, and CSR + GT MBT which additionally uses ground
truth object instance pairs between the Walkthrough Phase and the Unshuffle Phase. Table 2 shows
our method produces a better out-of-the-box improvement in all metrics as the perception and search
components become more accurate, suggesting both components are important.
Table 2 demonstrates our method produces significant gains when paired with accurate semantic
search and accurate semantic segmentation. When using ground-truth semantic segmentation labels
and ground-truth search locations, our method attains an improvement of 35.35 absolute percentage
points in Success compared to existing work given access to the same experts. CSR + GT BT makes
the same assumptions as our method with both components replaced with ground-truth, and is used
to compute this improvement margin. When prior work is given the additional accommodation of
ground-truth object instance pairs between the two environment phases, CSR + GT MBT, our method
maintains an improvement of 27.55 absolute Success points without the accommodation. These
results show our method has greater room for improvement than prior work, with a %Fixed Strict
32.50 absolute percentage points higher than current work. Our method’s room for improvement with
more accurate perception and search models is appealing because accurate 3D vision models are an
active area of research, and our method directly benefits from innovations in these models.

4.3    S TABILITY V ERSUS P ERCEPTION Q UALITY

In the previous sections, we evaluated our method’s effectiveness at rearrangement, and room for
growth as better perception and search models are developed. This direct benefit from improvements
in perception quality resulting from better models is desireable, but an effective method should also
be robust when perception quality is poor. In this section, we evaluate our method’s performance
stability as a function of the quality of object detections. We simulate changes in object detection


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Num Newly Misplaced
                                                                                                                                          0.08
                                                                                  0.20


                                                                  %Fixed Strict
                        0.8
                                                                                                                                          0.06


                                                                                                                                Success
                                                                                  0.15
                        0.6                                                                                                               0.04
                                                                                  0.10
                        0.4                                                                                                               0.02
                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                 0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8    1.0                            0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8     1.0                      0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8    1.0
                               Detection Confidence Threshold                            Detection Confidence Threshold                          Detection Confidence Threshold
                                                                                             Validation            Test

Figure 3: Rearrangement performance versus perception quality. Dark colored lines represent the
average metric across 1000 tasks, and shaded regions correspond to a 68% confidence interval. Lower
Num Newly Misplaced (left plot) is better, higher %Fixed Strict (center plot) and Success (right plot)
are better. Our method improves smoothly as perception quality increases, simulated by varying the
detection confidence threshold used to filter Mask R-CNN predictions detailed in Section 3.

quality by varying the detection confidence threshold of Mask R-CNN (He et al., 2017) described in
Section 3. A low threshold permits accepting detections where Mask R-CNN makes high-variance
predictions, reducing the quality of detections overall. In the following experiment, we vary the
detection confidence threshold on the validation and test sets of the rearrangement challenge.
Figure 3 shows our method is robust to small changes in perception quality. As the detection
confidence increases, simulating an improvement in object detection fidelity, performance of our
method smoothly increases. Peak performance with our method on the validation set is attained with
a detection confidence threshold close to 0.9, which is the value we employ throughout the paper.
Error bars in this experiment are computed using a 68% confidence interval with 1000 sample points,
corresponding to 1000 tasks in each of the validation and test sets. The small width of error bars
indicates the observed relationship between perception quality and performance most likely holds
for tasks individually (not just on average), supporting the conclusion our method is robust to small
changes in perception quality. We make a final observation that as perception quality increases, fewer
objects are misplaced as our method more accurately infers the rearrangement goal. These results
suggest our method produces consistent gains in rearrangement as perception models improve.

4.4                           S TABILITY V ERSUS E XPLORATION B UDGET

We conduct an ablation in this section to evaluate how the exploration budget affects our method.
This is important because the conditions an agent faces in the real world vary, and an effective agent
must be robust when the budget for exploring the scene is small. We simulate a limited exploration
budget by varying the amount of navigation goals used by the agent when building the semantic maps.
A lower budget results in fewer time steps spent building the semantic maps, and fewer updates to
voxels described in Section 3. With fewer updates, sampling goals intelligently is crucial to ensure
the agent has the information necessary to infer the task rearrangement goal.
Figure 4 shows our method is robust when the exploration budget is small. Performance is stable
when less than 5 navigation goals are proposed by our semantic search module, where no penalty
in %Fixed Strict and Success can be observed. This result confirms the effectiveness of semantic
search: sampled goals correspond to the locations of objects likely to need rearrangement, so even
when the budget is small, these objects are already observed. The experiment also shows that as
the budget decreases, fewer objects are misplaced. This is intuitive because when the budget is
small, fewer objects in the environment are observed and added to the map, reducing the chance
of incorrect map disagreements being proposed. Additionally, when the budget is large, the agent
spends the majority of the episode in navigation, and may not have enough time left to correct map
disagreements, resulting in slightly lower overall performance. These results suggest our method is
effective for a variety of exploration budgets, and is robust when the budget is small.

4.5                           FAILURE M ODES

Our previous experiments showed instances where our method is effective, but an understanding
of its limitations is equally important. The goal of this subsection is to identify how and why our


                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Num Newly Misplaced
                                                                                          0.22
                          0.60                                                                                                                          0.08


                                                                          %Fixed Strict
                          0.55                                                            0.20                                                          0.07


                                                                                                                                              Success
                          0.50                                                            0.18                                                          0.06
                          0.45                                                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                          0.16
                          0.40                                                                                                                          0.04
                                 2.5     5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0                          2.5     5.0       7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0                    2.5     5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0
                                       Num Navigation Goals                                            Num Navigation Goals                                          Num Navigation Goals
                                                                    Semantic Search Validation                                  Semantic Search Test

Figure 4: Rearrangement performance versus navigation budget. Dark colored lines represent the average
metric across 1000 tasks, and shaded regions correspond to a 68% confidence interval. Lower Num Newly
Misplaced (left plot) is better, higher %Fixed Strict (center plot) and Success (right plot) is better. Our method
performs well even when the number of navigation goals is small and maintains a performance gain over prior
work for all sizes of the budget, from one navigation goal (x-axis left) to 15 navigation goals (x-axis right).



method can fail. To accomplish this, we conduct an ablation to study how three indicators—object
size, distance to the goal position, and amount of nearby clutter—affect our method. These capture
different aspects of what makes rearrangement hard. For example, small objects can be ignored,
objects distant to their goal can be easier to misplace, and objects too close to one another can be
mis-detected. We measure the performance of our method with respect to these indicators in Figure 6
in Appendix B, and analyze the experimental conditions when our method is less effective.
Our results illuminate what kinds of tasks are difficult for our method. We find experimentally that
objects further from the rearrangement goal are harder for our method to successfully rearrange.
Objects within 0.326 meters of the goal are correctly rearranged >30% of the time, whereas objects
further than 4.157 meters from the goal are only correctly rearranged <20% of the time. One
explanation for this disparity in performance could be matching object instances between phases
is more difficult when those instances are further apart. Better perception models can mitigate this
explanation by providing more information about object appearance that may be used to accurately
pair instances. While this first observation is intuitive, our second is more surprising. We find that
our method rearranges small objects as effectively as large objects, suggesting our method is robust
to the size of objects it rearranges. This quality is desireable because realistic environments contain
objects in a variety of sizes. Effective agents should generalize to a variety of object sizes.


5                         C ONCLUSION

We presented a simple modular approach for rearranging objects to desired visual goals. Our approach
leverages a voxel-based semantic map containing objects detected by a perception model, and a
semantic-search policy for efficiently locating the objects to rearrange. Our approach generalizes to
rearrangement goals of varying difficulties, including objects that are small in size, far from the goal,
and in cluttered spaces. Furthermore, our approach is efficient, performing well even with a small
exploration budget. Our experimental evaluation shows our approach improves over current work
in rearrangement by 14.7 absolute percentage points, and continues to improve smoothly as better
models are developed and the quality of object detections increases. Our results confirm the efficacy
of active perceptual mapping for the rearrangement setting, and motivate several future directions
that can expand the flexibility and generalization of the method.
One limitation of the rearrangement setting in this work is that objects only have simple states:
position, orientation, and openness. Real objects are complex and have states that may change over
time, potentially from interactions not involving the agent. Investigating tasks that require modelling
these dynamic objects in the map is an emerging topic that can benefit from new benchmarks and
methods. Another promising future direction is using an agent’s experience to improve its perception.
Feedback from the environment, including instructions, rewards, and transition dynamics, provides
rich information about how to improve perception when true labels may be difficult to acquire.
Investigating how to leverage all sources of feedback available to an agent is a useful research topic
that may unlock better generalization for embodied agents in dynamic environments.


                                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Amazon for supporting this work financially, providing access to computational resources,
and feedback on intermediate drafts of this manuscript. In addition, we thank the reviewers for
their suggestions and critique in the review process, which improved this paper. We thank Ben
Eysenbach, Devendra Chaplot, Minji Yoon, Theophile Gervet, Murtaza Dalal, and So Yeon Min for
their discussion and feedback on the paper. Finally, we thank the teams at the Allen Institute for AI
that developed the AI2-THOR Rearrangement Challenge and provided benchmarking code, which
has been crucial in this work.

R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen
  Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, and Amir R. Zamir. On
  evaluation of embodied navigation agents. arXiv:1807.06757, 2018a.
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian D. Reid,
  Stephen Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-
  grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In CVPR, 2018b.
Dhruv Batra, Angel X Chang, Sonia Chernova, Andrew J Davison, Jia Deng, Vladlen Koltun, Sergey
  Levine, Jitendra Malik, Igor Mordatch, Roozbeh Mottaghi, et al. Rearrangement: A challenge for
  embodied ai. arXiv:2011.01975, 2020a.
Dhruv Batra, Aaron Gokaslan, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Oleksandr Maksymets, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
  Manolis Savva, A. Toshev, and Erik Wijmans. Objectnav revisited: On evaluation of embodied
  agents navigating to objects. arXiv:2006.13171, 2020b.
Ohad Ben-Shahar and Ehud Rivlin. Practical pushing planning for rearrangement tasks. ICRA, 1996.
Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Yoav Artzi. A persistent spatial semantic
  representation for high-level natural language instruction execution. In CoRL, 2021.
G. Bradski. The OpenCV Library. Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools, 2000.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Abhinav Gupta, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Object goal
  navigation using goal-oriented semantic exploration. In NeurIPS, 2020a.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Abhinav Gupta, and Saurabh Gupta. Neural
  topological slam for visual navigation. In CVPR, 2020b.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Murtaza Dalal, Saurabh Gupta, Jitendra Malik, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov. SEAL: self-supervised embodied active learning using exploration and 3d consistency. In
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), NeurIPS, 2021.
Kevin Chen, Juan Pablo de Vicente, Gabriel Sepulveda, Fei Xia, Alvaro Soto, Marynel Vazquez, and
  Silvio Savarese. A behavioral approach to visual navigation with graph localization networks. In
  RSS, 2019.
Nikolaus Correll, Kostas E. Bekris, Dmitry Berenson, Oliver Brock, Albert Causo, Kris Hauser, Kei
  Okada, Alberto Rodriguez, Joseph M. Romano, and Peter R. Wurman. Analysis and observa-
  tions from the first amazon picking challenge. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
  Engineering, 2018.
Akansel Cosgun, Tucker Hermans, Victor Emeli, and Mike Stilman. Push planning for object
  placement on cluttered table surfaces. In IROS, 2011.
Abhishek Das, Samyak Datta, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Embodied
  Question Answering. In CVPR, 2018.
Edsger W Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische mathematik,
  1959.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jakob Engel, Thomas Schöps, and Daniel Cremers. Lsd-slam: Large-scale direct monocular slam. In
  ECCV, 2014.

Jonathan Francis, Nariaki Kitamura, Felix Labelle, Xiaopeng Lu, Ingrid Navarro, and Jean Oh. Core
  challenges in embodied vision-language planning. arXiv:2106.13948, 2021.

Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Kiana Ehsani, Shuran Song, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Continuous scene
  representations for embodied AI. arXiv:2203.17251, 2022.

Daniel Gordon, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad Rastegari, Joseph Redmon, Dieter Fox, and Ali
  Farhadi. IQA: Visual question answering in interactive environments. In CVPR, 2018.

Ankit Goyal, Arsalan Mousavian, Chris Paxton, Yu-Wei Chao, Brian Okorn, Jia Deng, and Dieter
  Fox. IFOR: iterative flow minimization for robotic object rearrangement. CoRR, abs/2202.00732,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.00732.

Saurabh Gupta, James Davidson, Sergey Levine, Rahul Sukthankar, and Jitendra Malik. Cognitive
  mapping and planning for visual navigation. In CVPR, 2017.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR
  2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 770–778. IEEE Computer Society, 2016. doi:
 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.

Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross B. Girshick. Mask R-CNN. In ICCV, 2017.

Jennifer E King, Marco Cognetti, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. Rearrangement planning using
  object-centric and robot-centric action spaces. In ICRA, 2016.

A. Krontiris and K. E. Bekris. Efficiently solving general rearrangement tasks: A fast extension
  primitive for an incremental sampling-based planner. In ICRA, 2016.

H. W. Kuhn and Bryn Yaw. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Res. Logist.
  Quart, 1955.

Benjamin Kuipers and Yung-Tai Byun. A robot exploration and mapping strategy based on a semantic
  hierarchy of spatial representations. Robotics and autonomous systems, 1991.

Yann Labbé, Sergey Zagoruyko, Igor Kalevatykh, Ivan Laptev, Justin Carpentier, Mathieu Aubry, and
  Josef Sivic. Monte-carlo tree search for efficient visually guided rearrangement planning. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 2020.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross B. Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge J. Belongie.
  Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017, pp. 936–944. IEEE
  Computer Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.106. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
  CVPR.2017.106.

So Yeon Min, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Pradeep Ravikumar, Yonatan Bisk, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  FILM: following instructions in language with modular methods. arXiv:2110.07342, 2021.

Adithyavairavan Murali, Tao Chen, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Dhiraj Gandhi, Lerrel Pinto, Saurabh
  Gupta, and Abhinav Gupta. Pyrobot: An open-source robotics framework for research and bench-
  marking. CoRR, abs/1906.08236, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08236.

Alexander Pashevich, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun. Episodic transformer for vision-and-language
  navigation. In ICCV, 2021.

Ahmed Hussain Qureshi, Arsalan Mousavian, Chris Paxton, Michael C. Yip, and Dieter Fox. Nerp:
  Neural rearrangement planning for unknown objects. In Dylan A. Shell, Marc Toussaint, and M. Ani
  Hsieh (eds.), Robotics: Science and Systems XVII, Virtual Event, July 12-16, 2021, 2021. doi: 10.
 15607/RSS.2021.XVII.072. URL https://doi.org/10.15607/RSS.2021.XVII.072.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A. Rosinol, A. Violette, M. Abate, N. Hughes, Y. Chang, J. Shi, A. Gupta, and L. Carlone. Kimera:
  from SLAM to spatial perception with 3D dynamic scene graphs. Intl. J. of Robotics Research,
  2021.
Martin Rünz and Lourdes Agapito. Co-fusion: Real-time segmentation, tracking and fusion of
 multiple objects. In ICRA, 2017.
Gabriel Sarch, Zhaoyuan Fang, Adam W. Harley, Paul Schydlo, Michael J. Tarr, Saurabh Gupta,
  and Katerina Fragkiadaki. TIDEE: tidying up novel rooms using visuo-semantic commonsense
  priors. In Shai Avidan, Gabriel J. Brostow, Moustapha Cissé, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and
  Tal Hassner (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2022 - 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel,
  October 23-27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXIX, volume 13699 of Lecture Notes in Computer
  Science, pp. 480–496. Springer, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-19842-7\_28. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19842-7_28.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. ALFRED: A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instructions
 for Everyday Tasks. In CVPR, 2020.
Kunal Pratap Singh, Suvaansh Bhambri, Byeonghwi Kim, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Jonghyun Choi.
  Factorizing perception and policy for interactive instruction following. In ICCV. IEEE, 2021.
Mike Stilman, Jan-Ullrich Schamburek, James Kuffner, and Tamim Asfour. Manipulation planning
 among movable obstacles. In ICRA, 2007.
Sebastian Thrun. Robotic mapping: A survey. Exploring artificial intelligence in the new millennium,
  2002.
Sebastian Thrun, Dieter Fox, Wolfram Burgard, and Frank Dellaert. Robust monte carlo localization
  for mobile robots. Artificial Intelligence, 2001.
Luca Weihs, Matt Deitke, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Visual room rearrangement.
  In CVPR, 2021.
Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari S. Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva,
  and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames. In
  ICLR, 2020.
Yu-Shiang Wong, Changjian Li, Matthias Niessner, and Niloy J. Mitra. Rigidfusion: Rgb-d scene
  reconstruction with rigidly-moving objects. Computer Graphics Forum, 2021.
Yi Wu, Yuxin Wu, Aviv Tamar, Stuart Russell, Georgia Gkioxari, and Yuandong Tian. Bayesian
  relational memory for semantic visual navigation. In ICCV, 2019a.
Yuxin Wu, Alexander Kirillov, Francisco Massa, Wan-Yen Lo, and Ross Girshick. Detectron2.
  https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2, 2019b.
Wei Yang, Xiaolong Wang, Ali Farhadi, Abhinav Gupta, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Visual semantic
 navigation using scene priors. In ICLR, 2019.
Joel Ye, Dhruv Batra, Abhishek Das, and Erik Wijmans. Auxiliary tasks and exploration enable
  objectnav. arXiv:2104.04112, 2021.
Weihao Yuan, Johannes A Stork, Danica Kragic, Michael Y Wang, and Kaiyu Hang. Rearrangement
 with nonprehensile manipulation using deep reinforcement learning. In ICRA, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX
In this appendix we include the following supporting experiments and visualizations:
     A. We begin this appendix by presenting the performance of our map disagreement detec-
        tion module for each object category. We find that our method effectively detects map
        disagreements for both small and large objects, and is therefore robust to object size.
     B. We then present a performance breakdown of our method for object size, distance to goal,
        and amount of clutter, and find that our method is less effective when objects are further
        from the goal or when nearby objects are closer together.
     C. We report confidence intervals for our method’s performance on the rearrangement challenge.
     D. Finally, we outline the compute infrastructure needed to reproduce our experiments.
     E. We list the hyperparameters used in our paper.
     F. We categorize why our method can fail and provide a qualitative example.
The official code for our method will be released at publication.

A    O BJECT T YPE V ERSUS D ETECTION ACCURACY
In this section, we visualize the relationship between the performance of our map disagreement
detection module, detailed in Section 3, and the category of objects to be rearranged. For each of
1000 tasks in the validation set and test set of RoomR (Weihs et al., 2021), we record which object
categories are detected as needing to be rearranged, and log the ground truth list of object categories
that need to be rearranged. For each object, we calculate precision as the proportion of objects per
category that were correctly identified as map disagreements out of all predicted map disagreements.
Similarly, we calculate recall as the proportion of correctly identified as map disagreements out of
all ground-truth map disagreements. Each bar in Figure 5 represents a 68% confidence interval of
precision and recall over 1000 tasks per dataset split. The experiment shows that our method is
robust to the size of objects that it rearranges because small objects such as the SoapBar, CellPhone,
CreditCard, and DishSponge have comparable accuracy to large objects in Figure 5.

B    P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
This section extends Section 4.5 with an experiment to show potential failure modes. We consider
three failure modes: (1) object size, (2) object distance to the goal, and (3) closest object in the
same class. These indicators are visualized in Figure 6 against %Fixed. Our experiment suggests
our method is robust to the size of objects, shown by the lack of a global trend in the left plot in
Figure 6, and confirmed by Appendix A. Additionally, the experiment shows that objects further from
the rearrangement goal are solved less frequently (middle plot), which is intuitive. Instances that
have been shuffled to faraway locations in the scene may require longer exploration to find, and may
be more difficult for our map disagreement detection module to match. A final conclusion we can
draw from this experiment is that our method can fail when object instances are too close together.
This is shown in the right plot in Figure 6 by the steep drop in performance when objects in the
same category are < 1 meter apart. In this situation, our semantic mapping module can incorrectly
detect two nearby objects as a single object, which prevents their successful rearrangement. For each
of these potential failure modes, better perception and mapping approaches that more accurately
describe object locations and appearance can improve fidelity of our method and reduce failure.

C    P ERFORMANCE C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS
We report 68% confidence intervals in Table 3 to supplement our evaluation in Section 4.1 and Sec-
tion 4.2. We calculate intervals using 1000 tasks from the validation and test sets of the RoomR (Weihs
et al., 2021) dataset, and report the mean followed by ± interval width. Note that the official rearrange-
ment challenge leaderboard does not expose confidence intervals, nor the sample-wise performance
needed to calculate them. Due to this, we are unable to compute confidence intervals of the baselines
VRR (Weihs et al., 2021) and CSR (Gadre et al., 2022) at this time. These additional results show
that our improvements over prior work significantly exceed the 68% confidence interval.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    Which Map Differences (Small        Large) Are Detected In The Validation Set?
               1.00

               0.75
 Recall
               0.50

               0.25

               0.00


                                 Vase
                               Watch


                          ToiletPaper
                      PaperTowelRoll


                                                                                                                     Toilet
                          WineBottle
                           TissueBox
                          CreditCard
                               Pencil
                                  CD
                                  Pen
                           CellPhone
                         ButterKnife
                             SoapBar

                               Spoon
                                 Fork
                               Candle
                                  Egg


                                  Cup
                         DishSponge
                       RemoteControl
                              Spatula
                                Knife
                        PepperShaker
                           SaltShaker


                         SprayBottle
                                 Plate
                                 Mug
                          Newspaper

                          SoapBottle

                                Bottle

                                Book
                         AlarmClock
                                Bowl
                                Ladle

                                Kettle
                               Statue

                                                                                                                       Pan
                                                                                                                       Pot
                                                                                                                      Safe
                                                                                                                   Laptop
                                                                                                                      Box
                                                                                                                Microwave
                                                                                                                   Drawer

                                                                                                                    Fridge
                                                                                                                   Cabinet
                                                                                                               ShowerDoor
                                                                                                                    Blinds
                                                                                                             ShowerCurtain
                                        Which Detections (Small       Large) Are Correct In The Validation Set?
               1.00
 Precision


               0.75

               0.50

               0.25

               0.00


                                                                                              Vase
                           Watch


                                                                                      WateringCan
                                                        ToiletPaper
                                                    PaperTowelRoll


                                                                                             Toilet
                                                                                        WineBottle
                                                         TissueBox
                       CreditCard
                           Pencil
                              CD
                              Pen
                       CellPhone
                      ButterKnife
                         SoapBar


                                          Candle
                                             Egg
                                      DishSponge
                                    RemoteControl

                                                              Knife


                                                              Plate
                                                               Mug

                                                               Cup


                                                                                             Book


                                                                                              Box
                                                      PepperShaker
                                                         SaltShaker


                                                       SprayBottle


                                                        Newspaper

                                                        SoapBottle


                                                                                       AlarmClock
                                                                                             Bowl
                                                                                             Ladle

                                                                                            Kettle
                                                                                            Statue

                                                                                               Pan
                                                                                               Pot
                                                                                              Safe
                                                                                           Laptop

                                                                                        Microwave
                                                                                           Drawer

                                                                                            Fridge
                                                                                           Cabinet
                                                                                       ShowerDoor
                                                                                            Blinds
                                                                                     ShowerCurtain
                                       Which Map Differences (Small          Large) Are Detected In The Test Set?
               1.00

               0.75
 Recall


               0.50

               0.25

               0.00


                                 Vase
                               Watch


                          ToiletPaper


                      PaperTowelRoll


                                                                                                                     Toilet
                          WineBottle

                           TissueBox
                          CreditCard
                               Pencil
                                  Pen
                                  CD
                           CellPhone
                             SoapBar


                                  Cup
                         ButterKnife

                               Spoon
                                 Fork
                         DishSponge
                               Candle
                       RemoteControl
                              Spatula
                                  Egg
                                Knife


                                 Mug
                           SaltShaker
                        PepperShaker

                         SprayBottle

                                 Plate

                                Book
                          Newspaper


                          SoapBottle

                                Bowl
                         AlarmClock
                                Ladle
                                Bottle


                                                                                                       Pan

                                                                                                                    Statue
                                                                                                                    Kettle
                                                                                                                       Pot
                                                                                                                      Box
                                                                                                                   Laptop
                                                                                                                Microwave
                                                                                                                    Fridge

                                                                                                             ShowerCurtain
                                                                                                                    Blinds
                                                                                                               ShowerDoor
                                                                                                                   Drawer
                                                                                                                   Cabinet
                                            Which Detections (Small     Large) Are Correct In The Test Set?
                0.6
   Precision


                0.4

                0.2

                0.0
                                               Vase
                           Watch


                                       WateringCan
                                        ToiletPaper


                                    PaperTowelRoll


                                              Toilet
                                        WineBottle

                                         TissueBox
                       CreditCard
                           Pencil
                              Pen
                              CD
                       CellPhone
                         SoapBar
                      ButterKnife


                                       DishSponge
                                             Candle
                                     RemoteControl
                                            Spatula
                                                Egg
                                              Knife


                                               Book
                                                Cup
                                         SaltShaker
                                      PepperShaker

                                        SprayBottle
                                               Mug
                                               Plate
                                         Newspaper


                                         SoapBottle

                                               Bowl
                                       AlarmClock
                                              Ladle
                                              Bottle


                                                Pan
                                          Dumbbell
                                              Statue


                                                Box
                                              Kettle
                                                 Pot

                                             Laptop
                                        Microwave
                                             Fridge

                                     ShowerCurtain
                                             Blinds
                                       ShowerDoor
                                            Drawer
                                            Cabinet
Figure 5: Performance breakdown on the validation and test sets for various types of objects. The
height of bars corresponds to the sample mean of precision or recall for our map disagreement
detection module. Error bars show a 68% confidence interval for each kind of object. The top two
plots correspond to precision and recall on the validation set, while the bottom two plots correspond
to precision and recall on the test set. Object categories are shown on the x-axis, and are ordered in
ascending order of size. The experiment shows our method is robust to size, with small objects at the
left end of the plots having comparable accuracy to large objects at the right end of the plots.


D                 R EQUIRED C OMPUTE

The goal of this section is to outline the amount of compute required to replicate our experiments.
We will describe the amount of compute required for (1) training Mask R-CNN, (2) training a
semantic search policy πθ (x|mi ), and (3) benchmarking the agent on the rearrangement challenge.
For training Mask R-CNN, a dataset of 2 million images with instance segmentation labels were
collected from the THOR simulator using the training split of the RoomR (Weihs et al., 2021) dataset.
We then used Detectron2 (Wu et al., 2019b) with default hyperparameters to train Mask R-CNN with
a ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) Feature Pyramid Network backbone (Lin et al., 2017). We trained our
Mask R-CNN for five epochs using a DGX with eight Nvidia 32GB v100 GPUS for 48 hours. Our
semantic search policy requires significantly less compute: completing 15 epochs on a dataset of
8000 semantic maps annotated with an expert search distribution in nine hours on a single Nvidia
12GB 3080ti GPU. Evaluating our method on the AI2-THOR rearrangement challenge requires 40


                                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 0.40
             0.4                                                                         0.5
                                                 0.35

    %Fixed
                                                                                         0.4
             0.3
                                                 0.30                                    0.3
             0.2
                                                 0.25                                    0.2
             0.1                                 0.20                                    0.1
                10-4   10-3       10-2   10-1            2       4       6          8          1   2    3    4     5   6      7
                        Size (Meters³)                  Distance To Goal (Meters)              Nearest Same Object (Meters)
                                                        Validation           Test



Figure 6: Performance of various ablations for different Size (Meters3 ), Distance To Goal (Meters),
and Nearest Same Object (Meters). These indicators measure properties of objects that make
rearrangement hard. Colored lines represent the average performance over 1000 tasks in each dataset
split. Error bars represent a 68% confidence interval over those same 1000 sample points. The
experiment shows our method can fail when objects of the same class are too close together (right
plot), and when objects are too far from the goal location, typically >4.157 meters (center plot).


Table 3: Confidence intervals for our method on the AI2-THOR rearrangement challenge. Intervals
are calculated from 1000 sample points from RoomR (Weihs et al., 2021) validation and test sets. We
report pertformance starting with the sample mean, followed by ± a 68% confidence interval width.
Our improvements over prior work significantly exceed the 68% confidence interval, which suggests
that our improvements are significant and our method performs consistently well.
                                           Validation                          Test
 Method                                     %Fixed Strict                Success        %Fixed Strict                  Success
 Ours w/o Semantic Search                       15.77 ± 0.85          4.30 ± 0.63        15.11 ± 0.84             3.60 ± 0.58
 Ours                                           17.47 ± 0.92          6.30 ± 0.76        16.56 ± 0.89             4.70 ± 0.67
 Ours + GT Semantic Search                      21.24 ± 0.99          7.60 ± 0.83        19.79 ± 0.96             6.10 ± 0.75
 Ours + GT Segmentation                         66.66 ± 1.21         45.60 ± 1.57        59.29 ± 1.26            37.55 ± 1.53
 Ours + GT Both                                 68.46 ± 1.20         48.60 ± 1.57        59.50 ± 1.31            38.33 ± 1.57


GPU-hours with a 2080ti GPU or equivalent. In practice, we parallelize evaluation across 32 GPUs,
which results in an evaluation time of 1.25 hours for each of the validation and test sets.

E            H YPERPARAMETERS

We provide a list of hyperparameters are their values in Table 4. These hyperparameters are held
constant throughout the paper, except in ablations that study the sensitivity of our method to them,
such as Section 4.3. Our ablations show our method is robust to these hyperparameters.

F            R EASONS F OR TASK FAILURES

This section explores the reasons why certain tasks in the validation and test sets are not solved by
our method. We consider four reasons for task failures that cover all possible outcomes: (1) the agent
correctly predicts which objects need to be moved where, but fails to rearrange at least one object, (2)
the agent incorrectly predicts an object needs to be rearranged that doesn’t, (3) the agent runs out
of time, and (4) the agent misses at least one object that needs to be rearranged. We visualize the
proportion of failed tasks for each category in Figure 7. We find that our method with ground truth
perception and search (Ours + GT Both) tends to fail to rearrange objects after correctly identifying
which objects need to be rearranged. In contrast, the largest reason for failure for our method (Ours)
is the agent running out of time, followed by rearranging incorrect objects. This suggests the largest
potential gains for our method arise from improving the speed and fidelity of map building, whereas,
the optimality of the rearrangement policy becomes the bottleneck once a perfect map is available.


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Table 4: Hyperparameters used by our approach for all rearrangement tasks.
                                                Hyperparameter                            Value
                                                      voxel size                                                      0.05 meters
                                                      map height H                                                            384
                                                      map width W                                                             384
                                                      map depth D                                                              96
                                                      classes C                                                                54
                                                      detection confidence threshold                                          0.9
                                                      rearrangement distance threshold                                0.05 meters
                                                      expert search distribution σ                                    0.75 meters
                                                      πθ convolution hidden size                                               64
                                                      πθ convolution kernel size                                            3×3
                                                      πθ layers                                                                 5
                                                      πθ activation function                                                ReLU
                                                      πθ optimizer                                                          Adam
                                                      πθ learning rate                                                     0.0003
                                                      πθ batch size                                                             8
                                                      πθ epochs                                                                15
                                                      πθ dataset size                                                        8000


                             Task Outcomes (Ours + GT Both)                                   Task Outcomes (Ours)
                       1.0                                                           1.0
 Proportion Of Tasks


                                                               Proportion Of Tasks


                       0.8                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                     Reasons For Task Failures
                                                                                                                                    Task Solved
                       0.6                                                           0.6                                            Failed To Rearrange Disagreement
                       0.4                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                    Incorrect Object Rearranged
                                                                                                                                    Exceeded Time Limit
                       0.2                                                           0.2                                            Failed To Detect Disagreement
                       0.0                                                           0.0
                               validation          test                                    validation          test


Figure 7: Categorization of the reasons why our method fails to solve tasks. The proportion of tasks
that are solved (shown in blue) or fail due to one of four reasons (orange, green, red, purple) is shown
for different ablations of our method. The height per bar corresponds to the proportion of tasks in
the validation or test set in each category, and error bars indicate a 68% confidence interval. This
experiment shows the largest reason for failure is a result of mapping errors. In the right plot, the
agent fails most frequently by rearranging the wrong object, and by running out of time, which can
result from imperfect semantic maps. In contrast, once perfect maps are available in the left plot, the
largest source of errors are due to an imperfect planning-based rearrangement policy instead.


G                        I MAGE F EATURES F OR M ATCHING O BJECT I NSTANCES
We conduct an experiment where we use image features for matching instances of objects between
phases instead of their average color. We use ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet, and
compute a mean image feature hi ∈ R256 for each object. We process images with the ResNet50
backbone, extract a spatial feature map after the first residual block of ResNet50, and back-project the
features to a voxel grid. In this fashion, we introduce 256 additional channels at each voxel to store
the image features. We then compute hi by averaging the voxel features corresponding to occupied
voxels for object i in the map. Results in Table 5 show that matching object instances using image
features improves the performance of our method by 6.97 %Fixed Strict on the test set.

H                        E FFECT O F S EMANTIC S EARCH O N F OUND O BJECTS
To understand how our Semantic Search policy leads to an improvement in downstream performance,
our hypothesis is that Semantic Search leads the agent to find more objects during episodes. We


                                                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Locating ToiletPaper       Moving To Goal          Attempt Placing At Goal   Placed At Wrong Location



Figure 8: Qualitative example for why rearranging the correct object can fail. In this task, the agent
correctly predicts the ToiletPaper needs to be rearranged, but fails to place the ToiletPaper in the
correct location. The rightmost image shows the goal is located on the floor, but the agent mistakenly
places the ToiletPaper on the bathtub instead, shown in the second image from the right.


Table 5: Matching object instances using image features. Results show that our method can be further
improved by matching object instances between the walkthrough and unshuffle phases to maximize
similarity of corresponding features from ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet.
                                          Validation                           Test
    Method                       %Fixed Strict           Success      %Fixed Strict          Success
    Ours                           17.47 ± 0.92    6.30 ± 0.76          16.56 ± 0.89    4.70 ± 0.67
    Ours + Feature Matching        23.06 ± 1.04    7.81 ± 0.88          23.59 ± 1.03    6.79 ± 0.82


test this hypothesis by measuring the percent of objects found during episodes of the official 2022
Rearrangement Challenge. We consider an object found once the agent navigates within 1 meter of
the object. We track the cumulative percent of objects found, and report in Figure 9 the mean and
68% confidence interval of this metric across 1000 test set tasks. The results confirm our hypothesis:
in both phases, Semantic Search leads the agent to find more objects faster. In particular, at 250
episode timesteps during the Walkthrough phase, the agent has a 9.13 ± 1.23 higher percent than
a uniform baseline. During the Unshuffle phase, the agent has a 6.23 ± 1.20 higher percent than
our uniform baseline at 100 timesteps. This improvement becomes less significant as time increases
during the Unshuffle phase, suggesting Semantic Search is most helpful with a small time budget.

I   N OISY P OSE E STIMATION
We simulate noisy pose estimation due to imperfect localization and mapping using the sensor noise
model introduced by Sarch et al. (2022), which builds on earlier work from Chaplot et al. (2020b),
and constructs a Gaussian distribution based on real robot localization data collected from a real
LocoBot robot (Murali et al., 2019), and applies this noise model in simulation. This model adds
Gaussian noise with σ = 0.005 meters to positional observations, and adds Gaussian noise with
σ = 0.5 degrees to yaw observations at each timestep. Results with noisy pose are given in Table 6.
Our method is robust to this sensor noise model. On both the validation and test sets of the 2022
AI2-THOR Rearrangement Challenge, sensor noise leads to a slight improvement in performance,
which we attribute to noise producing a smoother semantic map.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            Walkthrough Phase                                                                       Unshuffle Phase
                          80
 % Objects Found (Test)


                                                                                   % Objects Found (Test)
                                                                                                            80
                          60
                                                                                                            60
                          40
                                                                                                            40

                          20                                                                                20

                               0      50      100      150        200       250                                   0        100       200       300       400   500
                                            Episode Timestep                                                                        Episode Timestep
                                                                Semantic Search                                  Uniform Baseline



Figure 9: Impact of Semantic Search on the percent of shuffled objects found during either phase.
In both cases, we observe an increase in the percent of shuffled objects found when using Semantic
Search. The improvement is most significant during the walkthrough phase, where Semantic Search
leads to an improvement of +9.13 percent of objects found at 250 episode timesteps. The improve-
ment during the unshuffle phase is smaller, with +6.23 at 100 timesteps, and +1.67 at 500 timesteps.


                                   Table 6: Impact of imperfect localization due to sensor noise on our method.
                                                                Validation                       Test
                                   Method                    %Fixed Strict                Success                        %Fixed Strict           Success
                                   Ours                                 17.47                                    6.30                 16.56            4.70
                                   Ours + Noisy Pose                    19.84                                    6.80                 17.33            4.90


                                                                                  18
