Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C ONTROLLABLE I MAGE G ENERATION VIA C OLLAGE
R EPRESENTATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Recent advances in conditional generative image models have enabled impressive
         results. On the one hand, text-based conditional models have achieved remarkable
         generation quality, by leveraging large-scale datasets of image-text pairs. To en-
         able fine-grained controllability, however, text-based models require long prompts,
         whose details may be ignored by the model. On the other hand, layout-based
         conditional models have also witnessed significant advances. These models rely on
         bounding boxes or segmentation maps for precise spatial conditioning in combina-
         tion with coarse semantic labels. The semantic labels, however, cannot be used to
         express detailed appearance characteristics. In this paper, we approach fine-grained
         scene controllability through image collages which allow a rich visual description
         of the desired scene as well as the appearance and location of the objects therein,
         without the need of class nor attribute labels. We introduce “mixing and matching
         scenes” (M&Ms), an approach that consists of an adversarially trained generative
         image model which is conditioned on appearance features and spatial positions
         of the different elements in a collage, and integrates these into a coherent image.
         We train our model on the OpenImages (OI) dataset and evaluate it on collages
         derived from OI and MS-COCO datasets. Our experiments on the OI dataset show
         that M&Ms outperforms baselines in terms of fine-grained scene controllability
         while being very competitive in terms of image quality and sample diversity. On
         the MS-COCO dataset, we highlight the generalization ability of our model by
         outperforming DALL-E in terms of the zero-shot FID metric, despite using two
         magnitudes fewer parameters and data. Collage based generative models have the
         potential to advance content creation in an efficient and effective way as they are
         intuitive to use and yield high quality generations.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Controllable image generation leverages user inputs – e.g. textual descriptions, scene graphs, bounding
box layouts, or segmentation masks – to guide the creative process of composing novel scenes. Text-
based conditionings offer an intuitive mechanism to control content creation, and short and potentially
high level descriptions can result in high quality generations (Ding et al., 2021; Gafni et al., 2022;
Nichol et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2016; Rombach et al., 2022). However, to
describe complex scenes in detail, long text prompts are required, which are challenging for current
models, see e.g. the person’s position in the second row of Figure 1. Moreover, current text-based
models require very large training datasets composed of tens of millions of data points to obtain
satisfactory performance levels. Bounding boxes (BB) (Sun & Wu, 2019; 2020; Sylvain et al., 2021;
Zhao et al., 2019), scene graphs (Ashual & Wolf, 2019) and segmentation mask (Chen & Koltun,
2017; Liu et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2018; Schönfeld et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2020b;
Wang et al., 2018; 2021) conditionings offer strong spatial and class-level semantic control, but offer
no control over the appearance of scene elements beyond the class level. Although user interaction is
still rather intuitive, the diversity of the generated scenes is often limited, see e.g. the third and fourth
rows of Figure 1, and the annotations required to train the models are laborious to obtain. Moreover,
the generalization ability of these approaches is restricted by the classes and scene compositions
appearing in the training set (Casanova et al., 2020).
In this paper, we explore fine-grained scene generation controllability by leveraging image collages
to condition the model. As the saying goes, a picture is worth a thousand words, and therefore,


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Conditioning              Sample #1       Sample #2         Sample #3


 M&Ms (Ours)


                 A field in the mountains
                 with a forest in the back-
 Text-to-image


                 ground, with a person
                 in sport clothes on the
                 bottom-left corner of the
                 image and a wooden
                 house on the top-right cor-
                 ner of the image.
 BB-to-image
 Mask-to-image


Figure 1: Approaches to controllable scene generation (from top): our approach based on collages
(M&Ms), text-to-image model (Make-a-scene (Gafni et al., 2022), samples are a courtesy of the paper
authors), BB-to-image model (LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)), and Mask-to-image (GauGAN2 (Park
et al., 2019)). Note that the models have been trained on different datasets and, as such, GauGAN2
cannot generate people as the model was not trained on a dataset containing this class. Visualization
of the input collage to M&Ms is depicted as a collaged RGB image for simplicity.

the rich information contained in image collages has the potential to effectively guide the scene
generation process, see the first row of Figure 1. Collage-based conditionings can be easily created
from a set of images with minimal user interaction, and provide a detailed visual description of the
scene appearance and composition. Moreover, as image collages by construction do not require any
semantic labels, leveraging them holds the promise of benefiting from very large and easy-to-obtain
datasets to improve the resulting image quality.
To enable collage-based scene controllability, we introduce Mixing & Matching scenes (M&Ms), an
approach that extends the instance conditioned GAN (IC-GAN, (Casanova et al., 2021)) by leveraging
image collages and treating each element of the collage as a separate instance. In particular, M&Ms
takes as input an image collage, extracts representations of each one of its elements, and spatially
arranges these representations to generate high quality images that are similar to the input collage.
M&Ms is composed of a pre-trained feature extractor, a generator and two discriminators, operating
at image and object level respectively. Similar to IC-GAN, M&Ms leverages the neighbors of the
instances in the feature space to model local densities but extends the framework to blend multiple
localized distributions – one per collage element – into coherent images. We train M&Ms on the
OpenImages dataset (Kuznetsova et al., 2020) and validate it using collages derived from OpenImages


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Ref. images              Collage #1          Collage #2          Collage #3          Collage #4


                        Generations #1      Generations #2      Generations #3      Generations #4


Figure 2: Images generated with M&Ms from four different collages. We obtained collages from
four reference images (leftmost column) coming from OpenImages and MS-COCO. Collages #1,
#2 and #3 are obtained by combining only the OpenImages images, while the collage #4 highlights
the zero-shot performance of M&Ms as it contains elements both from OpenImages and MS-COCO
images. Collage #1 consists of a background scene without added objects. Note that input collages to
the model are depicted as RGB overlays. Faces in the input images have been blurred out.

images. We further challenge the model by conditioning it on collages composed of MS-COCO (Lin
et al., 2014) images, not seen during training. We show that M&Ms is able to generate appealing
and diverse images in all cases, exhibiting zero-shot generalization to collages composed of scenes,
objects and layouts unseen during training. Figure 2 presents M&Ms in action. First, we select four
images, three from OpenImages and one from MS-COCO, to compose our collages and we draw
BBs to crop the objects of interest (left most column). Next, we create four collages by combining
each scene with either zero (second column), one (third column) or two (fourth and fifth columns)
cropped objects, adjusting their BBs, and use M&Ms to obtain two samples for each resulting collage.
Note that the fifth row combines a background from MS-COCO and objects from OpenImages. We
observe that for each created collage, M&Ms generates diverse scenes that are consistent with the
collage layout, captures the style of each element, and blends all the collage elements into coherent
images, see generations #1 – #4.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) We introduce M&Ms, a model to explore collage
based conditioning as a simple yet effective way to control scene generation; (2) On OpenImages,
we show that M&Ms generates coherent images even from collages that combine random objects
and scenes, and offers superior scene controllability w.r.t. baselines without affecting the generated
image quality; (3) To showcase the zero-shot transfer of our model, we evaluate it on the MS-COCO
dataset showing that M&Ms surpasses DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) in terms of the zero-shot FID
metric despite being trained on a two orders of magnitude smaller dataset, and having two orders of
magnitude less parameters.



2   C ONTROLLABLE IMAGE GENERATION VIA COLLAGES

In this section, we briefly review IC-GAN in Section 2.1 and present its extension to handle collages
through Mixing & Matching scenes (M&Ms) in Section 2.2.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.1       R EVIEW OF I NSTANCE -C ONDITIONED GAN

Instance-Conditioned GAN (IC-GAN) (Casanova et al., 2021) considers the data manifold as a set
of fine-grained and overlapping clusters, where each cluster is defined by a datapoint – or instance
– xi and the set of its k nearest neighbors Ai in a given feature space. IC-GAN models   P the data
                                                                                       1
distribution p(x) as a mixture of instance-conditioned distributions, such that p(x) ≈ M   i p(x|hi ),
where M is the number of datapoints in a given dataset and hi = fθ (xi ) are the instance features
of xi obtained with an embedding function f parameterized by θ. The conditional distributions
p(x|hi ) are modelled by a generator G whose inputs are a noise vector z ∼ N (0, I) sampled from a
unit Gaussian, and instance features hi , such that the generated image can be obtained as G(z, hi ).
The discriminator is conditioned on the same instance features hi and tries to distinguish between
the generated samples and the real images xj neighboring xi , which are sampled from Ai . Both
generator and discriminator engage in a two-player min-max game to find the Nash equilibrium of
the following equation:

  min max Exi ∼p(x),xj ∼Ai [ln D(xj , hi )] + Exi ∼p(x),z∼N (0,I) [ln(1 − D(G(z, hi ), hi ))] , (1)
      G     D

where we use xj ∼ Ai to denote that xj is sampled uniformly from the set Ai .
Despite its ability to generate visually compelling samples, IC-GAN can only control the generated
images through a single conditioning image (and a class label in its class-conditional version).

2.2       M IXING & M ATCHING SCENES (M&M S )

We define an image collage as a list C = [s, O] containing one background scene image, s, and a
set of foreground collage elements, O. The set of foreground collage elements is defined as a set of
tuples O = {(oc , bc )}O
                       c=1 , where oc is a foreground object image and bc its corresponding bounding
box, indicating the location and size of oc in the collage. Consider now a dataset D = {(Ci , xi )}M
                                                                                                   i=1
composed of collages Ci and corresponding natural images xi . The objective of collage-based image
generation is to model p(x|Ci ).
In M&Ms, we model p(x|Ci ) as p(x|Hi ), where Hi is a representation tensor of the image collage
Ci . We use a pre-trained neural network f parameterized by ϕ to obtain a representation of the
background scene image hsi = fϕ (si ) and of each collage element hoi,c = fϕ (oi,c ). We then spatially
replicate hsi and all hoi,c into Hi using the collage bounding boxes bi,c , as illustrated in Figure 3a.
When two bounding boxes overlap, we assume that the smaller box is in front of the bigger one.
We train M&Ms adversarially using one generator and two discriminators: a global discriminator and
an object discriminator. The objective of the global discriminator is to encourage the generator to
produce plausible and appealing images, while the object discriminator ensures that the generated
objects are both of high visual quality and consistent with the collage. Our generator G(Zi , Hi )
takes as an input a noise tensor Zi and the representation tensor of the collage Hi and outputs a
generation x̂. The noise tensor is composed of a scene noise vector zs ∼ N (0, I) and O object noise
vectors zoc ∼ N (0, I) that are spatially arranged into Zi using the collage bounding boxes bi,c . The
generation process is shown in Figure 3b.
The design of the training procedure for both discriminators follows the spirit of IC-GAN – i.e.
during training we ensure that the generated images and its objects are within the neighbourhood
of xi and oi,c , respectively. We use the dataset D to obtain k nearest neighbour sets Axi and Aoi,c
for images xi and object images oi,c , respectively. The neighbours are computed using the image
and object representations hxi and hoi,c by means of the cosine similarity, where hxi = fϕ (xi ). As
depicted in Figure 3b, the global discriminator Dg (x, hxi ) discerns between real neighbors sampled
from Axi and images generated by conditioning on Hi , while the object discriminator Do (o, hoi,c )
discerns between real neighbors sampled from Aoi,c and objects in the generated image, which are
extracted using the bounding boxes bi,c . Note that M&Ms reverts to IC-GAN if the image collage
only contains a single background scene image.
Training M&Ms. The generator and discriminators attempt to find the Nash equilibrium of the
following equation:
                    min max
                          g  o
                                (1 − λ)Lg (G, Dg ) + λLo (G, Do ),                       (2)
                           G {D ,D }



                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Process of extracting a collage representation Hi .        (b) Training workflow of M&Ms.

Figure 3: Overview of M&Ms. (a) Example collage Ci with one background scene image, si , and
two foreground objects, oi,0 and oi,1 . We extract feature representations, hsi , hoi,0 , and hoi,1 , from the
background scene image and the foreground object images, respectively. The object locations and
sizes in the collage, bi,0 and bi,1 , are used in conjuntion with the extracted feature representations to
spatially build the collage representation Hi . (b) We feed the generator G with the extracted collage
representation Hi and a noise tensor Zi , and generate an image x̂. The global discriminator Dg
distinguishes between generated images and real image neighbors, while the object discriminator Do
differentiates between generated objects and real object neighbors. Some weights are shared for the
global and object discriminator (see Section C.2 in Supplementary Material for details).


where Lg is the global loss, Lo is the object loss, and λ controls the importance of each term. The
global and object losses are defined as:
   Lg = E(Ci ,xi )∼D,xn ∼Axi [log Dg (xn , hxi )] + E(Ci ,xi )∼D,Zi ∼N (0,I) [log(1 − Dg (x̂, hxi )] . (3)

             Lo = E(Ci ,xi )∼D,(oi,c ,bi,c )∼Ci ,on ∼Aoi,c log Do (on , hoi,c )


                       + E(Ci ,xi )∼D,(oi,c ,bi,c )∼Ci ,Zi ∼N (0,I) log(1 − Do (ôi,c , hoi,c )) ,

                                                                                                       (4)
where ôi,c corresponds to the generated object extracted from the generated image x̂ using bi,c , and
Zi ∼ N (0, I) refers to the sampling procedure of the noise tensor.
In practice, obtaining the ground truth collage decompositions of natural images is challenging.
However, approximate decompositions can be easily obtained from the xi , by applying a set of
class-agnostic bounding boxes to extract object images and assuming that the background scene
image si is equivalent to xi . In the absence of class agnostic bounding box annotations, bounding
boxes can be obtained by leveraging an object proposal model such as OLN (Kim et al., 2022), as
validated in Supplementary Material G.
M&Ms architecture details. We start from the BigGAN generator and discriminator architec-
tures (Brock et al., 2019) given their ubiquitous and successful use in the literature, and extend them
to handle collages. In particular, we modify the normalization layers in the generator to take as input
a collage representation Hi (instead of a class embedding) and replace the fully connected layers by
1×1 convolutions. We also adapt the discriminator architecture to operate both at image level and
object level, by stacking ResNet blocks which are subsequently fed through an image processing path
and an object processing path, tying the parameters of the M&Ms’s image and object discriminators.
The image processing path applies a global pooling after the last ResNet block. The object processing
path applies a region of interest (RoI) pooling layer (Ren et al., 2015) at four intermediate ResNet
block outputs. We then compute the dot product between the output of the image processing path and
the real image features hxi to obtain the image discriminator score. Analogously, we compute the dot
product between the outputs of the object processing path and the features of the real objects hoi,c to
obtain the object discriminator scores. Note that this follows the projection discriminator (Miyato &
Koyama, 2018) principle of BigGAN, except that we project on image and object features rather than
class embeddings. More details can be found in the Supplementary Material C.2.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     E XPERIMENTS

Here, we first describe the datasets, evaluation metrics and training details. Then, we present
quantitative and qualitative results when training on OpenImages and evaluating on the same dataset.
Additionally, we transfer M&Ms to MS-COCO and demonstrate zero-shot generalization.

3.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Dataset. We train M&Ms on the 1.7M images of the OpenImages (v4) dataset (Kuznetsova et al.,
2020) and extract collages using the ground-truth bounding box annotations, see training details of
Section 2.2. We validate our model in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios using
collages derived from OpenImages images as well as in a zero-shot dataset scenario using collages
derived from MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) images.
Metrics. We measure the quality and diversity of the generated images by means of the Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017). More precisely, we measure the image FID (FIDx )
on generated images and the object FID (FIDo ) on generated objects. We obtain the reference
distributions to compute FIDx and FIDo using the training set of OpenImages or the validation set
of MS-COCO. We obtain the generated data distribution by sampling 50k samples from the model,
conditioning on a randomly sampled collage each time. Metrics are reported as the mean and standard
deviation over five random seeds that control the randomness of conditionings and noise vectors.
Training details are described in Supplementary Material C.3. Additionally, sensitivity studies
regarding the choice of the neighborhood sizes, the object/scene trade-off controlled by λ, and the
number of objects per scene, as well as ablations wrt the usage of object features versus class labels
can be found in Supplementary Material F.

3.2   R ESULTS

Here, we present three experiments: (1) we evaluate how M&Ms fits the training data on OpenImages
v4; (2) we create random collages from OpenImages images to test the controllability enabled by
our model; (3) we challenge M&Ms with zero-shot transfer by evaluating the model on collages from
MS-COCO. Additional experiments can be found in Supplementary Materials D and G, including
fidelity metrics, comparison to additional baselines and training our model without labeled data.

Fitting the training data. In this case, the collage representations of M&Ms are based on
scene and object features extracted directly from the training images and their bounding boxes.
In Table 1, we compare M&Ms to IC-GAN, which is
conditioned on the global scene background features Table 1: Quantitative results on 256×256
only. M&Ms achieves significantly better (lower) object OpenImages. *: reported as 0.0 due to
FID than IC-GAN, while maintaining roughly the same rounding.
image FID, highlighting the benefit of leveraging collage
representations. To zoom in into the image level results, we                IC-GAN M&Ms (ours)
compute precision (Px ) and recall (Rx ) metrics (Kynkaan-
                                                               ↓FIDx       5.9 ± 0.1      6.1 ± 0.1
niemi et al., 2019) at image level: M&Ms results in lower
                                                               ↓FIDo 23.8 ± 0.1           8.3 ± 0.1
precision than IC-GAN, while exhibiting higher recall.
This is perhaps unsurprising, given the M&Ms training. In      ↑Px        69.6 ± 0.4     67.3 ± 0.5
particular, the M&Ms discriminator considers both objects      ↑Rx        67.6 ± 0.3     69.4 ± 0.4
and scene neighbours as real samples, therefore potentially
pushing the overall image generations further away from the training data manifold. Intuitively, when
using the same neighbourhood size at scene level, M&Ms can go beyond what is captured within this
neighbourhood by introducing changes coming from the objects and their neighbours. This results
in a drop in precision. At the same time, the increase in recall reflects a higher coverage as the real
data lies within the generated data manifold more often.

Out-of-distribution collages. To assess the robustness of M&Ms to out-of-distribution condition-
ings, we build five types of random collages not seen during training. We start from a real image and
decompose it into a collage. We then replace up to O objects in the collage by altering either the
object images or their bounding boxes. We alter object images by replacing them by another object


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Collage #1   Generations #1   Collage #2       Generations #2            Collage #3      Generations #3


 IC-GAN
M&Ms (ours)


Figure 4: Example of collage conditionings and generated samples of IC-GAN and M&Ms, both
trained on OpenImages (256×256). We depict three scenarios: (Collage #1) a collage with one boat
object; (Collage #2) a collage where the original object has been replaced with a random object of
the same class; (Collage #3) a collage where the original object has been replaced with a random
dataset object. In all cases, the bounding box of the randomly sampled object is used. Note that input
collages to the M&Ms model are depicted as RGB overlays with red boxes to ease visualization. For
IC-GAN, the RGB overlay is used as the input image, and no bounding box information is used.

image sampled uniformly from (1) the original object’s neighbors (SN ); (2) the dataset objects of the
same class (SC ); or (3) the entire dataset of objects (SR ). We either keep the original object’s bounding
box (SO ) or use the bounding box corresponding to the sampled object (SS ). We compare M&Ms
with IC-GAN in terms of object and image FID, following the above-mentioned out-of-distribution
scenarios. For IC-GAN, we convert the collages into RGB images by blending the object images
with the background scene. Results are reported in Table 2.
When comparing the models, we observe that                    Table 2: Quantitative results on OpenImages
M&Ms consistently outperforms IC-GAN in terms                 (256×256) when using random collages obtained
of image FID and, by a large margin, in terms of ob-          by altering either the object images or their bound-
ject FID as well. This suggests that the collage rep-         ing boxes (BB). Objects can be replaced by another
                                                              object sampled from: the original object’s neigh-
resentation used to condition M&Ms is better suited
                                                              bourhood (SN ), the original object’s class (SC ), or
than the one of IC-GAN to enhance generation con-             the entire dataset of objects (SR ). We either keep the
trollability. Moreover, the object FID results of             BB corresponding to the original object (SO ) or use
M&Ms suggest that the object quality and diversity            the BB corresponding to the sampled object (SS ).
is preserved even in the most out-of-distribution             *: reported as 0.0 due to rounding.
scenario (SR , SS ), which considers random objects
and bounding box changes. In terms of image FID,                              Object   BB      ↓FIDx         ↓FIDo
the challenging scenarios with random objects (SR ,
SS ) and (SR , SO ) obtain the highest scores. We                              SN      SO     7.3 ± 0.1    24.5 ± 0.2
                                                                IC-GAN


                                                                               SC      SO    14.9 ± 0.2    30.7 ± 0.3
hypothesize that this is in part due to the enabled
                                                                               SR      SO    18.8 ± 0.1    33.0 ± 0.3
controllability, which results in generations that are                         SN      SS     6.8 ± 0.0    22.6 ± 0.1
far away from the reference images, changing the                               SC      SS    11.1 ± 0.1    28.1 ± 0.2
distribution of generated images and resulting in                              SR      SS    16.6 ± 2.8    30.9 ± 2.9
higher image FID. As illustrated in Figure 4, and
                                                                M&Ms (ours)


                                                                               SN      SO    5.9 ± 0.0*     8.2 ± 0.1
in contrast to IC-GAN, M&Ms results in genera-
                                                                               SC      SO    9.1 ± 0.0*     8.8 ± 0.1
tions that respect the object appearance and size of                           SR      SO    15.2 ± 0.1    11.4 ± 0.1
the conditioning collage, highlighting the genera-                             SN      SS    5.9 ± 0.0*     9.8 ± 0.1
tion controllability of our method. More qualitative                           SC      SS    9.6 ± 0.0*     8.3 ± 0.1
results can be found in Supplementary Material E.                              SR      SS    16.0 ± 0.1     9.2 ± 0.1

Zero-shot transfer to MS-COCO. To demonstrate we can go beyond the collages derived from the
training data, we condition M&Ms on collages composed of MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) validation
images. More precisely, we decompose each image in the dataset into a collage using the ground truth
bounding box annotations, and use the resulting collages to condition a pre-trained M&Ms. Table 3
compares M&Ms with recent text-to-image models in terms of zero shot FID. This comparison is
meant as a gauge of how M&Ms fares in this setup, rather than a direct comparison with text-to-
image models. M&Ms achieves competitive zero-shot FID, surpassing DALL-E, despite using a


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Collages               Generations #1            Generations #2             Generations #3


Figure 5: User-generated collages derived from the MS-COCO dataset, and the corresponding M&Ms
generated images. The object combinations and layouts are unseen with respect to the training data.
Input collages to the model are depicted as RGB overlays. Recognizable faces have been blurred out.


smaller model with 131× fewer parameters and being trained on 147× fewer images. Please refer
to the Supplementary Material E for qualitative results. Finally, we go beyond using MS-COCO
ground-truth BB layouts and we combine objects and scenes from different images, using the BB
coordinates chosen by a user to construct creative collages, see Figure 5. Once more, M&Ms
showcases outstanding controllability, quality and diversity, generating impressive scenes.


4   R ELATED WORK

Conditional image generation. Text-based image Table 3: Zero-shot FID (FID0 ) on MS-
generation has recently shown impressive results COCO (Lin et al., 2014) at 256 × 256, follow-
through training on very large datasets; see e.g. (Ding ing (Ramesh et al., 2021). *: Results with fil-
et al., 2021; Gafni et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2022; tered dataset. Baselines: DALL-E (Ramesh et al.,
Ramesh et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2016; Rombach 2021), GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2022), Make-A-
                                                          Scene (Gafni et al., 2022) and unCLIP (Ramesh
et al., 2022). Some works additionally enable image et al., 2022).
editing by providing a mask and text (Gafni et al.,
2022; Nichol et al., 2022), or editing single object
attributes with text (Li et al., 2019a; 2020a). Oth- Model                  # Params # Tr. data FID0
ers condition on labeled bounding boxes (Casanova DALL-E                         12B       250M     ∼ 28
et al., 2020; Frolov et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2020; GLIDE                          5B      250M      12.2
Sun & Wu, 2019; 2020; Sylvain et al., 2021; Zhao Make-A-Scene                      4B        35M 11.8*
et al., 2019), which enables precise control of ob- unCLIP                       5.2B      650M      10.4
ject location, but are limited when expressing object M&Ms                       91M        1.7M     16.7
semantics, relying on object class labels or, addition-
ally, attributes (Frolov et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2020), that require further data annotation. With
similar approaches, some works condition on scene graphs (Ashual & Wolf, 2019; Herzig et al.,
2020; Johnson et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019b), requiring less detailed scene description. Allowing for
more spatial control, but requiring more detailed annotations, semantic image synthesis methods
use segmentation masks to generate photorealistic scenes (Chen & Koltun, 2017; Liu et al., 2019;
Park et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2018; Schönfeld et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2018; 2021),
but are also limited to class labels to control object appearance. Text prompts, labeled bounding
boxes, scene-graphs, or segmentation masks, moreover, provide limited control about the desired
scene details, see Figure 1. Among such works, (Li et al., 2021b) combines a generic scene generator


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


model, and iteratively pastes objects generated by class-conditional GANs in the scene. Although
using local generators and discriminators, it does not allow for expressive image-based conditioning.

Exemplar-based image generation. Several works condition image generation on images or image
fragments. Given an input image, IC-GAN (Casanova et al., 2021) learns to generate diverse images
in the neighborhood of a conditioning instance. Despite its good image quality, the objects present in
the instance and their positions are not guaranteed to be preserved in the generations. PasteGAN (Li
et al., 2019b) and RetrieveGAN (Tseng et al., 2020) generate scenes by using a scene-graph and
object crops. At inference time, these object crops are selected as the most similar class objects
from the training set in terms of scene-graph embeddings. The objects in the generated scenes
are practically copy-pasted from those in the training set offering limited diversity. Shocher et al.
(2020) condition the generator on a pyramid of features extracted from an image using a pre-trained
classification network. At inference time, features from an object and a background can be combined
from different images. Unlike our work, results shown depict compositions with a single, image
centered copy-pasted object, that forms a likely combination with the background. Moreover, the
generated images are limited in quality and diversity. Qi et al. (2018) combine semantic segmentation
masks with crops from the training set retrieved based on their segmentation mask. In image to
image translation, segmentation masks (Tang et al., 2020a) or scene graphs together with an image
patch (Li et al., 2021a) are used as guidance for the final output. In contrast to the three latter works,
our approach does not require any semantic labels for training or generation.
Image editing. Image editing methods most often aim to preserve the input information and to apply
global style changes or local fine-grained modifications to the input image. By contrast, our goal
is to generate diverse and novel images inspired by the input collage. Latent manipulation methods
edit images by navigating the latent spaces of generative models in directions that correspond to
semantic edits (Bau et al., 2019; Cherepkov et al., 2021). This limits the diversity of the outputs
and the controllability, to only those editing operations that have been discovered. To overcome this,
some works leverage joint visual-textual embedding models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to
drive text-based latent manipulation (Couairon et al., 2022; Crowson et al., 2022). Other works edit
images by either projecting reference images into a latent space and then merging the resulting latents
locally with a mask (Kim et al., 2021), or by extracting a latent of an input collage image (Chai et al.,
2021). These methods only present results for human faces and other single object datasets. Other
methods optimize embeddings in the latent space to later combine information from multiple images
by performing affine transformations and semantic manipulations (Abdal et al., 2019; 2020; Zhu et al.,
2020; Issenhuth et al., 2021). Different works learn latent vectors that correspond to disentangled
parts of an image (Singh et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020b) or learn latent blobs in an unsupervised manner
to decompose scenes into semantic objects (Epstein et al., 2022); these factors are then recombined
at inference time to generate new images. In contrast to these works, we do not need to intervene in
the latent space to generate our composed scenes. ST-GAN (Lin et al., 2018) proposes to edit images
with geometrically consistent operations. Unlike ST-GAN, we do not aim at editing an image nor
geometrically constrain the outputs. Photomontage and image blending techniques (Agarwala et al.,
2004; Chen & Kae, 2019; Sbai et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Chai et al., 2021)
seamlessly combine the regions of multiple images, performing high quality blending. This is different
from our objective, which is to generate new content without preserving the input images as they are.

5    C ONCLUSION
We introduced a simple yet effective way of controlling scene generation by means of image collages,
which enables fine-grained control over the position and size of the objects, as well as the appearance
of both background and objects in the scene. Experimental results on OpenImages showed that
M&Ms is able to generate high quality images and objects, even when the collage contains randomly
selected and placed objects. We showcased better controllability than IC-GAN, while maintaining
the image quality and diversity. We then showed that M&Ms enables zero-shot generalization to
unseen datasets by providing quantitative and qualitative results on MS-COCO, obtaining better
zero-shot FID than DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) despite using two orders of magnitude fewer
training data and model parameters. Finally, we evaluated our model on user-generated collages with
unseen object combinations and arrangements and showed impressive image generations, further
emphasizing the potential to advance content generation by leveraging image collages.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   E THICS STATEMENT
Our easy to use image generation model provides a very appealing tool for content creation and
manipulation. Despite the positive impacts our model can provide to content creators and researchers,
there is always potential for misuse. Regardless of not being its intended use, there is the risk
that malicious actors use the model to generate harmful content and as a tool for harrassment or
misinformation, by using synthesized images as if they were real. Moreover, the biases present in
the training data can be magnified by generative models, by further under-representing some data
categories or strengthening societal stereotypes. Although we use publicly available datasets that
have been annotated and human-reviewed, there is no guarantee that all images depict safe content.
To mitigate the potential misuses of the tool we recommend building collages from images that do not
depict unsafe, discriminatory and harmful content. Following the DALL-E mini (Dayma et al., 2021)
model’s card recommendations, our model “should not be used to intentionally create or disseminate
images that create hostile or alienating environments for people. This includes generating images
that people would foreseeably find disturbing, distressing, or offensive; or content that propagates
historical or current stereotypes.”

7   R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We provide additional details in Supplementary Material C to allow researchers to reproduce our
work, such as dataset pre-processing and setup, architecture details, training hyper-parameters and
other relevant information such as compute resources needed to train the model.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan: How to embed images into the
  stylegan latent space? In ICCV, 2019.
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan++: How to edit the embedded
  images? In CVPR, 2020.
Aseem Agarwala, Mira Dontcheva, Maneesh Agrawala, Steven Drucker, Alex Colburn, Brian Curless,
  David Salesin, and Michael Cohen. Interactive digital photomontage. ACM Trans. Graph., 2004.
Oron Ashual and Lior Wolf. Specifying object attributes and relations in interactive scene generation.
  In ICCV, 2019.
David Bau, Hendrik Strobelt, William Peebles, Jonas Wulff, Bolei Zhou, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Antonio
  Torralba. Semantic photo manipulation with a generative image prior. SIGGRAPH, 2019.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. In ICLR, 2019.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021.
Arantxa Casanova, Michal Drozdzal, and Adriana Romero-Soriano. Generating unseen complex
  scenes: are we there yet? arXiv preprint, arXiv:2012.04027, 2020.
Arantxa Casanova, Marlène Careil, Jakob Verbeek, Michal Drozdzal, and Adriana Romero-Soriano.
  Instance-conditioned GAN. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Lucy Chai, Jonas Wulff, and Phillip Isola. Using latent space regression to analyze and leverage
  compositionality in gans. In ICLR, 2021.
Bor-Chun Chen and Andrew Kae. Toward realistic image compositing with adversarial learning. In
  CVPR, 2019.
Qifeng Chen and Vladlen Koltun. Photographic image synthesis with cascaded refinement networks.
  In ICCV, 2017.
Anton Cherepkov, Andrey Voynov, and Artem Babenko. Navigating the gan parameter space for
  semantic image editing. In CVPR, 2021.
Guillaume Couairon, Asya Grechka, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. FlexIT:
 Towards flexible semantic image translation. In CVPR, 2022.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Castri-
  cato, and Edward Raff. VQGAN-CLIP: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2204.08583, 2022.
                                                                                     ´
Boris Dayma, Suraj Patil, Pedro Cuenca, Khalid Saifullah, Tanishq Abraham, Phúc Lê Khăc,
  Luke Melas, and Ritobrata Ghosh. Dall-e mini, 7 2021. URL https://github.com/
  borisdayma/dalle-mini.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. In NeurIPS,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05233.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, and Jie Tang. CogView: Mastering text-to-image generation via
 transformers. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2105.13290, 2021.
Dave Epstein, Taesung Park, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A Efros. Blobgan: Spatially
  disentangled scene representations. ECCV, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Stanislav Frolov, Avneesh Sharma, Jörn Hees, Tushar Karayil, Federico Raue, and Andreas Dengel.
  Attrlostgan: attribute controlled image synthesis from reconfigurable layout and style. In DAGM
  GCPR, 2021.
Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-
  scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In ECCV, 2022.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask R-CNN. In ICCV, 2017.
Roei Herzig, Amir Bar, Huijuan Xu, Gal Chechik, Trevor Darrell, and Amir Globerson. Learning
  canonical representations for scene graph to image generation. In ECCV, 2020.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. In NeurIPS,
 2017.
Thibaut Issenhuth, Ugo Tanielian, Jérémie Mary, and David Picard. Edibert, a generative model for
  image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.15264, 2021.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
  Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
Justin Johnson, Agrim Gupta, and Li Fei-Fei. Image generation from scene graphs. In CVPR, 2018.
Dahun Kim, Tsung-Yi Lin, Anelia Angelova, In So Kweon, and Weicheng Kuo. Learning open-world
  object proposals without learning to classify. Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2), 2022.
Hyunsu Kim, Yunjey Choi, Junho Kim, Sungjoo Yoo, and Youngjung Uh. Exploiting spatial
  dimensions of latent in gan for real-time image editing. In ICCV, 2021.
Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab
  Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, et al. The open images dataset v4.
  IJCV, 128(7):1956–1981, 2020.
Tuomas Kynkaanniemi, Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Improved
  precision and recall metric for assessing generative models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip H. S. Torr. Controllable text-to-image
  generation. In NeurIPS, 2019a.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip H. S. Torr. Manigan: Text-guided image
  manipulation. In CVPR, 2020a.
Yijun Li, Lu Jiang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Controllable and progressive image extrapolation. In
  WACV, 2021a.
Yikang Li, Tao Ma, Yeqi Bai, Nan Duan, Sining Wei, and Xiaogang Wang. PasteGAN: A semi-
  parametric method to generate image from scene graph. In NeurIPS, 2019b.
Yuheng Li, Krishna Kumar Singh, Utkarsh Ojha, and Yong Jae Lee. MixNMatch: Multifactor
  disentanglement and encoding for conditional image generation. In CVPR, 2020b.
Zejian Li, Jingyu Wu, Immanuel Koh, Yongchuan Tang, and Lingyun Sun. Image synthesis from
  layout with locality-aware mask adaption. In ICCV, 2021b.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Ersin Yumer, Oliver Wang, Eli Shechtman, and Simon Lucey. ST-GAN: Spatial
  transformer generative adversarial networks for image compositing. In CVPR, 2018.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Xihui Liu, Guojun Yin, Jing Shao, Xiaogang Wang, and Hongsheng Li. Learning to predict layout-
  to-image conditional convolutions for semantic image synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ke Ma, Bo Zhao, and Leonid Sigal. Attribute-guided image generation from layout. arXiv preprint,
  arXiv:2008.11932, 2020.
Takeru Miyato and Masanori Koyama. cGANs with projection discriminator. In ICLR, 2018.
V. Nair and G. Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines. In ICML, 2010.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. In ICML, 2022.
Taesung Park, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun Wang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Semantic image synthesis with
  spatially-adaptive normalization. In CVPR, 2019.
Xiaojuan Qi, Qifeng Chen, Jiaya Jia, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric image synthesis. In
  CVPR, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.
  Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. In ICML, 2016.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. In NeurIPS, 2015.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv, 2022.
Othman Sbai, Camille Couprie, and Mathieu Aubry. Surprising image compositions. In CVPR, 2021.
Edgar Schönfeld, Vadim Sushko, Dan Zhang, Juergen Gall, Bernt Schiele, and Anna Khoreva. You
  only need adversarial supervision for semantic image synthesis. In ICLR, 2021.
Assaf Shocher, Yossi Gandelsman, Inbar Mosseri, Michal Yarom, Michal Irani, William T. Freeman,
  and Tali Dekel. Semantic pyramid for image generation. In CVPR, 2020.
Krishna Kumar Singh, Utkarsh Ojha, and Yong Jae Lee. FineGAN: Unsupervised hierarchical
  disentanglement for fine-grained object generation and discovery. In CVPR, 2019.
Wei Sun and Tianfu Wu. Image synthesis from reconfigurable layout and style. In ICCV, 2019.
Wei Sun and Tianfu Wu. Learning layout and style reconfigurable GANs for controllable image
 synthesis. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2003.11571, 2020.
Tristan Sylvain, Pengchuan Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, R Devon Hjelm, and Shikhar Sharma. Object-
  centric image generation from layouts. AAAI, 2021.
Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Yan Yan, Jason J Corso, Philip HS Torr, and Nicu Sebe. Multi-channel attention
  selection gans for guided image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2002.01048, 2020a.
Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Yan Yan, Philip HS Torr, and Nicu Sebe. Local class-specific and global
  image-level generative adversarial networks for semantic-guided scene generation. In CVPR,
  2020b.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hung-Yu Tseng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Weilong Yang. RetrieveGAN:
  Image synthesis via differentiable patch retrieval. In ECCV, 2020.
Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. High-
  resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional GANs. In CVPR, 2018.
Yi Wang, Lu Qi, Ying-Cong Chen, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jiaya Jia. Image synthesis via semantic
  composition. In ICCV, 2021.
Yuxin Wu, Alexander Kirillov, Francisco Massa, Wan-Yen Lo, and Ross Girshick. Detectron2.
  https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2, 2019.
Ning Xu, Brian Price, Scott Cohen, and Thomas Huang. Deep image matting. In CVPR, 2017.
Fisher Yu, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Ari Seff, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun: Construction of a large-
  scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.03365,
  2015.
Lingzhi Zhang, Tarmily Wen, Jie Min, Jiancong Wang, David Han, and Jianbo Shi. Learning object
  placement by inpainting for compositional data augmentation. In ECCV, 2020.
Bo Zhao, Lili Meng, Weidong Yin, and Leonid Sigal. Image generation from layout. In CVPR, 2019.
Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan Yuille, and Tao Kong. iBOT:
   Image BERT pre-training with online tokenizer. ICLR, 2022.
Jiapeng Zhu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Bolei Zhou. In-domain gan inversion for real image editing.
   In ECCV, 2020.
Minfeng Zhu, Pingbo Pan, Wei Chen, and Yi Yang. DM-GAN: Dynamic memory generative
 adversarial networks for text-to-image synthesis. In CVPR, 2019.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Controllable Image Generation via Collage Representations:
                    Supplementary Material
We expand the material provided in the main paper to first include a statement on the limitations
of our work, in Supplementary Material A. The assets used in this work are credited in Supple-
mentary Material B. Additional experimental details are provided in Supplementary Material C,
followed by extended quantitative and qualitative results in Supplementary Materials D and E,
respectively. Moreover, ablation and sensitivity studies are provided in Supplementary Material F.
Finally, Supplementary Material G contains experiments training our model with no labeled data.

A    L IMITATIONS
M&Ms leverages features from a pre-trained feature extractor and, therefore, depends on it. The
possibility of jointly training M&Ms together with the feature extractor is left as future work.
Moreover, we have observed that when the objects are cluttered and there is significant overlap among
them, the quality of the generated object can quickly degrade.
Moreover, training on a complex dataset with multiple objects and scenes is a challenging task. It
is particularly difficult to generate humans and their faces, which often appear blurry from afar.
Looking at other examples in the literature, diffusion models trained on ImageNet present low
quality human face generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Even the latest text-to-image model
Imagen Saharia et al. (2022) makes the following statement: “Our human evaluations found Imagen
obtains significantly higher preference rates when evaluated on images that do not portray people,
indicating a degradation in image fidelity” in their limitations section.

B    A SSETS CREDIT AND LICENSING
In Table 4 and Table 5, we provide the links and licenses to the assets used in this work. M&Ms’
training scheme follows IC-GAN (Casanova et al., 2020). M&Ms builds upon the BigGAN (Brock
et al., 2019) architecture, and leverages the SwAV (Caron et al., 2020) feature extractor to obtain
image, scene background and object features. Moreover, we used Faiss (Johnson et al., 2019) as a fast
nearest neighbor search tool to build image and object neighborhoods. Finally, we trained our model
on OpenImages (v4) (Kuznetsova et al., 2020), and tested it using collages derived from OpenImages
(v4) as well as MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) (zero-shot dataset). To calculate the zero-shot FID metric,
we followed the experimental setup provided by DM-GAN (Zhu et al., 2019) that was previously
used to evaluate text-to-image zero-shot generations on MS-COCO (Gafni et al., 2022; Ramesh et al.,
2022; 2021).
We also credit the individual images from the OpenImages dataset (Kuznetsova et al., 2020) or
obtained from the Creative Commons image search engine that were reproduced in the paper:
       • "Estombar - statues in the vineyard" by muffinn is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in
         Figures 1, 16 and 17.
       • "Free" by Charles ’Andy’ Lee is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figures 1, 16 and 17.
       • "old garage Rotherham" by Chris is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figures 1, 16
         and 17.
       • "The Cake Cutting ceremony" by Craig Howell is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in
         Figure 17.
       • "Behind Pullman city hall, 1970s" by Robert Ashworth is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
         Appears in Figure 17.
       • "Golden Gate National Cemetery #6" by Pargon is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in
         Figure 18.
       • "Vulture Sitting in Tree" by Hans Dekker is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 2.
       • "Certoza di Pavia" by Игорь, M is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 2.
       • "Sunset Reeuwijk II" by Frapestaartje is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figures 3a
         and 17.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      • "13183597093_2428d12447_o" by U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command
        (SMDC) is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 2.
      • "18 juillet 2011 (K5_02084)" by Manu_H is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in
        Figures 3a, 4 and 9.
      • "National Gallery - Stockholm" by Gustav Bergman is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears
        in Figure 3b.
      • "The view from my hospital room " by "Marywhotravels" is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
        Appears in Figure 3b.
      • "Alcatraz Island" by Florian Plag is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 3b.
      • "Conseil Régional de Haute-Normandie" by Frédéric BISSON is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
        Appears in Figure 3b.
      • "St. Petersburg, Undated" by Nathan Hughes Hamilton is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
        Appears in Figure 3b.
      • "IMG_3137" by Simon Davison is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 18.
      • "Fritz Rebotzky house - 2401 Queets Avenue, Hoquiam WA" by JOHN LLOYD is licensed
        under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 18.
      • "Liberty Star Schooner in Boston Harbor" by massmatt is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
        Appears in Figures 4 and 9.
      • "Boston at Night" by ReneS is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 9.
      • "beach" by barnyz is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. Appears in Figures 10 and 11.
      • "cacti wall" by ikarusmedia is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figures 10 and 13.
      • "Cacti at Moorten Botanical Garden - Palm Springs, California" by ChrisGoldNY is licensed
        under CC BY-NC 2.0. Appears in Figure 10.
      • "Robot" by Andy Field (Field Office) is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0. Appears in
        Figure 10.
      • "fortune telling robot" by Paul Keller is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 10.
      • "Lake McDonald Lodge" by GlacierNPS is marked with Public Domain Mark 1.0. Appears
        in Figure 11.
      • "DSC_5102" by Shane Global is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 19.
      • "IndieWebCamp 2011 Food" by Aaron Parecki is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in
        Figure 19.
      • "DSC09463" by Tanner Ford is licensed under CC BY 2.0. Appears in Figure 19.
      • "church" by barnyz is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. Appears in Figure 12.
      • "church" by barnyz is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. Appears in Figures 12 and 13.
      • "church" by barnyz is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. Appears in Figure 12.

                         Table 4: Links to the assets used in the paper.

  Asset                                                Link
  IC-GAN                   https://github.com/facebookresearch/ic_gan
  BigGAN                   https://github.com/ajbrock/BigGAN-PyTorch
  SwAV                       https://github.com/facebookresearch/swav
  Faiss                     https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss
  OpenImages (v4)   https://storage.googleapis.com/openimages/web/index.html
  MS-COCO                             https://cocodataset.org
  DM-GAN                       https://github.com/MinfengZhu/DM-GAN



                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Table 5: Assets licensing information.

          Asset                                          License
          IC-GAN                                       CC-BY-NC
          BigGAN                                          MIT
          SwAV                          Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
          Faiss                                           MIT
          OpenImages (v4)               CC BY 2.0 (images) CC BY 4.0 (annotations)
          MS-COCO             Terms of use: https://cocodataset.org/#termsofuse
          DM-GAN                                          MIT



C     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

We describe the experimental details of our model and the experimental setup, by defining the datasets
in Section C.1, the architecture details in Section C.2, training details in Section C.3 and additional
information such as compute resources and neighbour sets construction in Section C.4.

C.1   DATASETS

In order to save compute and enable faster experiment iteration, we perform the ablation and sensibility
studies, as well as the model selection, on a subset of OpenImages (v4) (Kuznetsova et al., 2020), that
we name OpenImages500k. The best model is then trained on the full OpenImages (v4) (Kuznetsova
et al., 2020) and later evaluated on MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) validation set. These datasets have
been filtered according to the criteria below.

OpenImages500k. A central crop was applied to the approximately 1.7M images from OpenIm-
ages v4. Ground-truth bounding boxes labeled as Occluded or Truncated, smaller than 2% of the
crop or positioned partly outside the crop, were discarded. After filtering out these objects, we only
consider images that contain at least one object, resulting in a subset with approximately 500k images,
used as background scenes, with 1.7M objects overall. Among the resulting images, 99% have at
most five objects.

OpenImages. All images from OpenImages v4, approximately 1.7M, were cropped around one
of their ground-truth objects, chosen randomly, to obtain square crops. Any object bounding box
smaller than 1% of the crop or positioned partly outside it is discarded. This results in 1.5M images
with a total of 5.7M objects. Most images have up to five objects (∼ 80%), and the remaining 200k
images are used as scene backgrounds.

MS-COCO validation set. A central crop was applied to the approximately 40k images in the
validation set. Ground-truth bounding boxes smaller than 2% of the crop or positioned partly outside
the crop, were discarded. Images with no objects are still used as only scene backgrounds.

C.2   A RCHITECTURE DETAILS

As already discussed in Section 2.2, we start from the BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019) generator and
discriminator architecture and provide additional details on the changes we applied to handle collages
as conditioning.

Generator. The input collage representation Hi , has a shape (B, D, H, W ), where B is the batch
size, D the feature dimensionality – we use D = 2048 in our experiments –, and H and W are the
collage height and width in pixels, respectively. We modified the normalization layers to take as
input the collage representations, by first reducing the feature dimensionality of Hi from 2048 to
512 to limit the number of extra parameters, similarly as in IC-GAN (Casanova et al., 2021). After
concatenating the noise tensor Zi with the reduced-dimensionality collage representation, two 1×1
convolutional layers – instead of two fully connected layers as in BigGAN – output the gain and bias
for the conditional normalization.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Image and object discriminators architecture for M&Ms at 256 × 256, that outputs an
image score and an object score. As input, the discriminators are given an image and its features,
and an object feature vector as well as its bounding box (BB). DBlock: block with a residual
connection, where a ReLU (Nair & Hinton, 2010), a convolutional layer, a second ReLU and a
second convolutional layer are applied, before optionally downsampling the feature maps. As
in BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019), the convolutional (conv) layers and linear layers are spectrally
normalized. Attention: global attention block, as used in BigGAN. RoI pooler (Ren et al., 2015)
extracts object features, and Global SumPool performs a sum operation over the spatial dimensions.
Different colored blocks are aimed at easing the visualization. Feature map sizes are specified below
each block.


Discriminators. The image and object discriminators share a common path, composed of several
blocks, that then branches into an image processing path and an object processing path, as depicted
in Figure 6. The common path receives an image as an input, that is processed by a residual block
chain. On the one hand, the image path further transforms the output of the common path and later
multiplies it by the image features, fed as an input to the image path, with a dot product. These
projected features are then summed with the output of a final linear layer, that processes the features
without projection. On the other hand, the object path aggregates feature maps at the output of four
intermediate blocks from the common path, with the help of a RoI pooler, that uses the input object
bounding boxes. Finally, those aggregated features are projected, by means of a dot product, with the
input object features. Similarly as for the image path, those projected features are summed with the
output of a linear layer that transforms the features without projection.

C.3   T RAINING DETAILS

We use SwAV (Caron et al., 2020), a ResNet50 trained with self-supervision, to extract features of
real images as well as background scenes and foreground objects in the collage. We represent scenes
and real images by means of the 1×2048 feature vector obtained after the average pooling of the
ResNet50. We represent each object by means of a 1×2048 feature vector extracted by applying
a RoI pooling layer (Ren et al., 2015) on the 7× 7×2048 feature map from the last ResNet block.
The cardinalities of the nearest neighbour sets Axi and Aoi,c are 50 and 5, respectively. We train our
model by sampling up to five objects per image – as ∼80% of the images in OpenImages contain five
objects or less – and use λ = 0.5 in Equation 2. We use the default optimization hyper-parameters of
IC-GAN (Casanova et al., 2021), and use early stopping on the FIDx metric. We use horizontal flips
as data augmentation.

C.4   A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Here we specify the compute resources used to train our models and how the nearest neighbor sets
were obtained.

Compute resources. To train M&Ms at 128×128 on OpenImages500k, we used 95h compute time
on 32 Volta 32GB GPUs; to train M&Ms at 128×128 on Openimages, we used 188h compute time
with 32 GPUs. Finally, to train M&Ms at 256×256 on OpenImages, we used 188h compute time
with 128 GPUs.

Features and nearest neighbor sets. Following the practise in (Casanova et al., 2021), both
background scene features hsi and object features hoi , with feature dimensionality 2048, are divided


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by their norm. Faiss (Johnson et al., 2019) was used to find k-NN datapoints per scene and object,
that form Axi and Aoi,c respectively, with cosine similarity as a metric.

D     E XTENDED QUANTITATIVE RESULTS

D.1    FID SCORES ON THE O PEN I MAGES VALIDATION SET

As additional generalization results, Table 6 provides im-                Table 6: Quantitative results on the valida-
age and object FID scores for IC-GAN and M&Ms on the                      tion set of OpenImages.
OpenImages validation set. M&Ms presents a slight de-
crease in terms of image FID compared to IC-GAN, while                                         ↓FIDx          ↓FIDo
it greatly improves on object FID scores. These results                                             128×128
further confirm that M&Ms enables control with respect to
the baseline, achieving better object quality and diversity,              IC-GAN           13.3 ± 0.1    22.4 ± 0.1
while slightly trading off the quality and diversity of the               M&Ms (ours)      14.7 ± 0.1     9.3 ± 0.1
global scene.                                                                                       256×256
Note that unlike the numbers reported in Table 1, that IC-GAN          14.0 ± 0.1 26.7 ± 0.2
samples 50K datapoints for real and generated samples, M&Ms (ours) 15.8 ± 0.1 15.1 ± 0.1
the validation set only contains 41K real samples and we
compute the FID metric by sampling 40K generated and
real samples. Therefore, numbers from Table 1 and the numbers in this table cannot be directly
compared.

D.2    F IDELITY BETWEEN INPUT COLLAGE AND GENERATED IMAGES

We additionally evaluate the fidelity between the input collages and the generated images to assess
how semantically close the objects in the generated images and the images themselves are to those
objects specified in the input collages and the input collage itself. In particular, object and image
features are extracted with SwAV, from both the generated images and the input collages, and the
cosine similarity is measured for each image and object correspondence between the input collage
and generated images. Then, the similarities are averaged across images and objects separately.
Using the same evaluation setup as in Table 1 and
Table 2 and sampling 10K input collages and gen-          Table 7: Fidelity score – measured with cosine
erated images, we report the fidelity scores in Ta-       similarity – for images and objects on OpenImages
ble 7. On the one hand, we observe that IC-GAN            (256×256) when using collages obtained by option-
and M&Ms are on-par for most setups in terms of           ally altering either the object images or their bound-
image fidelity, with IC-GAN presenting a higher           ing boxes (BB). Objects can be from the original
similarity for three out of six setups. We hypothe-       image (SO ) or can be replaced by another object
size that in this case, higher fidelity does not mean     sampled from: the original object’s neighbourhood
                                                          (SN ), the original object’s class (SC ), or the entire
that IC-GAN generates better scenes overall, but
                                                          dataset of objects (SR ). We either keep the BB cor-
rather that the feature extractor lacks the ability to    responding to the original object (SO ) or use the BB
capture the collaged objects in the input collage.        corresponding to the sampled object (SS ).
This would manifest when extracting global scene
features, for both input collage and generated im-
                                                                          Object    BB     ↑Fidelityx    ↑Fidelityo
ages, specially when the objects are small. When
IC-GAN uses these global scene features to condi-                           SO      SO     0.78 ± 0.1    0.53 ± 0.2
                                                            IC-GAN


tion the model and generate samples, we already                             SN      SO     0.77 ± 0.1    0.50 ± 0.2
observe that the objects are not present, see Figure 9.                     SC      SO     0.76 ± 0.1    0.45 ± 0.1
                                                                            SN      SS     0.78 ± 0.1    0.55 ± 0.2
When extracting the global scene features from the
                                                                            SC      SS     0.77 ± 0.1    0.45 ± 0.1
IC-GAN generated samples, those could be quite                              SR      SS     0.77 ± 0.1    0.44 ± 0.1
similar to the input collage features, as both ignore
                                                            M&Ms (ours)


or do not capture the collaged objects well. We also                        SO      SO     0.78 ± 0.1    0.65 ± 0.1
computed the fidelity scores with the iBOT (Zhou                            SN      SO     0.77 ± 0.1    0.59 ± 0.1
et al., 2022) feature extractor instead of SwAV and                         SC      SO     0.73 ± 0.1    0.48 ± 0.1
                                                                            SN      SS     0.78 ± 0.1    0.64 ± 0.1
obtained similar trends, showing that this hypothe-                         SC      SS     0.76 ± 0.1    0.52 ± 0.1
sis is not dependent on the SwAV feature extractor.                         SR      SS     0.75 ± 0.1    0.51 ± 0.1
On the other hand, M&Ms is superior to IC-GAN


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 8: Quantitative comparison between M&Ms and LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020) on the COCO-
Stuff validation set at 256×256. M&Ms is trained on Openimages performs zero-shot inference,
while LostGANv2 is trained on COCO-Stuff.

                         Method       ↓FIDx     ↓FIDo    ↑Fidelityx   ↑Fidelityo
                      LostGANv2        37.99    27.86       0.73        0.57
                      M&Ms (ours)      34.75    33.72       0.80        0.69


in terms of object fidelity for all setups, evidencing
that M&Ms preserves the object semantics better than IC-GAN while maintaining roughly the same
image semantics overall, indicating better controllability.

D.3    C OMPARISON WITH BB- TO - IMAGE METHODS

To provide a point of comparison with generative multi-object BB-to-image methods, we compare
M&Ms with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020), the BB-to-image method that obtains the lowest FID
score on COCO-Stuff at 256×256.

Experimental setup. Note that M&Ms has been trained on OpenImages and we perform zero-shot
inference on COCO-Stuff, while LostGANv2 is trained and tested on COCO-Stuff. We compute
FID and fidelity scores for both scenes and objects. For M&Ms, the fidelity scores measure how
well the semantics from the input collage are preserved in the output image. For LostGANv2, the
fidelity scores measure how similar the generated images are to the ground-truth images, given that
the model is conditioned on a bounding box layout and not directly on the input image. We have
compared both methods on the validation set of COCO-Stuff, by generating one sample per input
conditioning. Metrics are averaged across all validation scenes/objects. Additionally, similarly to
the random collages created in Table 2 (last row), we build random collages with the COCO-Stuff
validation set, by replacing “thing” (foreground) objects by random objects in the validation set,
changing the bounding boxes and labels for LostGANv2 or the bounding boxes and object crop for
M&Ms.

Results. In Table 8 we provide the results for this comparison. M&Ms is superior to LostGANv2
despite operating out of training data distribution, for image FID (FIDx ) and fidelity scores. Lost-
GANv2 obtains better object FID (FIDo ), which is to be expected, given the distribution shift between
the two datasets; for example, in COCO-Stuff animals appear much more often than in OpenImages,
which is dominated by people. However, when using random collages (or the equivalent BB layout)
as an input, both scene and object FIDs are better for M&Ms than LostGANv2. More concretely,
LostGANv2 scores 58.42 image FID and 37.12 object FID, while M&Ms, obtains 51.49 and 30.25
for image and object FID respectively, showcasing the better generalization of M&Ms to unseen
and challenging input conditionings. Finally, Figures 14 and 15 depict six conditionings for both
LostGANv2 and M&Ms, showing the superiority of M&Ms in terms of image quality and diversity,
despite not using semantic labels.


E     E XTENDED QUALITATIVE RESULTS

We provide other qualitative results on MS-COCO, for out-of-distribution collages on OpenImages,
as well as results when interpolating features or noise vectors. Finally, we provide the description of
the video demo provided as supplementary material to better illustrate the capabilities of M&Ms.

Qualitative results on MS-COCO. We present qualitative results on the zero-shot MS-COCO
validation set in Figure 7. We first extract background scene features, object features and bounding
box coordinates from the same image, in order to build the input collage conditioning. Then, we
use these conditionings to perform inference with M&Ms, pre-trained on OpenImages. As we can
observe, generated images preserve the layout specified by the object location and sizes, as well as
the appearance of the objects and scenes in the collages.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Collage                 Sample #1               Sample #2                Sample #3


Figure 7: Five collages derived from the MS-COCO dataset and the corresponding samples from
M&Ms. Note that the red boxes are overlaid on collage images to ease image interpretation. Faces in
the input images have been blurred out.


We identify some cases where the quality of the generated objects is degraded, shown in Figure 8.
This is the case when conditioning on objects that appear infrequently in the OpenImages (v4) dataset,
such as an airplane, a skateboard, a giraffe and skis (from top to bottom). Note that these objects
appear 2300, 78, 443 and 55 times, out of the total 5.7M objects used to train M&Ms. Moreover,
overlapping bounding boxes result in merging objects, such as the examples shown in the second and
fourth row.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Collage                  Sample #1                 Sample #2                 Sample #3


Figure 8: Four uncommon collages – with respect to OpenImages (v4) – with overlapping objects
derived from the MS-COCO dataset and the corresponding samples from M&Ms. Note that the red
boxes are overlaid on collage images to ease image interpretation. Faces in the input and generated
images have been blurred out.


Additional qualitative results for out-of-distribution collages on OpenImages. To extend the
qualitative results provided in Section 3.2, we provide further examples in Figure 9, where it is shown
that M&Ms enables controllability even for out-of-distribution collages, unlike IC-GAN.

Generated images using unseen classes of objects. In Figure 10, we have used images obtained
with the Creative Commons search engine to condition our model (zero-shot in the wild) and
conditioned on images from two classes that are not present in OpenImages: “cactus” and “robot”.
Note that we do not use class labels for neither training nor inference. We observe that M&Ms is
able to generate objects that preserve some characteristics of the unseen objects in the input collage,
generating cacti with the same shape/textures, or generating objects that maintain the color as well as
the humanoid toy aspect of the robots.

Changing the shape of the object masks at inference time. In Figure 11, we compare generations
with the same scene background features and object features, but changing the shape and size of the
object mask to non-rectangle masks. We observe that the model generalizes fairly well at inference
time, adapting the shape to the one provided in the mask. Given that we never enforce the object to


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Collage #1   Generations #1   Collage #2        Generations #2   Collage #3   Generations #3
 IC-GAN
M&Ms (ours)
 IC-GAN
M&Ms (ours)
 IC-GAN
M&Ms (ours)


Figure 9: Example of collage conditionings and generated samples of IC-GAN and M&Ms, both
trained on OpenImages (256×256). We depict three scenarios: (Collage #1) a collage with original
objects; (Collage #2) a collage where the original objects have been replaced with random objects of
the same class; (Collage #3) a collage where the original objects have been replaced with a random
objects from the dataset. In collages #2 and #3, the bounding box of the randomly sampled object is
used. Note that input collages to the M&Ms model are depicted as RGB overlays with red boxes for
visualization purposes. Identifiable faces in the input and generated images have been blurred out.


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Collage                   Generations              Collage                Generations


Figure 10: Collage conditionings with unseen class objects and generated samples obtained with
M&Ms, trained on OpenImages (256×256). Collages are obtained by combining images collected in
the wild, using the Creative Commons search engine. Cacti and robot objects, classes not present in
OpenImages, are used in the first and second row respectively. Note that input collages to the M&Ms
model are depicted as RGB overlays with red boxes to ease visualization.
    Collage #1     Generation #1      Collage #2    Generation #2     Collage #3    Generation #3


Figure 11: Collage conditionings with rectangle and non-rectangle object masks and the correspond-
ing generated samples obtained with M&Ms, trained on OpenImages (256×256). In Collage #1, the
object mask is a rectangle bounding box, illustred by copy-pasting the object in the RGB space. In
Collage #2 and #3, despite using the same object features as in Collage #1, the object masks, depicted
in black pixels, change shape and size. The generated object roughly adapts to the new object masks.

occupy the entirety of the input bounding box mask, the more concrete shapes specified in the input
collage are approximately taken into account, but does not match them pixel by pixel.

Feature and noise vector interpolations. The appearance of the objects and scenes can change
both by using different objects in the input collage or sampling different noise vectors. Moreover,
we can obtain a smooth transition between two objects or two noise vectors by linearly interpolating
them. In Figure 16, we show generated images when interpolating two noise vectors for the scene
(first row), the person (second row) and the building (third row). In Figure 17, generated images
are obtained by interpolating two feature vectors from collage elements: two background scenes
(first row), two persons (second row) or two buildings (third row). The generated images show a
smooth transition between two noise vectors or two collage element feature vectors. When those
interpolations are made at the object level, the rest of the scene remains the same, enabling object
morphing without altering the rest of the image.

Comparison to image editing methods. We compare against two image editing methods (Chai
et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020) in Figure 12. The method in (Chai et al., 2021) can only generate one
output image deterministically (first row). Moreover, the method from Zhu et al. (2020) (second row),
offers little diversity between generated outputs and visually lower quality generations than M&Ms.
Both image editing methods do not allow for combined changes in location, aspect ratio and size of
the objects. In contrast, M&Ms generates better quality images than Zhu et al. (2020) and diverse
outputs given one input collage (third row). Additionally, when changing the object size, aspect ratio


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and location (fourth and fifth row), M&Ms shows increased controllability and diversity. Moreover,
the editing methods in (Chai et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020) have been trained on single object datasets;
LSUN Churches and LSUN Towers respectively (Yu et al., 2015). Therefore, they can only operate
on limited image domains when performing edits, each domain needing a different trained model.
As opposed to this strategy, M&Ms has been trained on a more challenging and diverse dataset,
OpenImages, that contains at least 600 different objects. As shown in Figure 13, M&Ms is able to
generalize to unseen classes during training, such as cacti, while both methods in Chai et al. (2021);
Zhu et al. (2020) fail to successfully integrate the object in the output generations.

Video demo. We provide a video as part of the supplementary material to showcase a user-case
example, where the user generates images with M&Ms through an iterative process. The video
contains generated images for collages where objects are progressively added into a background
scene and their bounding boxes are occasionally adjusted to change their shape and location. Objects
and background scenes are changed throughout the video to show how these affect the generations.
Moreover, noise vectors are re-sampled for each individual object and scene to control for their
appearance. Note that images used as reference can either be from OpenImages or MS-COCO, and
the M&Ms model has been trained on OpenImages at 256×256 resolution. Collages are displayed as
an RGB overlay for simplicity.


F    A BLATION AND SENSITIVITY STUDIES

In this section we start by performing an ablation for M&Ms, where the usage of object features
is contrasted with the usage of object class labels. Then, we continue by assessing the impact of
training with a single object or multiple objects per background scene. Finally, we analyze the effect
of M&Ms’ hyper-parameters: the cardinality of the nearest neighbor set for objects Aoi,c and the λ
weight between the global and object losses in Equation 2. These studies are performed by training
several models on the smaller OpenImages500k subset at 128×128 resolution.

Object features versus object class labels. We train a baseline that builds the collage representation
Hi with background scene image features, an object bounding box and its object class label, instead
of the object features as in the standard M&Ms model. Results are presented in Table 9, first and
second row, where M&Ms has been trained with object features or object class labels, respectively.
We observe that using object features (first row) leads to moderately worse image and object FIDs than
using class labels (second row); we hypothesize that the class information is a strong conditioning
that leads to a better training data fit. However, as illustrated in Figure 18, we observe little diversity
between different noise samples in generated objects for M&Ms trained with object class labels.
Instead, M&Ms trained with object features exhibit more diversity (different house shapes and
window layouts) and furthermore, it enables fine-grained semantic control via features, evidenced by
the style change of generated houses (wooden house or white paint). Overall, using object features,
that have been obtained with no class label information, provides improved control and diversity
compared to using class labels, that achieve moderately better FID scores, but also require costly
class label annotations.

Object set cardinality and λ. From Table 9 we see that choosing a small object nearest neighbors
set cardinality (k o ) results in lower object FID, and therefore we choose k o = 5. The setting of λ
trades between image and object FID: with smaller λ values the scene quality improves, while with
bigger λ values the object quality improves. Therefore, we choose an intermediate value, λ = 0.5 for
all the experiments.

Single versus multiple objects per background scene. The collages can be built with one or more
foreground collage elements (objects) per background scene. As seen in Table 10, training M&Ms
with one object per background scene (first and third row) and performing inference with either one
or up to five objects per background scene, M&Ms exhibits similar image and object FID. Moreover,
using two, three or five objects at training time results in better image and object FID at inference
time. This confirms that training with multiple objects positively impacts the quality and diversity of
the generated images, even when there is only one object per background scene in the collages at
inference time (second row).


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Ablation study of the usage of object (Obj.) features (F) or class labels (C), and to analyze
the effect of the scene-object loss weight λ as well as the cardinality k o of the object nearest neighbor
set Aoi,c . Note that for λ = 0.0 M&Ms reverts to IC-GAN. All model variations have been trained
with one object per background scene. No horizontal flips were used as data augmentation.
*: Some non-zero standard deviations are reported as 0.0 due to rounding.

                              Obj.     λ       ko        ↓FIDx         ↓FIDo
                               F      0.5      5       11.3 ± 0.1    6.6 ± 0.0*
                               C      0.5      -        8.9 ± 0.1    5.3 ± 0.0*
                               F      0.5      25      11.0 ± 0.0*   7.1 ± 0.0*
                               F      0.5      50      12.3 ± 0.1    7.6 ± 0.0*
                               F      0.0      -        8.6 ± 0.1    21.1 ± 0.1
                               F     0.1       5       9.7 ± 0.0*     7.1 ± 0.1
                               F     0.25      5       10.7 ± 0.1    7.2 ± 0.0*
                               F      0.5      5       11.3 ± 0.1    6.6 ± 0.0*
                               F     0.75      5       11.2 ± 0.0*   6.1 ± 0.0*
                               F     0.9       5       13.6 ± 0.1*    6.1 ± 0.1


Table 10: Comparison with an M&Ms trained on a single or multiple objects per background scene
on OpenImages500k (128×128). OT : number of conditioning objects during training, OI : number
of conditioning objects during inference.
*: Some non-zero standard deviations are reported as 0.0 due to rounding.

                                        OT      OI       ↓FIDx        ↓FIDo
                              M&Ms         1       1     9.4 ± 0.1   5.3 ± 0.0*
                              M&Ms         5       1     6.3 ± 0.0    4.5 ± 0.0
                              M&Ms         1       5     9.3 ± 0.1    5.4 ± 0.1
                              M&Ms         2       5    5.6 ± 0.0*   3.6 ± 0.0*
                              M&Ms         3       5    5.6 ± 0.0*   3.7 ± 0.0*
                              M&Ms         5       5    5.6 ± 0.0*   3.9 ± 0.0*


Different feature extractors We explore the usage of different feature extractors for both scene and
object features. We replace the SwaV (Caron et al., 2020) feature extractor for either DINO (Caron
et al., 2021) or iBOT (Zhou et al., 2022) and report the FID metrics in Table 11. Despite the
improvements of DINO and iBOT regarding image classification on ImageNet with respect to SwAV,
we observe no improvement over image and object FIDs when using them as feature extractors for
M&Ms, and leave further exploration with additional feature extractors as future work.


Importance of object discriminator We ablate the model by removing the object discriminator
from M&Ms, and obtain an image FID score of 6.20 ± 0.0 and an object FID score of 8.11 ± 0.1,
which are higher than M&Ms with object discriminator (5.6 ± 0.0 and 3.9 ± 0.0 for image and object
FID respectively). This confirms the importance of the object disciminator in our pipeline.



Table 11: Feature extractor ablation on OpenImages500k (128×128), comparing SwAV, DINO (Caron
et al., 2021) and iBOT as feature extractors for both scene and object features.
*: Some non-zero standard deviations are reported as 0.0 due to rounding.

                                        Features          ↓FIDx        ↓FIDo
                              M&Ms          SwAV        5.6 ± 0.0*   3.9 ± 0.0*
                              M&Ms          DINO        7.2 ± 0.0*   5.5 ± 0.0*
                              M&Ms          iBOT         6.8 ± 0.1    5.0 ± 0.1


                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G     T RAINING M&M S WITHOUT BOUNDING BOX ANNOTATIONS
We hypothesized that M&Ms could be trained on a dataset containing images without any annota-
tions; i.e, no ground-truth bounding box coordinates nor class labels. We perform experiments on
OpenImages500K to validate the hypothesis.

G.1   E XPERIMENTS ON O PEN I MAGES 500K

We train three models on OpenImages500K at 128×128, where we replace the ground-truth bounding
boxes – and the objects they define – with either: (1) random image crops, (2) bounding box
coordinates predicted with Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) from the Detectron2 framework (Wu et al.,
2019), trained on MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and (3) bounding box coordinates predicted with
OLN (Kim et al., 2022), trained on MS-COCO, a method that does not predict class labels and
therefore it is not limited to only detecting classes in the MS-COCO training set.
We sample random crops using the ground-truth bounding box marginal distributions regarding the
number of objects per image, position in the image and their size, according to the statistics of Open-
Images500k. This results in roughly the same number of total objects in the dataset, approximately
900K objects. Bounding boxes predicted with Mask-RCNN are considered if the confidence is above
0.5 with a total of 1.4M objects, while the ones predicted with OLN are considered if the confidence
is above 0.65, resulting in 2.1M objects. For the very small set of images where no prediction is
found, a random crop is selected instead. In all cases, the size of the objects needs to be bigger than
2% of the image, following the standard procedure used to filter ground-truth bounding boxes in
OpenImages500k. Figure 19 shows a few example images in the dataset for which bounding boxes
have been extracted with the different methods.
Table 12 presents results for the three exper- Table 12: Impact study on the bounding boxes co-
iments, compared to M&Ms trained using ordinates used to train M&Ms on OpenImages500k
ground-truth bounding boxes. At inference (128×128). GT: ground-truth bounding boxes, RND:
time, scene background features and object fea- random crops, Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) pre-
tures are obtained from the same image, using dictions and OLN (Kim et al., 2022) predictions. *:
the ground-truth object bounding boxes. This Some non-zero standard deviations are reported as
testing setup is out-of-distribution for the ran- 0.0 due to rounding.
dom, Mask-RCNN and OLN crops, and there-
fore the worse image and object FID metrics,                Bounding Boxes      ↓FIDx       ↓FIDo
compared to the model trained with ground-
                                                  M&Ms            GT          5.6 ± 0.0* 3.9 ± 0.0*
truth boxes, are expected. When training with M&Ms               RND          8.5 ± 0.0* 12.9 ± 0.1
random crops, the boxes are obtained by sam- M&Ms             Mask-RCNN       13.3 ± 0.1 8.7 ± 0.0*
pling from the ground-truth box distribution, M&Ms               OLN          18.0 ± 0.1 8.6 ± 0.0*
which means that the bounding box distribu-
tion at inference time is in-distribution, what
could explain the lower image FID when compared to Mask-RCNN or OLN. However, the latter
methods obtain a better object FID, which could be the result of the bounding boxes being more
likely to contain actual objects than the random crops baseline. Moreover, in Figure 20, we show
generated images using out-of-distribution object combinations in a collage and observe that training
with Mask-RCNN and OLN bounding boxes results in better object generations than when training
with random crops, as already seen quantitatively in Table 12, as well as visually comparable image
quality and diversity to the model trained with ground-truth bounding boxes.
Overall, these experiments showcase that M&Ms can be trained without ground-truth bounding boxes
to generate reasonable scenes, see Figure 20, at the expense of worse image and object FID metrics
for the in-distribution setting, compared to the model trained with ground-truth boxes.


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Sample obtained with
                                (Chai et al., 2021)


             Collage           Samples obtained with in-domain image editing (Zhu et al., 2020)


                               Samples obtained with M&Ms


(a) Qualitative comparison with image editing methods (Chai et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020) that admit a collage
as input. Note that (Chai et al., 2021) can only generate one deterministic output given the intput collage (first
row), whereas (Zhu et al., 2020) generates images with little diversity (second row). In contrast, M&Ms offers
diverse outputs given the same collage (third row). Note that neither of the image editing methods supports
moving nor resizing the collage elements.
            Collage              Sample w/ M&Ms                   Collage              Sample w/ M&Ms


            Collage              Sample w/ M&Ms                   Collage              Sample w/ M&Ms


      (b) M&Ms effectively handles changes in size, location and aspect ration of the collage elements.

Figure 12: The potential of M&Ms w.r.t image editing methods. In all cases, input collages have
been build with images from the Creative Commons webpage and, for M&Ms, are depicted as RGB
overlays. Discussion in Section E.


                                                       28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Sample obtained with
                                (Chai et al., 2021)


             Collage             Samples obtained with in-domain image editing (Zhu et al., 2020)


                               Samples obtained with M&Ms


(a) Qualitative comparison with image editing methods (Chai et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020) that admit a collage
as input. Comparisons are made with collages that include the novel class cacti. Note that (Chai et al., 2021) can
only generate one deterministic output given the intput collage (first row), whereas (Zhu et al., 2020) generates
images with little diversity (second row). Neither of the image editing methods appears to generalize to the
novel object class. By contrast, M&Ms offers diverse output scenes with cacti in them (third row). Note that
neither of the image editing methods supports moving nor resizing the collage elements.
            Collage              Sample w/ M&Ms                   Collage              Sample w/ M&Ms


(b) M&Ms effectively handles changes in size, location and aspect ratio of the collage elements, even when
those belong to novel classes which were not seen during training.

Figure 13: The potential of M&Ms w.r.t image editing methods when considering object classes
not seen during training. Note that input collages have been build with images from the Creative
Commons webpage and, for M&Ms, are depicted as RGB overlays. Discussion in Section E.


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            BB layout #1       Samples obtained with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)


              Collage #1                Samples obtained with M&Ms (ours)


            BB layout #2       Samples obtained with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)


             Collage #2                 Samples obtained with M&Ms (ours)


            BB layout #3       Samples obtained with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)


             Collage #3                 Samples obtained with M&Ms (ours)


Figure 14: Qualitative results for three conditionings extracted from the COCO-Stuff validation
set. As input for M&Ms, collages are composed of an image and its bounding boxes; as input for
LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020), the equivalent bounding box layout is used. Note that input collages
are depicted as RGB overlays. Discussion in Section D.


                                              30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             BB layout #1        Samples obtained with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)


              Collage #1                  Samples obtained with M&Ms (ours)


             BB layout #2        Samples obtained with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)


              Collage #2                  Samples obtained with M&Ms (ours)


             BB layout #3        Samples obtained with LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020)


              Collage #3                  Samples obtained with M&Ms (ours)


Figure 15: Extra qualitative results for three conditionings extracted from the COCO-Stuff validation
set. As input for M&Ms, collages are composed of an image and its bounding boxes; as input for
LostGANv2 (Sun & Wu, 2020), the equivalent bounding box layout is used. Note that input collages
are depicted as RGB overlays. Discussion in Section D.


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Collage         0.0         0.2             0.5             0.8             1.0
   Scene
   Person
   Building


Figure 16: Noise interpolation with M&Ms conditioning on a collage built from OpenImages
reference images. Generated samples are shown by interpolating noise vectors for the scene (first
row), person (second row) and building (third row), with weights 0.0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8 and 1.0 that balance
between two sampled noise vectors. Discussion in Section E.


              Element #1 Element #2   0.0           0.2           0.5             0.8         1.0
Background
Person
Building


Figure 17: Feature interpolation with M&Ms conditioning on collages built from OpenImages
reference images. Element #1 and #2 depict the RGB images corresponding to the features that are
being interpolated: background scenes, people and buildings (first, second and third row respectively).
Next to these elements, generated samples are shown by using the same noise vectors for scene and
objects and performing a linear interpolation between element #1 and #2, with weights 0.0, 0.2, 0.5,
0.8, 1.0, where 0.0 means conditioning on element #1 only, and 1.0 conditioning on element #2.
Faces in the input images have been blurred out. Discussion in Section E.



                                                  32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Conditioning      Sample #1       Sample #2        Sample #3       Sample #4        Sample #5


    Collage        Sample #1        Sample #2         Collage        Sample #1        Sample #2


Figure 18: Collage conditionings and their respective generated samples using M&Ms trained with
object class labels in the first row, and two conditionings for M&Ms trained with object features
instead, in the second row. Both models have been trained on OpenImages500k (128×128). Note
that input collages are depicted as RGB overlays. Discussed in Section F.


         GT BBs                 RND BBs              Mask-RCNN BBs                OLN BBs


Figure 19: Images from the OpenImages500k (128 × 128) dataset split with their corresponding
bounding boxes (BBs), overlaid as red rectangles, obtained from either the labeled ground-truth data
(GT), sampled as random crops (RND), predicted by Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) or OLN (Kim
et al., 2022). Discussion in Section G.


                                                33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Conditioning     Sample #1               Sample #2               Sample #3
 GT BBs
 RND BBs
 Mask-RCNN BBs
 OLN BBs


Figure 20: Generated images obtained with M&Ms trained on OpenImages (128×128) with ground-
truth bounding boxes (GT BBs), random crops (RND BBs), crops predicted by Mask-RCNN (He
et al., 2017) (Mask-RCNN BBs) or predicted by OLN (Kim et al., 2022) (OLN BBs). The input
conditioning has been built with ground-truth object crops from the training set in an unseen collage
combination. Note that input collages are depicted as RGB overlays. Discussion in Section G.


                                                 34
