Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M USIC - TO -T EXT S YNAESTHESIA : G ENERATING D E -
SCRIPTIVE T EXT FROM M USIC R ECORDINGS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         In this paper, we consider a novel research problem, music-to-text synaesthesia.
         Different from the classical music tagging problem that classifies a music record-
         ing into pre-defined categories, the music-to-text synaesthesia aims to generate
         descriptive texts from music recordings for further understanding. Although this
         is a new and interesting application to the machine learning community, to our
         best knowledge, the existing music-related datasets do not contain the semantic
         descriptions on music recordings and cannot serve the music-to-text synaesthesia
         task. In light of this, we collect a new dataset that contains 1,955 aligned pairs of
         classical music recordings and text descriptions. Based on this, we build a com-
         putational model to generate sentences that can describe the content of the music
         recording. To tackle the highly non-discriminative classical music, we design a
         group topology-preservation loss in our computational model, which considers
         more samples as a group reference and preserves the relative topology among
         different samples. Extensive experimental results qualitatively and quantitatively
         demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model over five heuristics or pre-
         trained competitive methods and their variants on our collected dataset.1


1    I NTRODUCTION
Multi-modal learning has drawn great attention in recent years and has been very developed in
diverse applications, since our physical world is naturally composed of various modalities. Visual
frames in videos are matched with text captions and these pairs have been widely used for video-
language pre-training (Sun et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020); Kinects employ the RGB
camera and the depth sensor for action recognition and human pose estimation (Shotton et al., 2011;
Carreira & Zisserman, 2017); autonomous driving cars integrate the visible and invisible lights by
the camera, radar and lidar for a series of driving-related tasks (Buehler et al., 2007; Torres et al.,
2019); cross-modal retrieval aims to understand and match text with the existing textual repository
and other modalities to meet users’ queries (Nagrani et al., 2018; Suris et al., 2018; Zeng et al., 2021);
language grounding learns the meaning of natural language meaning by leveraging the sensory data
such as video or images (Bisk et al., 2020; Thomason et al., 2021).
Besides the above studies that employ multi-modal data to jointly achieve the learning task, trans-
lating information among different modalities, also known as synaesthesia, is another crucial task in
the multi-modal community, where the text with its good compatibility and presentation ability, has
become the intermediary of modality interaction. Various methods for synaesthesia between text
and other modalities have been studied. Speech recognition can be directly regarded as a translation
between the text and audio modality (Shen et al., 2018). Image captioning extracts the high-level
visual cues and translates them into a descriptive sentence to describe the image content, while some
studies consider the inverse process of image captioning by converting a semantic text into the vi-
sual image (Huang et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2015). Different from the existing modality translation
studies, in this paper, we consider a novel problem, the music-to-text synaesthesia, i.e., generating
descriptive texts from music recordings.
Recently, there are some pioneering attempts that build the connections between music recordings
and tags at the initial stage. Cai et al. (2020) formulate music auto-tagging as a captioning task and
  1
    Our code and data resources are available at https://github.com/MusicTextSynaesthesia/
MusicTextSynaesthesia.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


automatically outputs a sequence of tags given a clip of music. Zhang et al. (2020) use keywords
of music key, meter and style to generate music descriptions, which can be used for caption gen-
eration. However, we argue that descriptive texts contain much richer information than tags, thus
providing a better understanding of music recording. Moreover, we notice that tags might have a
biased interpretation. Figure 1 presents two music recordings with the same music tags, but the
opposite sentiment orientation of the text. The first one expresses a positive sentiment by describing
the music as “peaceful” and “beautiful,” while the second one uses tokens including “sadness” and
“loss” to express a negative sentiment. It is clear that music tags are insufficient for describing the
content of a music piece.
Contributions. In this paper, we propose a new task of generating descriptive text from music
recordings. Specifically, given a music recording, we aim to build computational models that can
generate sentences that can describe the content of the music recording, as well as the music’s
inherent sentiment. The major contributions are summarized as follows:
 • From the research problem perspective, different from the music tagging problem, we propose
   the music-to-text synaesthesia, a cross-modality translation task that aims at converting a given
   music piece to a text description. To our best knowledge, the music-to-text synaesthesia is a
   novel research problem in the multi-modal learning community.
 • From the dataset perspective, the existing music-related datasets do not contain the semantic
   description of music recordings. To build computational models for this task, we collect a new
   dataset that contains 1,955 aligned pairs of classical music recordings and text descriptions.
 • From the technical perspective, we design a group topology-preservation loss in our computa-
   tional model to tackle the non-discriminative music representation, which considers more data
   points as a group reference and preserves the relative topology among different nodes. Thus it
   can better align the music representations with the structure in text space.
 • From the empirical evaluation, extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
   our proposed model over five heuristics or pre-trained competitive methods and their variants on
   our collected dataset. We also provide several case studies for comparisons and elaborate the
   explorations on our group topology-preservation loss and some parameter analyses.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Multi-modality Learning. The goal of multi-modal machine learning is to build computational
models that are able to process and relate information from different modalities, such as audio,
text, and image. Baltrusaitis et al. (2019) describes five challenges for multi-modal learning,
namely: learning representations, translating, aligning, fusing, and co-learning from/between dif-
ferent modalities. A large portion of prior works has focused on modality fusion, which aims at
making predictions by joining information from two or more modalities. Applications include
audio-visual speech recognition (Afouras et al., 2018), visual question answering (Goyal et al.,
2017), emotion recognition, and media summarization. We now briefly review the literature and
refer readers to Guo et al. (2019); Baltrusaitis et al. (2019) for more complete surveys.
Translation between Modalities. Beyond the applications of multi-modality translation we men-
tion in the introduction section, here we introduce three common frameworks of multi-modality
translation. (1) Encoder-decoder models directly learn intermediate representations used for pro-
jecting one modality into another. Zhang et al. (2017) adopt a sketch-refinement process to generate
photo-realistic images for text-to-image synthesis tasks. Wang et al. (2021) designed a framework
for end-to-end dense video captioning with parallel decoding. (2) Models with joint representations
fuse multi-modal features by mapping representations of different modalities together into a shared
semantic subspace. Sun et al. (2019) proposed ViLBERT, which extends BERT architecture to a
multi-modal two-stream model, that learns task-agnostic joint representations of image content and
natural language. Habibian et al. (2017) designed an embedding between video features and term
vectors to learn the entire representation from freely available web videos and their descriptions.
(3) Representations in coordinated representations based models exist in separated spaces, but are
coordinated through a similarity function (e.g., Euclidean distance) or a structure constraint. These
works include Wang et al. (2017), which presents a method to learn a common subspace based on
adversarial learning for adversarial cross-modal retrieval. Peng et al. (2018) proposes modality-
specific cross-modal similarity measurement approach for tasks including cross-modal retrieval. In


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Movement III: Andante espressivo (by Charle Stanford)
                                                        Tags: mode - minor, instrument - string, ensemble - quartet, tempo - medium
                                                        Text: Perhaps the work's center of gravity is the slow movement, Andante
                                                        espressivo. The motif is given a peaceful, and extraordinarily beautiful
                                                        treatment. The stormy middle section makes a very strong impression.


Movement I: Tempo moderato (by Wilhelm Stenhammar)
                                                        Tags: mode - minor, instrument - string, ensemble - quartet, tempo - medium
                                                        Text: The movement to Quartet No.6, Tempo moderato un poco rubato,
                                                        though not funereal, clearly conveys the feelings sadness and loss. The tempo
                                                        never speeds up and the players are warned off keeping a strict tempo.



Figure 1: Samples of classical music and corresponding text descriptions in our collected dataset.
The first piece is from String Quartet No.2 in A minor Op.45 composed by Charles Stanford, and the
second is from String Quartet No.6 in D minor Op.35 by Wilhelm Stenhammar. While two samples
have exactly the same music tags, it is clear that the two text descriptions have different sentiment.

this work, we experiment with different losses on the coordinate model, as it achieves the best per-
formance among all three different types of models.
Music Related Datasets and Tasks. The existing music-related datasets mainly contain simple
music tags. AudioSet dataset (Gemmeke et al., 2017) is a large-scale collection of human-labeled
10-second sound clips (not music recording) drawn from YouTube videos. This dataset only has
descriptions for categories, not for individual sounds. The MTG-Jamendo dataset (Bogdanov et al.,
2019) contains over 55,000 full audio tracks with 195 tags ranging from genre, instrument, and
mood/theme categories. Oramas et al. (2016) describes a dataset containing reviewers from Amazon
for albums. However, users’ reviews may not necessarily describe the actual contents of music
recordings. Cai et al. (2020) formulated the music tagging problem as a multi-class classification
problem. A dataset called MajorMiner is used, with each music recording associated with tags
collected from different users. Zhang et al. (2020) studied bidirectional music-sentence retrieval and
generation tasks. The used dataset contains 16,257 folk songs paired with metadata information,
including select key, meter and style as keywords. Text describing music recordings has limited
style and mainly focuses on only some specific information.
We notice the studies on music captioning-related tasks address a similar research question (Choi
et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2022; Manco et al., 2022). Specifically, Manco et al. (2021) used a private
production music dataset, with their music clips of length between 30 and 360 seconds and cap-
tions contain between 3 and 22 tokens. Manco et al. (2021) also used an encoder-decoder network
consisting of a multimodal CNN-LSTM encoder with temporal attention and an LSTM decoder.

3       DATA C OLLECTION AND A NALYSIS
Since we address a new problem that generates descriptive texts from music recordings in this paper,
a dataset containing aligned music-text pairs is required for model training. Although there are
several public music/audio datasets with tags or user reviews (See Section 2), unfortunately, they
do not meet our research problem for the following reasons: (1) From the text side, current datasets
only have pre-defined tags for music pieces, rather than descriptive texts for music contents. (2)
From the audio side, some clips are too short without a musical melody. In light of this, we collect
a new dataset for the music-to-text synaesthesia.
Data Collection and Post-Processing. We collected the data from EARSENSE,2 a website that
hosts a database for chamber music, where Figure 1 shows an illustrative example of the music-text
pairs. A typical music composition in chamber music contains several movements. Each movement
has a title that normally contains tempo markings or terms such as minuet and trio; in some cases,
it has a unique name speaking to the larger story of the entire work. As movements have their own
form, key, and mood, and often contain a complete resolution or ending, we will treat each movement
as the basic unit in this work. For example, Ludwig van Beethoven’s Piano Sonata No. 8 in C minor,
Op. 13 (also referred as Sonata Pathétique) contains three movements: (I) Grave (slowly, with
solemnity), (II) Adagio cantabile (slowly, in a singing style), and (III) Rondo: Allegro (quickly).
EARSENSE also provides comprehensive meta information for each music composition, including
    2
        http://earsense.org/



                                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


composers, works and related multi-media resources. There is also an associated introductory article
from professional experts, with detailed explanations, comments or analyses for movements.
By dividing the music compositions into movements according to their meta information, we col-
lected 2,380 text descriptions in total, where 1,955 descriptions have corresponding music pieces.
Each movement has its specific title, such as in-domain words indicating the types of music. This
kind of information is useful when constructing a model as classical music follows some fixed pat-
terns when composed. In general, tempo markings are specific but may differ from countries. In this
work, we refer to Wikipedia3 and convert Italic, French, German and other tempo markings into a
universal four categories from slow to super fast. These categories are then added for movements as
tags, by directly checking whether it contains tokens in our list.
Preliminary Exploration. The lengths of the
95% collected music pieces vary from 2.5min to

14min, which correspond to the descriptive texts
with 14 to 192 tokens. The longest music length
is up to 37 mins. We provide more details of

these statistics in the Appendix.
Beyond the above basic statistics, we further ex-
plore the pairwise similarity and check whether          (a) music similarity                   (b) text similarity
similar music pieces share similar textual de-
scriptions. Figure 2 shows the pairwise similar- Figure 2: Pairwise similarity matrices of music
ity matrix of music and text, respectively, where representation by a self-reconstruction autoen-
we use the cosine similarity on the music rep- coder and raw text by cosine and BLEU score.
resentations derived from a self-reconstruction auto-encoder and use BLEU score to calculate the
raw text similarity. We notice that the texts are highly discriminative, where 96% of the pairwise
similarities are below 0.06. However, all music representations have over 0.95 similarity due to
the high similarities among classical music. It inevitably increases the difficulty of learning a map-
ping function for the music-to-text synaesthesia task that the similar music pieces match divergent
texts. Thus, a natural idea is to employ the text to guide the learnt music representations to make
them more discriminative, so the cross-modality transformation would be easier. The research ques-
tion we explore in this paper is: How can we employ the music-text pairs to learn the informative
representation for music pieces and achieve the music-to-text synaesthesia?


4       M ODEL

The music-to-text synaesthesia is a cross-modality translation                                            Music                                  Text

problem. Given n paired tuple ⟨mi , ti ⟩ with 1 ≤ i ≤ n, where
mi denotes the tuple i’s music and ti for its corresponding text,                                        Music                                  Text
a music-to-text synaesthesia model M → T builds a mapping                                               Decoder                               Decoder
from the music to the text space, where M and T present the
music and text space, respectively. In this section, we first pro-
vide a general overview of our model structure, followed by                                                                     GTP Loss
our proposed group topology-preservation loss to tackle the non-
                                                                                                         Music                                  Text
discriminative music representation.                                                                    Encoder                               Encoder

Cross-Modality Translation Model. Figure 3 shows our
translation model, which is mainly based on the coordinate            Music              Text
model (Peng et al., 2018) and our proposed group topology-
preservation loss to achieve the translation between two modali- Figure 3: Framework for our
ties by learning the music/text latent space and their mapping by music-to-text synaesthesia task.
using three independent auto-encoders.
Learning Music Representation. We choose a convolutional neural network structure as our music
feature extractor. Specifically, we use the spectrum of the raw music as inputs, where a CNN encoder
and a transposed-CNN decoder are connected for the music reconstruction task. Let f (·) as the
music encoder and f ′ (·) as the music decoder. We have the loss function for music representation

    3
        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tempo



                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 2                  5                      2                  5                        2           5
                       1                                    1                                           1
          Text Space                                                                Negative Pair
                                                        6                                           6                                     6
                           3            4                           3              4                           3           4
                                                                        Positive Pair                       Group Topology Preservation
     Guidance

                            3                                   Positive Pair
                                                                                                                   2           5
                                                                                   4                    1
                       1                    5                       3
         Music Space                                    6
                                2                                                                                                         6
                                                            1                 Negative Pair
                                                                                                    6
                                                                          2                   5                    3           4
                                                4

                                (a) Original                              (b) Triplet                          (c) GTP (Ours)

Figure 4: Our group topology-preservation (GTP) loss. (a) The structure of data points in the original
text and music spaces. (b) The triplet loss is able to enforce the similarity between pairs of points, but
fails to maintain the relative positions with other data points. (c) Our proposed GTP loss considers a
group reference for each point and aligns the music representations with their structure in text space.
learning as follows:
                                                ℓm2m = ||mi − f ′ (f (mi ))||2 .                                                              (1)

Learning Text Representation. Similarly, in the text field, a transformer-based encoder and decoder
are combined to train a text reconstruction model. Let g(·) be the text encoder and g ′ (·) be the text
decoder. We have the loss function for text representation learning as follows:
                                            ℓt2t = CrossEntropy(ti , g ′ (g(ti ))).                                                           (2)

Transforming From Music to Text. With the above music and text representation, an extra auto-
encoder is employed to achieve the mapping M from music to text.
                                             ℓm2t = ||f (mi ) − M(g(ti ))||2 .                                                                (3)

Group Topology-Preservation (GTP) Loss. Although the above coordinate model can achieve the
music-to-text transformation, we notice that the music representations by the auto-encoder suffer
from high non-discrimination, which further prevents the effective transformation. In light of this,
we design a novel Group Topology-Preservation (GTP) loss to learn the discriminative music repre-
sentation. Due to the relatively high discrimination in the text space, we aim to employ the text to
guide the music representation generation.
To better illustrate our point, we provide a visualization of our designed group topology-preservation
loss and the comparison with the triplet loss in Figure 4, where (a) shows the original representation
space of music and text derived from the auto-encoders, (b) shows the effect of the triplet loss and
(c) shows the effect of our GTP loss. When applying the triplet loss to node #3 in Figure 4(b),
we observe that nodes #3 and #4 get close and nodes #3 and #5 are more separated. However,
its relative positions as opposed to other data points are still different from the structure in the
original text space. In Figure 4(c), our proposed GTP loss considers more data points as a group
reference and preserves the relative topology among different nodes, thus it can better align the
music representations with the structure in text space.
Formally, given a paired tuple ⟨mi , ti ⟩ and a batch B = {⟨mj , tj ⟩}k−1
                                                                      j=1 containing other k−1 paired
tuples as the group reference, our GTP loss can be defined as follows:
         ℓGTP = ||softmax(CON(cos(f (mi ), f (mj )))k−1                              k−1    2
                                                    j=1 − softmax(CON(BLEU(ti , tj ))j=1 )|| ,                                                (4)
where cos is the cosine similarity and BLEU score for the music and text’s similarity calculation and
CON is a concatenation function that flats the input elements and returns a row vector, and softmax
is a normalizer across all elements. Our GTP enforces the given tuple and its group reference share
the similar topology structure in both the hidden music space and the original text space, further
separating the highly similar music representations. Moreover, the GTP loss not only captures the
relationship between the given tuple and other samples in the group reference but also considers the
relationship within the group reference.
Overall Objective Function. Our overall objective function can be written as follows:
                          X n
                      ℓ=      (ℓm2m + ℓt2t + ℓm2t + αℓGTP ) + βΩ(Θ),                                                                          (5)
                                  i=1



                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where Θ is the whole learning parameters including f , f ′ , g, g ′ and M, Ω is the parameter regular-
izer and α, β are trade-off hyper parameters among different losses in the objective function.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Comparison Models. Here we propose five competitive methods and their variants for the music-
to-text synaesthesia, which are in two main categories, heuristics and pre-trained methods.
 • Heuristics methods. In our collected dataset, each music recording is associated with 4 types
    of tags, including mode, instrument, tempo and ensemble (see Table A2 in the Appendix). We
    note these tags normally contain information that categorizes the characteristics of the recordings.
    Motivated by this observation, we design two simple baselines that are based on heuristics. TAGS
    (kNN): Inspired by the k nearest neighbor clustering, TAGS (kNN) assigns the text from the
    closest tags for each piece of music. Specifically, we directly use the text description from
    a music recording which has the largest number of same tags with our given music. TAGS
    ( REPRESENTATIVE ): Alternatively, we first divide all music pieces into separated groups based
    on four categories of tags. For each tag combination, we select a representative sentence, which
    has the highest BLEU score within its equivalent classes. These representative sentences can be
    formed as a text description for given music with the same tag combination.
 • Pre-trained methods. E NCODER D ECODER . The Encoder-Decoder model consists of a music
    CNN encoder and a text transformer decoder. The CNN encoder takes the spectrum of music
    as input and its output is then directly sent to the text transformer decoder to generate text de-
    scriptions. J OINT. The Joint Model is based on the assumption that information from different
    modalities is the same. A music encoder and text encoder are used to first encode the music
    and text inputs. Then the encoded outputs are sent to an adversarial discriminator to identify the
    encoding source, forcing the alignment of representation from different modalities. Finally, the
    encoding vector from both music or text can be decoded into text description without modal-
    ity source information. C OORDINATE. Coordinate model representing different modalities in
    different spaces. To do so, two autoencoders are used for music and text representation. And
    the text decoder is also required to learn a mapping of music to the description text. Moreover,
    based on C OORDINATE, we propose its variants with additional losses for better music represen-
    tation learning. Contrastive loss(Chen et al., 2020) builds positive samples by pitch shift, time
    stretch, randomly mask and noise addition(Won et al., 2020) to increase representation robust-
    ness. Pairwise loss pulls a pair of music representations together with similar texts. And triplet
    loss(Schroff et al., 2015) is an improved version that set a margin to pull similar samples and
    push other negative samples away. Figure A3 in the Appendix shows the differences among the
    Encoder Decoder, Joint Model and Coordinate Model.
Implementation. From the music side, the original classical                                2ULJLQDO

                                                                                  IUHTXHQF\ +]


music is first converted into a spectrogram which has a fre-
quency axis of 256 dimensions and a flexible temporal axis.
It is then encoded into T × 768 by CNN encoder, where T
is the music length in seconds. Both the music encoder and
decoder contain 8 layers. From the text side, the text de-                            5HFRQVWUXFWLRQ

                                                                                  IUHTXHQF\ +]


scriptions are tokenized by BERT tokenizer and encoded into
L × 768, where L is the number of tokens. The text en-
coder and decoder consist of 5 layers. As the input music

and text are of varying length, both music and text encodings
                                                                                           WLPH V
are divided into 20 segments evenly, and mean pooled into
20 × 768 vectors as a fixed-length representation. The same     Figure        5: Spectrum             diagrams from
number of layers for music and text encoders are used for       the  original      music        (top)              and recon-
Encoder-Decoder and Joint Model baselines.                      struction       (bottom)      of      our          pre-trained
                                                                music autoencoder.
For our model, we first pre-train music and text auto-encoders on our constructed dataset. To pre-
vent data leakage, the text auto-encoder is pre-trained without the test data. Moreover, these music
and text auto-encoders capture a good representation in the reconstruction task. Figure 5 shows the
spectrum diagrams of the original and reconstruction music from music representation, which con-
tains the main information of original music. Meanwhile, the text-autoencoder reconstructs from


                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


representation with an average BLEU score of 79.66. During training, we set the learning rate to be
5e−5 and the batch size is 8, implemented by gradient accumulation. The hyperparameters in our
model are set to be α = 500, β = 5 and k = 32. Considering the computational budget, our k grouped
sample representations are implemented by a queue according to MOCO (He et al., 2020), where
we employ a momentum encoder with momentum = 0.999.
Evaluation. As the size of our dataset is rather small, we evaluate the model performance using the
5-fold cross-validation for all our experiments. We use the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) as
our main evaluation metric to compare our generated captions with the reference text descriptions.
BLEU score has been confirmed to have a high correlation with human judgements, and it is widely
used in natural language generation tasks, such as machine translation and text summarization.4

5.2    M AIN R ESULTS

For each data split, we run 5 experimental trails and then report the average and standard deviation of
the BLEU scores in Table 1. Note that the ground text descriptions for classical music are sometimes
hard to digest even for humans (see the cases in Table 2), it is thus not totally surprising that the
performance of our model is generally low.5
We observe that heuristics baseline methods have lower performance compared to learning-based
models. It is intuitive as heuristics-based methods are not able to generate text descriptions that
are adjusted to given music contents. Among all three representative models for multi-modal tasks,
C OORDINATE model achieves the best performance with an average BLEU score of 6.42. When
further adding different losses to the training objective of the coordinate model, we observe similar
performance for using triplet loss and even drops for contrastive loss and pairwise loss; while there
is a significant performance improvement when using our proposed GTP loss, achieving the highest
BLEU score of 6.76. Our experimental results compared to baseline methods are statistical signifi-
cant with p-value < 0.001. Some music recordings on earsense have a second comment by another
commentator. We collect these data to be another dataset with 50 records and validate our models
on it. The BLEU score of the baseline Coordinate model is 8.54 and our GTP loss model is 8.81.
To better interpret this experimental result, in Figure 6 we plot the music and text similarities of a
pair of different music-text tuples along with the histograms on the music similarity when applying
different losses. We observe that the output representations from pre-trained music autoencoder have
high similarity, with most above 0.90 in Figure 6(a). It is because the high frequency of all music is
almost blank while classical music also has a similar low frequency with several limited instruments.
When using pair loss, we observe the music representations simply gather together and become
indistinguishable (shown in Figure 6(b)). Meanwhile, using our proposed GTP loss helps maintain
a structure among music representations. As shown in Figure 6(c), the music similarities vary from
-0.05 to 0.4 and the range is much wider than that of other models. Also, the representations spread
out and become more distinguishable, which naturally helps the performance of text generation. It
validates the motivation of our designed GTP loss that when considering more data points as a group
reference, the model is able to capture the relative topology among different nodes, thus can better
accomplish the transformation from different modalities.
We further present several examples in Table 2, showing the comparisons between ground truth
music descriptions and the generated ones from C OORDINATE with or without our proposed GTP
loss. We observe that C OORDINATE and O URS are able to identify basic characteristics of the input
musics, while our model in general could capture more subtle differences. For example, in Case #1,
both models correctly identify the tempo category “allegro,” while our model further captures the
music instrument of “cello” and genre of “sonate.” In Case #2, our model correctly captures two
themes in one movement, where the “bright and lively” first theme is recognized as a “march like a
scherzo,” and the “dreamy” second theme is described to be “romantic”.
It can be observed that, for objective facts, models can simply and correctly tell the correct term,
while our model can further capture more details. When it comes to subjective description, our
model could capture the sentiment orientation of music themes, although it is still a challenging task
   4
    The typical BLEU score for machine translation task is from 10 to 40 (Vaswani et al., 2017).
   5
    We do not report the performance of MusCaps (Manco et al., 2021) due to their low performance. We
conjecture it comes from the different music feature backbone.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Comparisons of different models for our music-to-text generation task using BLEU metric.
For all neural-based methods, we run experiments 5 times for each split and then report average
scores and standard deviations. k in triplet loss refers to different pair numbers used.
                                                                                    Split #1                                     Split #2         Split #3                      Split #4                          Split #5             Average
                        TAGS (kNN)                                                           3.95                                  3.73                   3.6                                             3.84        3.57                  3.74
                        TAGS ( REPRESENT.)                                                   3.75                                  3.65                  4.06                                             3.51        3.13                  3.62
                        E NCODER D ECODER                                         5.86±0.21                                     6.31±0.27       6.36±0.15                  5.77±0.20                             6.59±0.30                  6.18
                        J OINT                                                    5.84±0.66                                     6.31±0.24       6.48±0.53                  5.83±0.27                             6.27±0.27                  6.15
                        C OORDINATE                                               6.41±0.34                                     6.70±0.17       6.20±0.21                  6.10±0.11                             6.66±0.24                  6.42
                        C OOR . + Contrastive loss                                5.71±0.16                                     4.80±0.18       6.74±0.24                  6.11±0.11                             6.98±0.47                  6.07
                        C OOR . + Pairwise loss                                   6.20±0.32                                     6.76±0.10       6.53±0.29                  5.97±0.20                             6.53±0.21                  6.40
                        C OOR . + Triplet loss (k=1)                              6.60±0.15                                     6.47±0.13       6.74±0.07                  6.07±0.13                             6.95±0.14                  6.56
                        C OOR . + Triplet loss (k=32)                             6.36±0.28                                     6.59±0.07       6.50±0.20                  5.94±0.24                             6.71±0.21                  6.42
                        O URS                                                     6.94±0.19                                     6.71±0.15       6.91±0.25                  6.37±0.24                             6.87±0.16                  6.76


  PXVLF VLPLODULW\


                                                                                       PXVLF VLPLODULW\


                                                                                                                                                                           PXVLF VLPLODULW\


                         WH[W VLPLODULW\              QXP                         WH[W VLPLODULW\                       QXP                                   WH[W VLPLODULW\            QXP
      (a) Pretrained music autoencoder                                                                                    (b) C OOR . + Pairwise loss                                                            (c) O URS
Figure 6: Music and text similarities of a pair of different music-text tuples and histograms on the
music similarity, where the music similarity is calculated by the cosine similarity on the learned
representation and the text similarity is calculated by the BLEU score on the original texts. (a)
Pretrained music autoencoder; (b) C OORDINATE with pairwise loss; and triplet loss has a similar
histograms; (c) O URS model (with GTP loss).

due to no sentiment supervision and expression diversity (see Section 5.3 for further analyses of the
sentiment transfer ability between different modalities). We also notice some grammar mistakes and
fixed patterns appear in generated sentences. It seems that even with sufficient pre-training, it is still
hard to learn a professional expression of both correctness and fluency from limited dataset.

5.3                                  I N - DEPTH A NALYSES

Effects of Hyperparameters. We are interested in the effect of the number k of samples considered
in our GTP loss. To do this, we vary the number of k from 4 to 2,048 and plot the BLEU scores in
Figure 7(a). We observe that the performance of our model first increases and achieves its peak when
k is chosen to be 32; the performance then drops when k is larger. It provides empirical evidence
that considering more information from other data points do help improve the model performance.
However, a larger k is not always better for which will make older samples in the momentum encoder
queue more outdated. We observe a similar pattern when varying the scale of the hyperparameter α
from 1e-2 to 1e5 in Figure 7(b). The model yields the best performance when α = 500.
Transfer Ability of Sentiment. Since our task is music-to-text synaesthesia, we care about whether
our model could learn a transfer capability from the music domain to the text domain. To explore
this, we analyze whether the generated text descriptions are able to reflect the sentiment from the
original ground truth text. We select a popular sentiment classifier6 that could detect a variety
of 7 sentiment categories and then apply this classifier to identify the sentiment in reference text
and text descriptions generated by our model. Figure 7(c) shows the sentiment distribution of our
generated texts and the original reference texts. We observe a skewed distribution that a majority of
         6
                        https://huggingface.co/j-hartmann/emotion-english-distilroberta-base



                                                                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Generated text descriptions between different models given a classical music piece, fol-
lowed by their sentiments [joy/neurtal/sadness] in the end. We use different colors to highlight
phrases: blue for noun phrases that is objective facts and yellow for subjective adjective phrases.
                               Ref.: the rousing allegro vivace finale begins with a sweetly singing adagio introduction that very briefly
                               seems to recall the extended introductions of the earlier op. 5 sonatas and provides the only real hint of a slow
                               movement that will otherwise have to wait for the last cello sonata for its fully independent flowering. [joy]
    Case #1                    C OORDINATE: the movement, allegro moderato, begins with a fugue with a fugue. [neutral]
                               O URS: the movement, allegro moderato, begins with a theme of the main theme of the main theme in the cello.
                               the main theme is a kind of the middle section, the work of the movement. the music is a fugue with a bit more
                               lyrical second theme to the sonata form of pizzicato. [joy]
                               Ref.: the movement, allegro molto e con brio, is based on two subjects, the first is bright and lively while the
                               second is dreamy with an improvisational aura. the development is ingenious and an exciting coda caps off this
                               first rate work. [joy]
    Case #2                    C OORDINATE: the movement, allegro moderato, begins with a theme in the main theme. [joy]
                               O URS: the movement, allegro molto, is a series of variations that it begins with a march - like it is a scherzo
                               and a sense of the main theme, in the movement. it is a very romantic second theme, a sense of the movement.
                               [joy]
                               Ref.: the movement, allegro moderato, begins with a somewhat passionate, very characteristic quartet - like
                               melody which leads to an ingratiating, lyrical second theme. [joy]
    Case #3                    C OORDINATE: the movement, allegro, begins with a lengthy introduction. [neutral]
                               O URS: the movement, allegro, begins with a lively allegro con brimming with a long series of the main
                               theme. it begins with a very romantic melody, the music of the movement. [joy]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5HIHUHQFH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2XU PRGHO


%/(8


                                                                                %/(8


                                                                                                                                                                   QXP


                                                                                                   H       H                     MR\ QHX  VDG IHD  DQJ  VXU  GLV
                                              N
 (a) Number of samples k in GTP                                                                 (b) Parameter sensitivity                                                          (c) Sentiment distribution
Figure 7: (a) BLEU score when varying the number of neighbors k. (b) Parameter sensitivity on α.
(c) Sentiment distribution of our generated texts and the original reference texts.


descriptions from both references and generated models are classified as “joy,” while the left others
are tagged as having sentiments like “neutral,” “sadness,” and “fear.” These experimental results are
consistent with our intuitions that classical music normally brings people with happiness and joy.
We observe that the distributions for the sentiment labels from reference and our model are similar,
with a Pearson correlation coefficient up to 0.96.

6               C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel task of music-to-text synaesthesia, the goal of which is to gener-
ate text descriptions for a given music piece. As current existing datasets normally do not contain
semantic descriptions for music pieces, we collected a new dataset that contains 1,955 classical mu-
sic recordings with professional text descriptions. We also proposed a group topology-preservation
loss that preserves relative group topology among music and text, given the fact that classical mu-
sic is non-discriminative. We conducted experiments on five heuristics or pre-trained competitive
baseline methods, based on existing multi-modal literature. Compared with other sample level con-
straint losses, our model with GTP loss extracted better music representation and generated better
text descriptions. We further performed extensive experiments including case study and sentiment
analysis to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed music-to-text synaesthesia model.


                                                                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, Andrew Senior, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew Zisserman.
  Deep audio-visual speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
  telligence, 2018.
Tadas Baltrusaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Multimodal machine learning:
  A survey and taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 41(2):
  423–443, 2019.
Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtzman, Jesse Thomason, Jacob Andreas, Yoshua Bengio, Joyce Chai, Mirella
  Lapata, Angeliki Lazaridou, Jonathan May, Aleksandr Nisnevich, Nicolas Pinto, and Joseph
  Turian. Experience grounds language. In Proceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, 2020.
Dmitry Bogdanov, Minz Won, Philip Tovstogan, Alastair Porter, and Xavier Serra. The mtg-jamendo
 dataset for automatic music tagging. In Machine Learning for Music Discovery Workshop, Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Martin Buehler, Karl Iagnemma, and Sanjiv Singh. The 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge: The Great
 Robot Race. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition, 2007.
Tian Cai, Michael I Mandel, and Di He. Music autotagging as captioning. In Proceedings of
  Workshop on NLP for Music and Audio, 2020.
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics
  dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, 2017.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2020.
Keunwoo Choi, Gy”orgy Fazekas, and Mark B. Sandler. Towards music captioning: Generating
  music playlist descriptions. ArXiv, abs/1608.04868, 2016.
Wenhao Gao, Xiaobing Li, Cong Jin, and Yun Tie. Music question answering:cognize and perceive
 music. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW),
 pp. 1–6, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICMEW56448.2022.9859499.
Jort F. Gemmeke, Daniel P. W. Ellis, Dylan Freedman, Aren Jansen, Wade Lawrence, R. Channing
  Moore, Manoj Plakal, and Marvin Ritter. Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for
  audio events. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing, 2017.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the V
  in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in Visual Question Answering. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
Wenzhong Guo, Jianwen Wang, and Shiping Wang. Deep multimodal representation learning: A
 survey. IEEE Access, 7:63373–63394, 2019.
Amirhossein Habibian, Thomas Mensink, and Cees G. M. Snoek. Video2vec embeddings recognize
 events when examples are scarce. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
 gence, 39(10):2089–2103, 2017.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
Yupan Huang, Hongwei Xue, Bei Liu, and Yutong Lu. Unifying multimodal transformer for bi-
  directional image and text generation. In Proceedings of ACM International Conference on Mul-
  timedia, 2021.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Linjie Li, Yen-Chun Chen, Yu Cheng, Zhe Gan, Licheng Yu, and Jingjing Liu. HERO: Hierarchical
  encoder for Video+Language omni-representation pre-training. In Proceedings of Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2020.

Jianjie Luo, Yehao Li, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Hongyang Chao, and Tao Mei. Coco-bert: Improving
   video-language pre-training with contrastive cross-modal matching and denoising. In Proceedings
   of ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2021.

Ilaria Manco, Emmanouil Benetos, Elio Quinton, and György Fazekas. Muscaps: Generating cap-
   tions for music audio. In 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
   1–8, 2021. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9533461.

Ilaria Manco, Emmanouil Benetos, Elio Quinton, and Gy”orgy Fazekas. Contrastive audio-language
   learning for music. ArXiv, abs/2208.12208, 2022.

A. Nagrani, S. Albanie, and A. Zisserman. Seeing voices and hearing faces: Cross-modal bio-
  metric matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2018.

Sergio Oramas, L. Espinosa-Anke, A. Lawlor, Xavier Serra, and H. Saggion. Exploring customer
  reviews for music genre classification and evolutionary studies. In Proceedings of International
  Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference, 2016.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics, 2002.

Yuxin Peng, Jinwei Qi, and Yuxin Yuan. Modality-specific cross-modal similarity measurement
  with recurrent attention network. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 27(11):5585–5599,
  2018.

Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. FaceNet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2015.

Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J. Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang,
  Zhifeng Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, R. J. Skerry-Ryan, Rif A. Saurous, Yannis Agiomyr-
  giannakis, and Yonghui Wu. Natural TTS synthesis by conditioning WaveNet on mel spectrogram
  predictions. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing, 2018.

J. Shotton, A. Fitzgibbon, M. Cook, T. Sharp, M. Finocchio, R. Moore, A. Kipman, and A. Blake.
   Real-time human pose recognition in parts from single depth images. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2011.

Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid. Videobert: A joint
  model for video and language representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.

Didac Suris, Amanda Duarte, Amaia Salvador, Jordi Torres, and Xavier Giro-i Nieto. Cross-modal
  embeddings for video and audio retrieval. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-
  puter Vision Workshops, 2018.

Jesse Thomason, Mohit Shridhar, Yonatan Bisk, Chris Paxton, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Language
  grounding with 3d objects. In Proceedings of Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.

Lucas Tabelini Torres, Thiago M. Paixão, Rodrigo F. Berriel, Alberto F. De Souza, Claudine Badue,
  Nicu Sebe, and Thiago Oliveira-Santos. Effortless deep training for traffic sign detection using
  templates and arbitrary natural images. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,
  2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
  Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon,
  U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Bokun Wang, Yang Yang, Xing Xu, Alan Hanjalic, and Heng Tao Shen. Adversarial cross-modal
  retrieval. In Proceedings of ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2017.
Teng Wang, Ruimao Zhang, Zhichao Lu, Feng Zheng, Ran Cheng, and Ping Luo. End-to-end
  dense video captioning with parallel decoding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Minz Won, Andres Ferraro, Dmitry Bogdanov, and Xavier Serra. Evaluation of cnn-based automatic
 music tagging models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00751, 2020.
Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho, Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich
  Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual
  attention. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Yawen Zeng, Da Cao, Xiaochi Wei, Meng Liu, Zhou Zhao, and Zheng Qin. Multi-modal relational
  graph for cross-modal video moment retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dim-
  itris N. Metaxas. Stackgan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adver-
  sarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2017.
Yixiao Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Dingsu Wang, and Gus Xia. BUTTER: A representation learning frame-
  work for bi-directional music-sentence retrieval and generation. In Proceedings of Workshop on
  NLP for Music and Audio, 2020.


                                                12
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 A        DATA A NALYSIS
 We summarize the statistics of our newly collected dataset in Tables A1 and A2,Figures A1 and A2.
 There are several advantages and unique features for this dataset: (1) Music pieces are semantically
 hard enough, which are provide space for generating text with rich information. (2) The descriptive
 texts are generated by music professionals, thus are freestyle and diverse.

        Table A1: Statistics of our collected dataset                                 Table A2: Four categories of tags in our dataset
    # of unique music compositions                                   786                      Tag                 Type
    # of unique composers                                            304
    # of music-text pairs                                           2,380                     mode                major, minor
                                                                                              instrument          string, wind, piano
    # avg. of tokens per text description                         45.7 ± 41.2                 tempo               slow, medium, fast, super faster
    # avg. of each music piece (seconds)                              305                     ensemble            sonate, trio, quartet, quintet or more


                        FRXQW


                                                                                          FRXQW



                                             (a) Music Length                                                  (b) Token Numbers
                                          Figure A1: Distribution of music length and token nums


    1000
        800
        600
count


        400
        200
          0       e                  or         or           e     g     o             d                  e     a io      t e                e w       m st      r
              Non              maj           min          Non strin pian            win                Non sonat tr quarte abov           Non slo mediu fa faste
                       (a) mode                               (b) instrument                                   (c) ensemble                     (d) tempo
                                                     Figure A2: Distribution of four tag categories


 B        S TRUCTURES OF BASELINE MODELS
 We visualize the structure of all baseline models in Figure A3.

                             Text                    from music or text?             Text                                Music                 Text



                      TextDecoder                       Discriminator           TextDecoder                         MusicDecoder           TextDecoder


                  MusicEncoder                         MusicEncoder             TextEncoder                         MusicEncoder           TextEncoder



                          Music                             Music                    Text                                Music                 Text

              (a) EncoderDecoder                                   (b) JointModel                                         (c) CoordinateModel

                                                      Figure A3: Structures of baseline models.


                                                                                     13
