Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J OINT I MPLICIT N EURAL R EPRESENTATIONS                                                         FOR
G LOBAL -S CALE S PECIES M APPING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Estimating the geographical range of a species from sparse observations is a chal-
         lenging and important geospatial prediction problem. Given a set of locations
         where a species has been observed, the goal is to learn a model that can predict
         whether the species is present or absent at any location. This problem has a long
         history in ecology, but traditional methods struggle to take advantage of emerging
         large-scale crowdsourced datasets which can include tens of millions of records
         for hundreds of thousands of species. We propose a new approach based on im-
         plicit neural representations that jointly estimates the geographical ranges of 47k
         species simultaneously. We also introduce a series of benchmarks that measure
         different aspects of species range estimation and spatial representation learning.
         We find that our approach scales gracefully, making better predictions as we scale
         up the number of species used for training and the amount of training data per
         species. Despite being trained on noisy and biased crowdsourced data, our mod-
         els can approximate expert-developed gold standard range maps for many species.


1    I NTRODUCTION
We are witnessing a dramatic decline in global biodiversity, which has severe ramifications for
natural resource management, food security, and ecosystem services that are crucial to human
health (Watson et al., 2019). If we want to take effective conservation action we must understand
where different species live. In ecology, this problem is known as species distribution modeling
(SDM) (Elith & Leathwick, 2009). Ideally we would have up-to-date global SDMs for all species.
Unfortunately, we only have SDMs for a relatively small number of species and locations.
A key obstacle is that most SDM methods are incompatible with the most common form of species
data. An SDM must predict whether a species is present or absent at any location given spatially
sparse observation records. With a sufficient amount of presence-absence data – records of where a
species has been observed to occur and where it has been confirmed to be absent – this problem can
be approached using standard methods from machine learning and statistics (Beery et al., 2021).1
Most SDM methods require presence-absence data. Unfortunately, presence-absence data is scarce
due to the difficulty of verifying that a species is absent from an area. Presence-only data – which
consists only of locations where a species has been observed, with no confirmed absences – is much
more abundant. For instance, at the end of 2022 the iNaturalist community science platform (iNa)
had collected over 70M observations across 300k species, all of which is presence-only data. Though
presence-only data is not without drawbacks (Hastie & Fithian, 2013), it is important to develop
SDM methods that can take advantage of this vast supply of data.
Deep learning is currently one of our best tools for making use of large-scale datasets. Deep neural
networks also have a key advantage over many prior SDM methods because they can jointly learn
the distribution of many species in the same model (Chen et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2018; Mac Aodha
et al., 2019). By learning representations that share information across species, the models can make
improved predictions (Chen et al., 2017). However, the majority of these deep learning approaches
need presence-absence data for training, which prevents them from scaling beyond the small number
of species and regions for which sufficient presence-absence data is available.
    1
      The term “presence-absence” should not be taken to convey absolute certainty about whether a species
is present or absent. False absences and, to a lesser extent, false presences are a serious concern in SDM
(MacKenzie et al., 2002; Guillera-Arroita, 2017).


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: We show that sparse species observation data (left) can be used to learn meaningful
geospatial representations (middle). We evaluate the ability of these models to (right): estimate
species ranges, assist computer vision classifiers, and transfer to other geospatial prediction tasks.

Our work makes the following contributions: (i) A novel implicit neural representation approach
to joint SDM across tens of thousands of species, trained with crowdsourced presence-only data.
(ii) A detailed investigation of loss functions for learning from presence-only data, their scaling
properties, and the resulting geospatial representations. (iii) A new suite of geospatial benchmark
tasks – ranging from species mapping to fine-grained visual categorization – which will facilitate
future research on large-scale SDM and geospatial representation learning.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Species distribution modeling (SDM) refers to a set of methods that aim to predict where (and
sometimes when and in what quantities) species of interest are likely to be found (Elith & Leathwick,
2009). The literature on SDM is vast. Readers interested in an overview of SDM should see the
classic review by Elith & Leathwick (2009) or the recent review of SDM for computer scientists
by Beery et al. (2021). Note that we focus narrowly on the problem of estimating species range, i.e.
we do not consider more complex problems like abundance estimation (Potts & Elith, 2006).
Traditional approaches to SDM train conventional supervised learning models (e.g. logistic regres-
sion (Pearce & Ferrier, 2000), random forests (Cutler et al., 2007), etc.) to learn a mapping between
hand-designed sets of environmental features (e.g. altitude, average rainfall, etc.) and species pres-
ence or absence (Phillips et al., 2004; Elith et al., 2006). Readers interested in traditional SDM ap-
proaches should consult Norberg et al. (2019); Valavi et al. (2021; 2022) and the references therein.
More recently, deep learning methods have been introduced that instead jointly represent multiple
different species within the same model (Chen et al., 2017; Botella et al., 2018b; Tang et al., 2018;
Mac Aodha et al., 2019). These models are typically trained on crowdsourced data, which can in-
troduce additional challenges and biases that need to be accounted for during training (Fink et al.,
2010; Chen & Gomes, 2019; Johnston et al., 2020; Botella et al., 2021). We build on the work of
Mac Aodha et al. (2019), who proposed a neural network approach that forgoes the need for en-
vironmental features (as required by e.g. Botella et al. (2018b); Tang et al. (2018)) by learning to
predict species presence from geographical location alone.
The problem of joint SDM with presence-only data can be viewed as an instance of multi-label
classification with limited supervision. In particular, it is an example of single positive multi-label
learning (SPML) (Cole et al., 2021; Verelst et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022). The goal is to train
a model that is capable of making multi-label predictions at test time, despite having only ever
observed one positive label per training instance (i.e. no confirmed negative training labels). Our
work connects the SPML literature and species range mapping literature, and sets up large-scale
joint species distribution modeling as a challenging real-world SPML task. This setting presents
significant new challenges for SPML, which has previously been limited to relatively small label
spaces (< 100 categories). We investigate the role of the number of categories in our experiments.
Some SPML methods such as ROLE (Cole et al., 2021) are not computationally viable when the
label space is large. One of our baselines will be the SPML method of Zhou et al. (2022), which is
scalable and attains state-of-the-art performance on standard SPML benchmarks.
Our task is related to the growing number of works that use coordinate neural networks for implic-
itly representing images (Tancik et al., 2020) and 3D scenes (Sitzmann et al., 2019), including those
that perform novel-view image synthesis (Mildenhall et al., 2020). There are many design choices
in these methods that are being actively studied, including the impact of the activation functions in
the network (Sitzmann et al., 2019; Ramasinghe & Lucey, 2022) and the effect of different input
encodings (Tancik et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022). In most research on implicit neural representa-


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tions, there is a natural choice of training objective e.g. mean squared error between the predictions
and the data. In the context of presence-only species range estimation, this choice is less clear. We
systematically investigate this question in our experiments.
Quantifying the performance of SDMs at scale is notoriously difficult due to the fact that we lack
presence-absence data for most species and locations (Beery et al., 2021). One approach is to eval-
uate performance on a small set of species (typically fewer than 300) from limited geographical
regions where it is feasible to collect presence-absence data, as done in e.g. Potts & Elith (2006);
Norberg et al. (2019); Valavi et al. (2022). Two of our evaluation tasks are larger-scale versions of
this idea, in which we compare the performance of our models against gold standard expert range
maps for around 4,000 species. An alternative evaluation approach is to measure the performance
on a related “proxy” task. For example, there have been a number of works that use models trained
for species range estimation to assist deep image classifiers (Berg et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015;
Mac Aodha et al., 2019; Chu et al., 2019; Mai et al., 2020; Terry et al., 2020; Skreta et al., 2020;
Yang et al., 2022). By using images from platforms like iNaturalist, we can evaluate different range
estimation methods on the task of aiding fine-grained image classification across tens of thousands
of species. Finally, we also evaluate the spatial representations learned by our models via transfer
learning, using them as inputs for a suite of geospatial regression tasks. This suite of complementary
benchmark tasks captures different aspects of SDM performance, and provides a starting point for
large-scale SDM evaluation. See Appendix B.1 for a more detailed comparison of approaches to
SDM benchmarking.

3     M ETHODS
3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Problem statement. Let x = [lon, lat] denote a geographical location (i.e. longitude and latitude).
Let y ∈ {0, 1}S denote the true presence (1) or absence (0) of S different species at x. We introduce
z ∈ {0, 1, ∅}S to represent our observed data at x, where zj = 1 if species j is present, zj = 0 if
species j is absent, and zj = ∅ if we do not know whether species j is present or absent. Our goal
is to develop a model that produces an estimate of y at any location x over some spatial domain
X , given observed data {(xi , zi )}N
                                    i=1 . We parameterize this model as ŷ = hϕ (fθ (x)), where fθ :
X → Rk is a location encoder and hϕ : Rk → [0, 1]S is a multi-label classifier. The prediction
ŷ ∈ [0, 1]S is our estimate of the presence or absence of each species at x. Intuitively, the location
encoder fθ learns a representation of space that is used by the multi-label classifier hϕ to predict
species presence at a given location.
Input encoding. Each species observation is associated with a point x = [lon, lat]. We rescale these
values so that lon, lat ∈ [−1, 1]. Following Mac Aodha et al. (2019) we guard against boundary
effects by using a sinusoidal encoding for the input. The final result is an input vector
                            x = [sin(lon), cos(lon), sin(lat), cos(lat)] .                         (1)
Alternative input encodings for related coordinate networks have been explored in existing litera-
ture (Mai et al., 2020; Tancik et al., 2020; Mai et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022). Their choice is
orthogonal to the losses we explore, thus we leave their evaluation for future work.
Implicit neural representations. Traditionally, representation learning aims to transform complex
objects (e.g. images, text) into simpler objects (e.g. low-dimensional vectors) that facilitate some
downstream task (e.g. classification) (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Implicit neural representations offer
a different perspective, in which a signal is represented by a neural network that maps the signal
domain (e.g. R for audio, R2 for images) to the signal values (Sitzmann et al., 2019; Tancik et al.,
2020). In this work we learn an implicit neural representation for a large collection of crowdsourced
species observation data, which can be viewed as a set of 2D point clouds (one for each species).
This process yields an implicit neural representation for the geospatial distribution of each species,
as well as a representation for any location on earth.
Presence-absence vs. presence-only data. Species observation datasets come in two varieties: (i)
Presence-absence data consists of locations where a species has been observed to be present and
locations where it has been confirmed to be absent. That is, we say we have presence-absence data
for species j if |{zi : zij = 0}| > 0 and |{zi : zij = 1}| > 0. Unfortunately, presence-absence data


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          targets at               targets at                      data location
                         data location          random location
             AN-SSDL     ?   +    ?   ?   ?       ?   -        ?   ?   ?


             AN-SLDS     ?   +    ?   -   ?       ?   ?        ?   ?   ?


              AN-full    -   +    -   -   -       -   -        -   -   -


                                 unobserved ground truth                         random location

                         -   +    -   -   +       +   -        -   +   +



Figure 2: Illustration of three basic losses from Section 3.2. For each loss (LAN−SSDL , LAN−SLDS ,
and LAN−full ) we visualize the targets that the network is encouraged to predict. Each loss can be
broken into two parts: one part that updates the network’s predictions at the location of a training
example (the data location) and one part that updates the network’s predictions at another location
chosen randomly (random location). Each loss has access to one confirmed positive label (bold
boxes). The rest of the labels are unobserved (non-bold boxes), and the losses make different as-
sumptions about those unobserved labels. LAN−SSDL (top) assumes that the species that has been
confirmed present at the data location is absent from the random location. LAN−SLDS (middle)
assumes that a random species (other than the one that is confirmed to be present) is absent from
the data location. LAN−full (bottom) assumes that all unobserved species are absent from the data
location, and that all species are absent from the random location. All of these losses are making
imperfect approximations of the unobserved ground truth labels shown at the bottom of the figure.

is costly to obtain at scale because confirming absence requires skilled observers to exhaustively
search an area. (ii) Presence-only data is easier to acquire and thus more abundant because absences
are not collected, i.e. zij ∈ {1, ∅} for i ∈ [N ] and j ∈ [S].

3.2   L EARNING FROM L ARGE -S CALE P RESENCE -O NLY DATA

In the context of SPML image classification, a simple but effective approach is to assume that un-
observed labels are negative (Cole et al., 2021). This approach is based on a probabilistic argument:
since natural images tend to have a small number of categories compared to the size of the label set,
the vast majority of the labels will be negative. This is also true for species distribution modeling.
Given an arbitrary location and a large set of candidate species, nearly all of them will be absent. In
this section we describe several simple and scalable loss functions based on this idea. We illustrate
three of our basic losses in Figure 2.
“Assume negative” loss (same species, different location). This loss pairs each observation of a
species with a pseudo-negative for that species at another location chosen uniformly at random:
                                                 S
                                               1 X
                   LAN−SSDL (ŷ, z) = −                       1[zj =1] [log(ŷj ) + log(1 − ŷj′ )]   (2)
                                              npos j=1

where ŷ′ = hϕ (fθ (r)) with r ∼ Uniform(X ) and npos = j=1 1[zj =1] . This approach generates
                                                           PS
pseudo-negatives across the globe, but many of them are likely to be “easy” because they are in the
ocean or far from the true species range.
“Assume negative” loss (same location, different species). This loss pairs each observation of a
species with a pseudo-negative at the same location for a different species:
                                                 S
                                               1 X
                   LAN−SLDS (ŷ, z) = −                   1[zj =1] [log(ŷj ) + log(1 − ŷj ′ )]      (3)
                                              npos j=1

where j ′ ∼ Uniform({j : zj ̸= 1}). Intuitively, this approach generates pseudo-negatives that are
aligned with the spatial distribution of the observed data.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Full “assume negative” loss. The previous two losses are inefficient in the sense that they do not
use all of the entries in ŷ. We can combine the pseudo-negative sampling strategies of LAN−SSDL
and LAN−SLDS and use all available predictions as follows:
                                 S
                              1 X
                                    1[zj =1] λ log(ŷj ) + 1[zj ̸=1] log(1 − ŷj ) + log(1 − ŷj′ )

         LAN−full (ŷ, z) =                                                                            (4)
                              S j=1

where ŷ′ = hϕ (fθ (r)) with r ∼ Unif(X ). The hyperparameter λ > 0 can be used to prevent the
negative labels from dominating the loss. This is equivalent to the loss from Mac Aodha et al. (2019)
without their user modeling terms.
Maximum entropy loss. The current state-of-the-art in SPML image classification is a technique
proposed by Zhou et al. (2022). The idea is to encourage predictions for unobserved labels to
maximize entropy instead of forcing them to zero. Zhou et al. (2022) also includes an additional
pseudo-labeling component, but we omit this because the resulting empirical improvement from it is
small. We can apply this idea to LAN−SSDL , LAN−SLDS , and LAN−full by replacing all terms of the
form “− log(1−p)” with terms of the form “H(p)” where H(p) = −(p log(p)+(1−p) log(1−p)).
We name these “maximum entropy” (ME) variants LME−SSDL , LME−SLDS , and LME−full .

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section we evaluate the performance of the different losses outlined previously across a range
of species and environmental prediction tasks.

4.1   M ODELS

As described in Section 3.1, our model consists of a location encoder fθ and a multi-label classifier
hϕ which produce a vector of predictions ŷ = hϕ (fθ (x)) for a location x. The location encoder fθ
is implemented as the fully connected neural network shown in Figure A4. We implement the multi-
label classifier hϕ as a single linear layer with sigmoid activations. Full implementation details can
be found in Appendix C.
There are two other model types represented in Table 1. The rows tagged with “LR” are logistic
regression baselines (Pearce & Ferrier, 2000), in which the location encoder fθ is replaced with the
identity function and hϕ is unchanged. The “Best Discretized Grid” row does not use a location
encoder, but instead makes predictions based on binning the training data (Berg et al., 2014). Full
details for these models can be found in Appendix C. These baselines allow us to quantify the
importance of our deep location encoder.

4.2   T RAINING DATA

We train our models on presence-only species observation data obtained from the community science
platform iNaturalist (iNa). The training set consists of 35.5 million observations covering 47,375
species observed prior to 2022. For each species, we have the geographical coordinate where the
species was observed. To be included in the training set, each species needed at least 50 observa-
tions. Some species are more common than others, and thus the dataset is heavily imbalanced – see
Figure A6. Later we use this data in its entirety (“All”), with different maximum observations per
class (“X / Class”), or with different subsets of classes. See Appendix D for more details on the
dataset.

4.3   E VALUATION TASKS AND M ETRICS

We propose four tasks for evaluating large-scale species distribution models. We give brief descrip-
tions here, and provide further details in Appendix E.
S&T: eBird Status and Trends. This task quantifies the agreement between our presence-only
maps and high-quality expert range maps from the eBird Status & Trends dataset (Fink et al., 2020),
covering 536 bird species. Performance is measured using mean average precision (MAP), i.e.
computing the per-species average precision (AP) and averaging the results across species.

                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


IUCN: Range Maps. This task compares our maps against expert range maps from the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List (IUC). Unlike the bird-focused S&T task, this
task covers 3,938 species from diverse taxonomic groups. Performance is measured using MAP.
Geo Prior: Geographical Priors for Computer Vision. This task measures the utility of our range
maps as priors for fine-grained image classification (Berg et al., 2014; Mac Aodha et al., 2019). For
this task we collect 282,974 geo-located images from iNaturalist, covering 39,444 species from our
training set. The performance metric for this task (“∆ Top-1”) is the change in image classifier top-1
accuracy when using our range maps as a geographical prior. This occurs at test time – the image
classifier is never trained with geographical information. A positive value indicates that the prior
improves the performance of the classifier. Unlike S&T and IUCN, this is an indirect evaluation of
range map quality since we are assessing only how useful the range maps are for a downstream task.
Geo Feature: Environmental Representation Learning. Instead of evaluating the range estimates
of our model, this transfer learning task evaluates the quality of the underlying geospatial repre-
sentation that has been learned. The goal is to predict nine different geospatial characteristics of
the environment e.g. above-ground carbon, elevation, etc. First, we use the location encoder fθ to
extract features for a grid of evenly spaced locations. After splitting the locations into train and test
sets, we fit a linear regressor to predict the geospatial characteristics from the extracted features.
Performance is evaluated using the coefficient of determination R2 on the test set.


4.4   R ESULTS

Deep location encoders are crucial. Our method outperforms logistic regression trained with the
same inputs and loss by more than 50 MAP on the S&T task – compare “LAN−full ” and “LAN−full
(LR, Coord. Inputs)” with 1000 examples per class in Table 1. The only difference is the fact that
our method uses a deep location encoder. See Appendix A.2 for more details.
Environmental features are unnecessary for good performance. Our method gains only 1.1 MAP
on the S&T task when we switch from coordinate inputs (“LAN−full ”) to environmental feature
inputs (“LAN−full (Env. Inputs)”). The gain is much more significant for logistic regression, i.e.
+15.7 MAP for “LAN−full (LR, Env. Inputs)” vs. “LAN−full (LR, Coord. Inputs)”. It seems that
our approach can successfully use sparse presence-only data to learn about the environment, so that
using environmental features as input provides a marginal benefit. See Appendix A.1 for more.
Low-shot performance is surprisingly good. In Table 1 we can see that LAN−full (using only 10
examples per category, i.e. 1.3% of the training data) beats the “Best Discretized Grid” baseline
(which uses all of the training data) on every task. Our models seem to be capable of capturing
general spatial patterns using relatively little data. While this is encouraging, we expect that more
data is necessary to capture fine detail as suggested by Figure 5.
Pseudo-negatives that follow the data distribution are usually better. LAN−SSDL and LAN−SLDS
differ only in the fact that LAN−SSDL samples pseudo-negatives from random locations while
LAN−SLDS samples pseudo-negatives from data locations (see Figure 2). We can see in Table 1
that LAN−SLDS outperforms LAN−SSDL for all tasks except IUCN. This could be due to the fact that
some IUCN species have ranges far from areas that are well-sampled by iNaturalist. As we can see
in Figure A3 (Black Oystercatcher), LAN−SSDL can behave poorly in areas with little training data.
This highlights the importance of using diverse tasks to study range estimation methods.
Joint learning across categories is beneficial, but more data is better. In Figure 3 we study the
effect of the amount of training data on performance for the S&T task. We first note that increasing
the number of training examples per species reliably and significantly improves performance. One
possible mechanism for this is suggested by Figure 5, which shows a more spatially detailed repre-
sentation emerging with more training data. Figure 3 also shows that adding additional species to
the training set (which are not in the test set) also tends to increase performance, though by a smaller
margin. In the right panel of Figure 3 we can see that it is better to have more training data for fewer
species than less training data spread across more species. Table 1 shows a clear trend towards
higher performance with more training data across tasks. The exception is that both LAN−SLDS
and LAN−full have worse performance on the Geo Prior task when using all data compared to using
1000 / class. This may be due to the extreme imbalance in the full training set, as show in Figure A6.

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: S&T range prediction performance with LAN−full as a function of training set size. We
consider two notions of size: number of training examples per class and number of classes (i.e.
species). These plots visualize the same data in different ways. (Left) Each curve corresponds to a
model trained on a different set of species. “S&T” indicates that we only train on the species in the
S&T task. For “S&T + X” we add in X species chosen uniformly at random. For the “All” line we
train on all 47k species. The x-axis represents the number of training examples per class. (Right)
Each curve corresponds to a different amount of training data per class. The points along each curve
correspond to the different training sets from the left panel (i.e. “S&T”, “S&T + 4k”, ..., “All”). The
x-axis represents the total number of training examples. Unsurprisingly, increasing the number of
training examples per category improves performance. More interestingly, adding training data for
additional species (which are not evaluated at test time) improves performance as well.


Figure 4: Geo Feature task performance broken down by subtask. All location encoders are trained
with 1000 examples per category. The regression tasks are sorted by the performance of “Enc. Co-
ords.” which is a naive baseline method that only uses the raw encoded coordinates from Equation 1
as features. All losses outperform this naive baseline, but no loss consistently outperforms the oth-
ers.


Method rankings may not generalize across domains. The presence-only SDM problem in this
work and the SPML image classification problem in Cole et al. (2021) are both SPML problems.
Despite this formal equivalence, it does not seem to be the case that the best current method for
SPML image classification is also the best methods for presence-only SDM. Zhou et al. (2022)
show that their “maximum entropy” loss performs much better than the “assume negative” loss
across a number of image classification datasets. However, all of the “maximum entropy” losses in
Table 1 (LME−SSDL , LME−SLDS , LME−full ) perform worse than their “assume negative” counter-
parts (LAN−SSDL , LAN−SLDS , LAN−full ) in almost all cases. LME−full is a top performer on the
Geo Feature task, but Figure 4 shows that no method seems to have a commanding advantage.


4.5   L IMITATIONS

There are some limitations associated with our analysis. As noted, the training set is heavily imbal-
anced, both in terms of the species themselves and where the data was collected. This is partially
because some species are more common and thus more likely to be observed than others. We do not
explicitly deal with species imbalance in the training data, other than by showing that the ordering
of methods does not significantly vary even when the training data is capped to the same upper limit
per species, i.e. 10, 100, or 1,000 examples per class in Table 1.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Visualization of the 256-dimensional learned location encoder features projected to three
dimensions using Independent Component Analysis. (Left) This corresponds to the LAN−full model
with a maximum of 10 examples per class. The features are smooth and do not appear to encode
much high frequency spatial information. (Right) In contrast, the LAN−full model with a maximum
of 1000 examples per class, contains more high frequency information. The increase in training data
appears to enable this model to better encode spatially varying environmental properties.


                           LAN−SSDL                                                     LAN−SLDS                                                        LAN−full
  10 Positives / Class


                                  © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                               © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                          © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors
  100 Positives / Class


                                  © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                               © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                          © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors
  1000 Positives / Class


                                  © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                               © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                          © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors


                                  Present                                Absent   0.0    0.2   0.4                   0.6                    0.8   1.0
                                                                                                 Model Score


Figure 6: Visualization of predictions for Wood Thrush when varying the amount of training data
(rows) for different loss functions (columns). The model predictions are generated on a grid of coor-
dinates. Hexagons signify locations where we can evaluate the model outputs using S&T data. Light
hexagons are locations where the model should predict present, dark hexagons are locations where
the model should predict absent, and locations without hexagons are not used for S&T evaluation.
All models improve their range maps when given access to more data, as expected. LAN−SSDL over
estimates the range with few examples, and refines the range with additional data, while LAN−full
starts off conservative with few training examples and expands as more data is available. The range
predicted by LAN−SLDS is somewhere in-between. The magnitude of the score values is also inter-
esting, with both LAN−SSDL and LAN−SLDS predicting more locations confidently than LAN−full .


                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Results for four geospatial tasks: S&T (eBird Status & Trends species mapping), IUCN
(IUCN species mapping) , Geo Prior (fine-grained image classification with a geographical prior),
and Geo Feature (geographical feature regression). The tasks and metrics are defined in Section 4.3.
We assess performance as a function of the loss function and the amount of training data (“# /
Class”). The logistic regression (“LR”) and “Best Discretized Grid” baselines do not have an entry
for the Geo Feature task as they do not learn a location encoder. “LAN−full (Env. Inputs)” does not
have an entry for the Geo Feature task because it is trained on environmental features which may be
closely related to the evaluation task.
                                                                         S&T     IUCN     Geo Prior   Geo Feature
    Loss                                                    # / Class   (MAP)    (MAP)    (∆ Top-1)    (Mean R2 )
    LAN−SSDL                                                10           65.65    95.94     +3.6         0.671
    LAN−SSDL                                                100          73.54    97.54     +4.7         0.731
    LAN−SSDL                                                1000         76.52    98.02     +4.8         0.725
    LAN−SSDL                                                All          77.35    98.11     +4.9         0.731
    LAN−SLDS                                                10           72.09    92.74     +4.8         0.705
    LAN−SLDS                                                100          79.66    95.06     +6.2         0.724
    LAN−SLDS                                                1000         82.68    94.45     +6.2         0.729
    LAN−SLDS                                                All          82.98    95.36     +5.9         0.744
    LAN−full                                                10           74.78    96.70     +4.5         0.699
    LAN−full                                                100          81.83    97.78     +6.6         0.735
    LAN−full                                                1000         84.80    98.27     +6.2         0.746
    LAN−full                                                All          85.15    98.19     +5.0         0.743
    LAN−full (Env. Inputs)                                  1000         85.94      -         -            -
    Baselines:
    LAN−full (LR, Coord. Inputs) (Pearce & Ferrier, 2000)   10          31.46    49.25      -0.4           -
    LAN−full (LR, Coord. Inputs) (Pearce & Ferrier, 2000)   100         30.05    44.95      -0.3           -
    LAN−full (LR, Coord. Inputs) (Pearce & Ferrier, 2000)   1000        32.14    39.49      -0.6           -
    LAN−full (LR, Env. Inputs) (Pearce & Ferrier, 2000)     1000        47.83      -          -            -
    LME−SSDL (Zhou et al., 2022)                            1000        72.48    96.56      +1.6         0.708
    LME−SLDS (Zhou et al., 2022)                            1000        81.86    93.62      +2.1         0.728
    LME−full (Zhou et al., 2022)                            1000        82.52    94.71      +1.5         0.747
    Best Discretized Grid (Berg et al., 2014)               All         72.87    94.42      +4.1           -
    LGP (Mac Aodha et al., 2019)                            1000        81.97    97.73      +5.7         0.718



Reliably evaluating the performance of models for species range estimation is a long standing and
challenging question. To address this issue, we present a suite of complementary benchmarks that
attempt to evaluate different facets of this spatial prediction problem. However, obtaining ground
truth distribution data for tens of thousands of species remains a very difficult problem. While we
believe our benchmarks to be a significant step forward, they are likely to have blind spots.
Finally, extreme care should be taken before making conservation decisions based on the outputs
of models such as the ones presented here. Our goal in this work is to demonstrate the promise
of large-scale representation learning for species distribution modeling. Our models have not been
calibrated or validated beyond the experiments illustrated above.

5      C ONCLUSION
We explored the problem of species range estimation through the lens of representation learning.
Across a range of spatial prediction tasks, we showed that adding more and diverse data improves
model performance. In doing so, we also made connections to recent literature on training implicit
coordinate networks and learning multi-label classifiers from limited supervision. We hope that our
work will encourage more machine learning researchers to work on this important problem.
While the initial results are encouraging, there are still many avenues for future work. For example,
currently our models do not make use of any temporal input information (Mac Aodha et al., 2019),
we do not account for the spatial biases present in the data (Chen & Gomes, 2019), and our neural
network models could be adapted to have better inductive biases for encoding spatially varying
signals (Ramasinghe & Lucey, 2022).


                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
H3. https://h3geo.org/, accessed 28 September 2022.
IUCN Red List. https://www.iucnredlist.org, accessed 28 September 2022.
iNaturalist. www.inaturalist.org, accessed 28 September 2022.
Sara Beery, Elijah Cole, Joseph Parker, Pietro Perona, and Kevin Winner. Species distribution mod-
  eling for machine learning practitioners: A review. In Conference on Computing and Sustainable
  Societies, 2021.
Thomas Berg, Jiongxin Liu, Seung Woo Lee, Michelle L Alexander, David W Jacobs, and Peter N
  Belhumeur. Birdsnap: Large-scale fine-grained visual categorization of birds. In CVPR, 2014.
Christophe Botella, Pierre Bonnet, François Munoz, Pascal P Monestiez, and Alexis Joly. Overview
  of geolifeclef 2018: location-based species recommendation. In Working Notes of CLEF 2018-
  Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum, volume 2125. CEUR-WS, 2018a.
Christophe Botella, Alexis Joly, Pierre Bonnet, Pascal Monestiez, and François Munoz. A deep
  learning approach to species distribution modelling. In Multimedia Tools and Applications for
  Environmental & Biodiversity Informatics. 2018b.
Christophe Botella, Maximilien Servajean, Pierre Bonnet, and Alexis Joly. Overview of geolifeclef
  2019: plant species prediction using environment and animal occurrences. In Working Notes of
  CLEF 2019-Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum, number 2380, 2019.
Christophe Botella, Alexis Joly, Pierre Bonnet, François Munoz, and Pascal Monestiez. Jointly
  estimating spatial sampling effort and habitat suitability for multiple species from opportunistic
  presence-only data. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 2021.
Di Chen and Carla P Gomes. Bias reduction via end-to-end shift learning: Application to citizen
  science. In AAAI, 2019.
Di Chen, Yexiang Xue, Daniel Fink, Shuo Chen, and Carla P Gomes. Deep multi-species embed-
  ding. In IJCAI, 2017.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020.
François Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In CVPR, 2017.
Grace Chu, Brian Potetz, Weijun Wang, Andrew Howard, Yang Song, Fernando Brucher, Thomas
  Leung, and Hartwig Adam. Geo-aware networks for fine-grained recognition. In ICCV Work-
  shops, 2019.
Elijah Cole, Benjamin Deneu, Titouan Lorieul, Maximilien Servajean, Christophe Botella,
  Dan Morris, Nebojsa Jojic, Pierre Bonnet, and Alexis Joly. The geolifeclef 2020 dataset.
  arXiv:2004.04192, 2020.
Elijah Cole, Oisin Mac Aodha, Titouan Lorieul, Pietro Perona, Dan Morris, and Nebojsa Jojic.
  Multi-label learning from single positive labels. In CVPR, 2021.
Scott L Collins and Susan M Glenn. Importance of spatial and temporal dynamics in species regional
  abundance and distribution. Ecology, 72(2):654–664, 1991.
D Richard Cutler, Thomas C Edwards Jr, Karen H Beard, Adele Cutler, Kyle T Hess, Jacob Gibson,
  and Joshua J Lawler. Random forests for classification in ecology. Ecology, 88(11):2783–2792,
  2007.
Benjamin Deneu, Titouan Lorieul, Elijah Cole, Maximilien Servajean, Christophe Botella, Pierre
  Bonnet, and Alexis Joly. Overview of lifeclef location-based species prediction task 2020 (geo-
  lifeclef). CEUR-WS, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sami Domisch, Martin Friedrichs, Thomas Hein, Florian Borgwardt, Annett Wetzig, Sonja C Jähnig,
  and Simone D Langhans. Spatially explicit species distribution models: A missed opportunity in
  conservation planning? Diversity and Distributions, 25(5):758–769, 2019.
Jane Elith and John R Leathwick. Species distribution models: ecological explanation and prediction
  across space and time. Annual review of ecology, evolution, and systematics, 2009.
Jane Elith, Catherine H. Graham, Robert P. Anderson, Miroslav Dudı́k, Simon Ferrier, Antoine
  Guisan, Robert J. Hijmans, Falk Huettmann, John R. Leathwick, Anthony Lehmann, et al. Novel
  methods improve prediction of species’ distributions from occurrence data. Ecography, 2006.
Jane Elith, Catherine Graham, Roozbeh Valavi, Meinrad Abegg, Caroline Bruce, Simon Ferrier,
  Andrew Ford, Antoine Guisan, Robert J Hijmans, Falk Huettmann, et al. Presence-only and
  presence-absence data for comparing species distribution modeling methods. Biodiversity infor-
  matics, 15(2):69–80, 2020.
Stephen E Fick and Robert J Hijmans. Worldclim 2: new 1-km spatial resolution climate surfaces
  for global land areas. International journal of climatology, 37(12):4302–4315, 2017.
Daniel Fink, Wesley M Hochachka, Benjamin Zuckerberg, David W Winkler, Ben Shaby, M Arthur
  Munson, Giles Hooker, Mirek Riedewald, Daniel Sheldon, and Steve Kelling. Spatiotemporal
  exploratory models for broad-scale survey data. Ecological Applications, 2010.
Daniel Fink, Tom Auer, Alison Johnston, Matt Strimas-Mackey, Orin Robinson, Shawn Ligocki,
  Wesley Hochachka, Lauren Jaromczyk, Chris Wood, Ian Davies, Marshall Iliff, and Luke Seitz.
  ebird status and trends, data version: 2020; released: 2021. Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca,
  New York, 10, 2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. http:
  //www.deeplearningbook.org.
Gurutzeta Guillera-Arroita. Modelling of species distributions, range dynamics and communities
  under imperfect detection: advances, challenges and opportunities. Ecography, 40(2):281–295,
  2017.
Antoine Guisan and Carsten Rahbek. Sesam–a new framework integrating macroecological and
  species distribution models for predicting spatio-temporal patterns of species assemblages, 2011.
Trevor Hastie and Will Fithian. Inference from presence-only data; the ongoing controversy. Ecog-
  raphy, 36(8):864–867, 2013.
Robert J Hijmans, Susan E Cameron, Juan L Parra, Peter G Jones, and Andy Jarvis. Very high res-
  olution interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. International Journal of Climatology:
  A Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 25(15):1965–1978, 2005.
Alison Johnston, Nick Moran, Andy Musgrove, Daniel Fink, and Stephen R Baillie. Estimating
  species distributions from spatially biased citizen science data. Ecological Modelling, 2020.
Titouan Lorieul, Elijah Cole, Benjamin Deneu, Maximilien Servajean, Pierre Bonnet, and Alexis
   Joly. Overview of geolifeclef 2021: Predicting species distribution from 2 million remote sensing
   images. In Working Notes of CLEF 2021-Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum, volume
   2936, pp. 1451–1462, 2021.
Titouan Lorieul, Elijah Cole, Benjamin Deneu, Maximilien Servajean, Pierre Bonnet, and Alexis
   Joly. Overview of geolifeclef 2022: Predicting species presence from multi-modal remote sens-
   ing, bioclimatic and pedologic data. In CLEF 2022-Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum,
   volume 3180, pp. 1940–1956, 2022.
Oisin Mac Aodha, Elijah Cole, and Pietro Perona. Presence-only geographical priors for fine-
  grained image classification. In ICCV, 2019.
Darryl I MacKenzie, James D Nichols, Gideon B Lachman, Sam Droege, J Andrew Royle, and
  Catherine A Langtimm. Estimating site occupancy rates when detection probabilities are less
  than one. Ecology, 83(8):2248–2255, 2002.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gengchen Mai, Krzysztof Janowicz, Bo Yan, Rui Zhu, Ling Cai, and Ni Lao. Multi-scale represen-
  tation learning for spatial feature distributions using grid cells. In ICLR, 2020.

Gengchen Mai, Yao Xuan, Wenyun Zuo, Krzysztof Janowicz, and Ni Lao. Sphere2vec: Multi-scale
  representation learning over a spherical surface for geospatial predictions. arXiv:2201.10489,
  2022.

Julieta Martinez, Rayat Hossain, Javier Romero, and James J Little. A simple yet effective baseline
  for 3d human pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 2640–2649, 2017.

Cory Merow, Mathew J Smith, Thomas C Edwards Jr, Antoine Guisan, Sean M McMahon, Signe
  Normand, Wilfried Thuiller, Rafael O Wüest, Niklaus E Zimmermann, and Jane Elith. What do
  we gain from simplicity versus complexity in species distribution models? Ecography, 37(12):
  1267–1281, 2014.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.

Anna Norberg, Nerea Abrego, F Guillaume Blanchet, Frederick R Adler, Barbara J Anderson, Jani
  Anttila, Miguel B Araújo, Tad Dallas, David Dunson, Jane Elith, et al. A comprehensive evalua-
  tion of predictive performance of 33 species distribution models at species and community levels.
  Ecological monographs, 89(3):e01370, 2019.

Jennie Pearce and Simon Ferrier. An evaluation of alternative algorithms for fitting species distribu-
  tion models using logistic regression. Ecological modelling, 128(2-3):127–147, 2000.

Steven J Phillips, Miroslav Dudı́k, and Robert E Schapire. A maximum entropy approach to species
  distribution modeling. In ICML, 2004.

Joanne M Potts and Jane Elith. Comparing species abundance models. Ecological modelling, 2006.

Sameera Ramasinghe and Simon Lucey. Beyond periodicity: Towards a unifying framework for
  activations in coordinate-mlps. In ECCV, 2022.

Esther Rolf, Jonathan Proctor, Tamma Carleton, Ian Bolliger, Vaishaal Shankar, Miyabi Ishihara,
  Benjamin Recht, and Solomon Hsiang. A generalizable and accessible approach to machine
  learning with global satellite imagery. Nature communications, 2021.

Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. NeurIPS, 2019.

Marta Skreta, Alexandra Luccioni, and David Rolnick. Spatiotemporal features improve fine-
 grained butterfly image classification. In Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning Work-
 shop at NeurIPS, 2020.

Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh
 Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn
 high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. In NeurIPS, 2020.

Kevin Tang, Manohar Paluri, Li Fei-Fei, Rob Fergus, and Lubomir Bourdev. Improving image
  classification with location context. In ICCV, 2015.

Luming Tang, Yexiang Xue, Di Chen, and Carla Gomes. Multi-entity dependence learning with rich
  context via conditional variational auto-encoder. In AAAI, 2018.

J Christopher D Terry, Helen E Roy, and Tom A August. Thinking like a naturalist: Enhancing
  computer vision of citizen science images by harnessing contextual data. Methods in Ecology
  and Evolution, 2020.

Roozbeh Valavi, Jane Elith, José J Lahoz-Monfort, and Gurutzeta Guillera-Arroita. Modelling
  species presence-only data with random forests. Ecography, 44(12):1731–1742, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Roozbeh Valavi, Gurutzeta Guillera-Arroita, José J Lahoz-Monfort, and Jane Elith. Predictive per-
  formance of presence-only species distribution models: a benchmark study with reproducible
  code. Ecological Monographs, 92(1):e01486, 2022.
Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam,
  Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8769–8778,
  2018.
Thomas Verelst, Paul K Rubenstein, Marcin Eichner, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Maxim Berman.
  Spatial consistency loss for training multi-label classifiers from single-label annotations.
  arXiv:2203.06127, 2022.
Robert Watson, Ivar Baste, Anne Larigauderie, Paul Leadley, Unai Pascual, Brigitte Baptiste, Seb-
  sebe Demissew, Luthando Dziba, Günay Erpul, Asghar Fazel, et al. Summary for policymakers
  of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmen-
  tal Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Bonn, Germany: IPBES
  Secretariat, 2019.
Lingfeng Yang, Xiang Li, Renjie Song, Borui Zhao, Juntian Tao, Shihao Zhou, Jiajun Liang, and
  Jian Yang. Dynamic mlp for fine-grained image classification by leveraging geographical and
  temporal information. In CVPR, 2022.
Jianqiao Zheng, Sameera Ramasinghe, Xueqian Li, and Simon Lucey. Trading positional complex-
   ity vs. deepness in coordinate networks. In ECCV, 2022.
Donghao Zhou, Pengfei Chen, Qiong Wang, Guangyong Chen, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Acknowl-
  edging the unknown for multi-label learning with single positive labels. In ECCV, 2022.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

A.1   H OW DOES OUR APPROACH COMPARE TO A TRADITIONAL SDM?

Our approach can handle large-scale SDM in a way that most traditional SDMs cannot. However,
for context we compare our results to a classic SDM. One of the most scalable SDM approaches
in the ecology literature is to use logistic regression with environmental features as input (Pearce &
Ferrier, 2000). Crucially, we can train this method using GPU-accelerated batch-based optimization.
Full implementation details are provided in Appendix C.3.1.
In Figure A1 we compare our approach against logistic regression. We try both approaches with
environmental feature inputs and with coordinate inputs. First we note that our method has a decisive
advantage over logistic regression in all cases. Second, we observe that using environmental features
as input (instead of coordinates) improves the performance of logistic regression significantly (+15.7
MAP) and improves the performance of our method slightly (+1.1 MAP). These facts are consistent
with the claim that our method is able to learn a rich representation of the environment from species
co-occurrence patterns alone, without the need for environmental covariates.


Figure A1: Results for the S&T task. All models are trained with 1000 examples per class using
the LAN−full loss. We compare logistic regression (“LR”) to our approach (“Ours”), using either
coordinates (“Coords.”) or environmental covariates (“Env.”) as inputs.



A.2   W HAT IS THE EFFECT OF THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE LOCATION ENCODER ?

Location encoder depth. As discussed in Appendix C, the location encoder fθ used throughout the
paper has one input layer followed by four residual layers. We now consider the importance of the
number of layers in the encoder. Figure A2 shows a large performance increase when we go from the
logistic regression model (0 hidden layers) to the next largest model (4 hidden layers). Performance
is fairly stable beyond that point, marginally increasing (8 hidden layers) and then dropping (12
hidden layers). We suggest that the performance drop for the deepest models may be due to the fact
that, with enough capacity, there is no need to share information across species.
Residual modules vs. traditional layers. The residual network used by us was chosen to allow us
to directly compare to existing related work that uses the same architecture (Mac Aodha et al., 2019).
Figure A2 compares this architecture against a simpler multi-layer perceptron (MLP) architecture.
Here the traditional MLP is comparable, and in fact performs slightly better. Though there is not
much difference in performance, future work should consider using a traditional MLP for simplicity.



                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A2: Results for the S&T task under different design choices for the location encoder ar-
chitecture. All models are trained with 100 examples per class. We compare the location encoder
architecture used throughout the paper (“Residual MLP”) against a simple MLP as a function of the
number of layers in the encoder. Note that one residual layer corresponds to two traditional layers,
so for the purposes of this figure the encoder used throughout the paper has 8 layers (8 ordinary
layers = 4 residual layers). The 0-layer model is identical for both architectures, and is equivalent
to logistic regression.


A.3   A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

To build some intuition for the behavior of LAN−SSDL , LAN−SLDS , and LAN−full , we compare these
losses on three species that are known to have interesting ranges in Figure A3.

B     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION
B.1   H OW DO THE BENCHMARK TASKS PROPOSED IN THIS PAPER COMPARE TO EXISTING
      SDM BENCHMARKS ?

Presence-only SDM is notoriously tricky to evaluate (Beery et al., 2021), and there are few public
benchmark datasets available for the task. Here we will discuss the two most relevant lines of prior
work that have approached this evaluation problem (one from the ecology community and one from
the machine learning community), and discuss where our benchmark is similar and different.
To the best of our knowledge, Elith et al. (2006) was the first attempt to systematically compare
presence-only SDM algorithms across many species and locations. That work compared 16 SDM
algorithms on a collection of taxonomically-specific datasets from 6 different regions, covering a
total of 226 species. Presence-only data was used for training, presence-absence data was used for
evaluation. Unfortunately the data was not made publicly available until Elith et al. (2020). There
are two main issues with this benchmark. First, the benchmark is not suitable for studying large-
scale joint SDM. It has a small number of species overall, and there are at most 54 covered in any
region. Second, the species in the dataset are anonymized. This makes it impossible to use their
dataset to study large-scale SDM, because we cannot increase the size of their training with external
data nor can we evaluate our trained models on their test data.
Another line of work comes from the GeoLifeCLEF series of datasets and competitions (Botella
et al., 2018a; 2019; Deneu et al., 2020; Cole et al., 2020; Lorieul et al., 2021; 2022). These bench-
marks represent an attempt to scale up presence-only SDM, with the 2022 dataset covering 17k
species with 1.6M species observations the U.S. and France. As in our benchmark, all of their train-
ing data is drawn from community science projects. The primary limitation of the GeoLifeCLEF
benchmarks is that they use biased presence-only data at test time, evaluating the problem as an
information retrieval task instead of a spatial prediction task.


                                                 15
                              LAN−SSDL                                                                                  LAN−SLDS                                                                LAN−full


                                                        © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                                                             © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                        © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors


        Barn Swallow
                                                        © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                                                             © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                        © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors


        Blue Rock-Thrush
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


16
                                              © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                                                             © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors                        © Carto © OpenStreetMap contributors


       Black Oystercatcher
                                                                                               Present   Absent   0.0    0.2   0.4         0.6              0.8                   1.0
                                                                                                                                 Model Score


     Figure A3: Loss function comparison (columns) for three different species of birds (rows). All models were trained with 1000 examples per class. See Figure 6 for
     an explanation of the plots. These species were chosen for visualization because their ranges have interesting complementary properties. (Top Row) Barn Swallow
     is a species that occurs across the globe. (Middle Row) Blue Rock-Thrush is a species whose range goes from the data rich Western Palearctic biogeographic realm,
     through a data sparse area, and back to a more data rich area of eastern Asia. (Bottom Row) Black Oystercatcher is a species whose range hugs the west coast of the
     United States. Unlike in the rest of the paper, these visualizations for Black Oystercatcher do not use a mask to filter out predictions from non-land regions. Here,
     we specifically wanted to see if the models learned to follow the coastline. We observe that LAN−SLDS incorrectly expands the range into the Pacific.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Our benchmark can be viewed as a significant expansion of the GeoLifeCLEF line of work. Instead
of being geographically limited to France and the U.S., we allow data from anywhere in the world.
Instead of evaluating with biased presence-only data, we use presence-absence data like Elith et al.
(2020). However, unlike Elith et al. (2020), we work at a large scale that allows us to study data
scaling in SDM. Our indirect evaluation tasks (Geo Prior and Geo Feature) add complementary
dimensions to presence-absence evaluation, and have no counterpart in Cole et al. (2020) or Elith
et al. (2020).


B.2   E NVIRONMENTAL C OVARIATES VS . C OORDINATES

One important characteristic of any SDM is whether or not it is spatially explicit. Spatially explicit
SDMs include geospatial coordinates as part of the model input (Domisch et al., 2019). Traditional
covariate-based SDMs include only environmental features (e.g. altitude, distance to roads, average
temperature, etc.) in the input (Elith & Leathwick, 2009).
Covariate-based SDMs are often understood to reflect habitat suitability, because they learn a
relationship between environmental characteristics and observed species occurrence patterns. A
covariate-based SDM will make the same predictions for all locations with same covariates, even if
those locations are on different continents. Furthermore, covariates sets must be selected by hand
and are often limited in their spatial resolution and coverage.
By contrast, spatially explicit SDMs can model the fact that a species may be present in one location
and absent in another, even if those two locations have similar characteristics. However, spatially
explicit models are unlikely to generalize to locations that are spatially distant from the training data
– such locations are simply out of distribution.
Our proposed approach is spatially explicit, so our goal is not to learn from data in one location and
extrapolate to distant locations. Instead, our goal is to use abundant (but noisy and biased) species
observation data to approximate high-quality expert range maps. Our locations of interest are the
same during training and testing. The difference is the training data source and quality. See Merow
et al. (2014) for a more nuanced discussion of extrapolation vs. interpolation and the role of model
complexity in SDM.


B.3   T HE ROLE OF T IME

Some species are immobile (e.g. trees), while others (e.g. birds) may occupy different areas at dif-
ferent times of the year. For this reason, there has long been interest in the temporal dynamics of
species distributions (Collins & Glenn, 1991; Guisan & Rahbek, 2011). However, traditional SDMs
use environmental features as input, which seldom include temporal structure (Elith et al., 2020;
Norberg et al., 2019). For instance, the famous WorldClim bioclimatic variables used in many SDM
papers are non-temporal (Hijmans et al., 2005). It is therefore not unusual for papers on SDM to
make no explicit considerations for temporal information. Similarly, in this work we do not use
temporal information during training or evaluation. However, we consider this to be an interesting
area for future work.


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

C.1   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

Unless otherwise specified, we use the network in Figure A4 for our location encoder fθ . This is
identical to the architecture in Mac Aodha et al. (2019), and similar architectures have been used
for other tasks (Martinez et al., 2017). The right side of the figure shows the network structure,
consisting of one standard linear layer and four residual layers. The left side of the figure shows the
structure of a single residual layer. Note that all layers have the same number of nodes. Every layer
of the network has 256 nodes and we use p = 0.5 for the dropout probability.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2     T RAINING D ETAILS

Environment. All models were trained on an Amazon AWS p3.2xlarge instance with a Tesla
V100 GPU and 60 GB RAM. The model training code was written in PyTorch (v1.7.0).
Hyperparameters. All models were trained for 10 epochs using a batch size of 2048. We used the
Adam optimizer with an exponential learning rate decay schedule of

                 learning rate = initial learning rate× epoch0.98

where epoch ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 9}. For each model we tuned the learning rate over {1e−2, 1e−3, 1e−4}
and selected the model with the best validation performance on the “S&T” task. For LAN−full and
LGP we set λ = 2048.

                              a


                                   Linear                     x
                                   ReLU
                                   Dropout
                                                                    Linear
                                   Linear
                                                                    ReLU
                                   ReLU
                                                                    Residual Layer
                                                                    Residual Layer
                              b                                     Residual Layer
                                                                    Residual Layer


                                                             f(x)


                             a+b


Figure A4: Network diagram for the fully connected network (with residual connections) which we
use for our location encoder fθ .


C.3     BASELINES

C.3.1    L OGISTIC R EGRESSION WITH E NVIRONMENTAL C OVARIATES

This section discusses our implementation of logistic regression with environmental covariates,
whose performance is discussed in Appendix A.1.
The architecture for this approach is equivalent to using our method but replacing the location en-
coder fθ with the identity function. Then we can in principle use any of our loss functions for
training. All other training details follow Appendix C.2.
This approach uses environmental covariates as input, not raw coordinates. This means that environ-
mental covariates are required for both training and evaluation. We use the elevation and bioclimatic
rasters from WorldClim 2.1 (Fick & Hijmans, 2017) at the 5 arc-minute spatial resolution. We
normalize each covariate independently by subtracting the mean and dividing by standard devia-
tion (ignoring NaN values). We the replace NaN values with zeros. Note that we use these same
environmental covariates as the inputs to our model in Appendix A.1.

C.3.2    D ISCRETIZED G RID

Our baseline system for the S&T, IUCN, and Geo Prior tasks is a simple spatial binning method.
Once we choose a resolution level, the H3 geospatial indexing library (H3W) defines a collection
of W hexagons {H1 , . . . , HW } that partition the globe. For instance, W =2,016,830 at resolution
level 5. We show discretized grid results for a few different resolution choices in Table A1. Below
we describe the discretized grid baseline in more detail.
For the S&T and IUCN tasks, we can compute a score for any hexagon and species as follows:


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table A1: Discretized Grid baseline results on test data when using various hexagon resolution for
‘training’ the model. As this baseline does not learn a location encoder, it is not possible to evaluate
it on the Geo Feature task.
                                   Species Range IUCN Geo Prior Geo Feature
              Hex Res # / Cls.          MAP           MAP       ∆ Top-1           R2
              0            All          61.50         94.42        3.5              -
              1            All          70.05         90.43        4.1              -
              2            All          72.87         81.07        3.1              -
              3            All          62.85         69.22       -0.9              -


          1. We compute the number of occurrences of species j in hex w as
                                                         N
                                                                1[xi ∈Hw ] 1[zij =1]
                                                         X
                                                 nwj =                                              (5)
                                                          i=1

             for 1 ≤ w ≤ W and 1 ≤ j ≤ S.
          2. Let Ht be a hexagon we wish to evaluate at test time. For any species 1 ≤ j ≤ S, we
             compute a prediction for Ht as
                                                        ntj
                                            ŷj =                  .                          (6)
                                                  max1≤w≤W nwj

That is, ŷj measures how often species j was observed in Ht (relative to how often species j occurred
in the location where it was observed most often). These predictions always fall between 0 and 1,
which ensures that they are compatible with the average precision metrics we use for S&T and IUCN
evaluation.
For the Geo Prior task, the first step is the same but the second step is different:

          1. We the number of occurrences of species j in hex w as
                                                         N
                                                                1[xi ∈Hw ] 1[zij =1]
                                                         X
                                                 nwj =                                              (7)
                                                          i=1

             for 1 ≤ w ≤ W and 1 ≤ j ≤ S.
          2. Let Ht be a hexagon we wish to evaluate at test time. For any species 1 ≤ j ≤ S, we
             compute a prediction for Ht as
                                                        ŷj = 1[nwj >0] .                           (8)

That is, any species which were not observed in Ht are “ruled out” for the downstream image
classification problem.

D        T RAINING DATASET
D.1       DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

Our training data was collected by the users of the community science platform iNaturalist (iNa).
iNaturalist users take photographs of plants and animals, which they then upload to the platform.
Other users review these images and attempt to identify the species. The final species labels are
decided by the consensus of the community. Each species observation consists of an image and
associated metadata indicating when, where, and by whom the observation was made. iNaturalist
data only contains presence observations, i.e. we do not have access to any confirmed absences in
our training data.
Specifically, our training data was sourced from the iNaturalist AWS Open Dataset2 in May 2022.
We began by filtering the species observations according to the following rules:
    2
        https://github.com/inaturalist/inaturalist-open-data


                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                            105


                                                                                            104


                                                                                                  Num. training observations
                                                                                            103


                                                                                            102


                                                                                            101


                                                                                            100


Figure A5: Histogram of the locations of the observations from our iNaturalist training set. Here we
bin the data for all 35 million observations across all 47,375 species. Darker colors indicate fewer
observations, brighter colors indicate more. The training data is biased towards North America,
Europe, and New Zealand.


Figure A6: Summary statistics for our training data. (Left) Distribution of observations over species.
(Right) Distribution of observations over users.


        1. Observations must have valid valid longitude and latitude data.
        2. Observations must be identified to the species level by the iNaturalist community. Obser-
           vations which can only be identified to coarser levels of specificity are discarded.
        3. Observations must have research grade status, which indicates that there is a consensus
           from the iNaturalist community regarding their taxonomic identity.

After this filtering process, species with fewer than 50 observations were removed from the dataset.
We also remove any species which are marked as inactive3 . Finally, we only included observations
made prior to 2022. This will enable a temporal split from 2022 onward to be used as a test set in the
future. After filtering, we were left with 35,500,262 valid observations from 47,375 distinct species.
A visualization of the geographical distribution of the resulting data can be seen in Figure A5. As
Figure A6 shows, our training data is heavily imbalanced, reflecting the natural frequency with
which they are reported to iNaturalist (Van Horn et al., 2018).

D.2      C HANGING THE N UMBER OF T RAINING E XAMPLES PER C ATEGORY

In the main paper we consider the impact of the number of observations per species in the training
set by training on different sub-sampled datasets. We construct these datasets by choosing k obser-
   3
       https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/how+taxon+changes+work


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


vations per species, uniformly at random. We set a seed to ensure that we are always using the same
k observations per category. We also make certain that sampled datasets are nested, so the dataset
with k1 examples per category is a superset of the dataset with k2 < k1 examples per category. If a
category has fewer than k observations, we use them all.


D.3       C HANGING THE N UMBER OF T RAINING C ATEGORIES

In the main paper we also consider the impact of the number of species in the training set. In
particular, we consider the following nested subsets:

           • The set of 536 bird species in the eBird Status & Trends dataset (Fink et al., 2020).
           • The eBird Status & Trends species plus an additional A randomly selected species, where
             A ∈ {4000, 8000, 24000}.


E        E VALUATION TASKS

Here we provide additional details on the benchmark tasks used in the main paper. For each task,
we outline the dataset properties, how it was collected, and the evaluation metrics used.


E.1       S&T: E B IRD S TATS AND T RENDS

Task: The goal of this task is to evaluate how effective models trained on noisy crowdsourced
data from iNaturalist are at predicting species range maps. We use the eBird Status & Trends data
from Fink et al. (2020) to evaluate our range predictions. This dataset consists of estimated range
maps for 536 species of birds predominately found in North America, but also other regions. The
range maps are the output of an expert crafted model (Fink et al., 2020) that has been trained on
tens of millions of presence and absence observations, makes use of additional expert knowledge to
perform data filtering, and uses rich environmental covariates as input. While not without its own
limitations, we treat this data as ‘ground truth’ for evaluation purposes as it is developed using much
higher quality data compared to what we use to train our models.
Dataset: We perform several pre-processing steps on the raw data. We first spatially bin the data
using hexagons at resolution five as defined by the H3 project 4 . 2, 016, 842 hexagons cover the
world at this resolution, each with an average area of 252.9km2 . Our goal is to predict the presence
or absence of a given species in each hexagon using the eBird Status & Trends output as ‘psuedo’
ground truth. The evaluation regions are restricted to those where the eBird Status & Trends models
have determined that there is sufficient data to make a prediction for a given species. Thus, the
set of evaluation regions can vary from species to species. For example, Melozone aberti has
23,282 locations with known presence or absence, of which 271 are deemed present. On the other
hand, Columba livia has 67,251 locations with known presence or absence, of which 39,754
are deemed present.
The eBird Status & Trends data provides species presence and absence information for each location
over the course of the year. For the purposes of our evaluation, we collapse all time points to one,
and count a hexagon region as being a presence for a given bird if the output of their model is greater
than zero for any week in the year for that species.
We create a validation split by choosing 50% of the hexes with known presence/absence status
uniformly at random for each species. This is in line with the notion of generalization we care about.
That is, we want to know how well we can reproduce expert range maps from raw, potentially noisy,
data, not how well we can make predictions in previously unseen locations.
Evaluation: We use mean average precision (MAP) as our evaluation metric, only evaluating on
valid regions for a given species.

    4
        https://h3geo.org


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        Black Crake                                          Chiloe Wigeon

Figure A7: Here we show two example species from the IUNC range map evaluation task. The blue
points represent positive observations, i.e. where the expert generated range maps indicate that the
species is likely to be found. In contrast, the red points indicate absences.


E.2      ICUN: R ANGE M APS

Task: The goal of this task is similar to the previous one, i.e. to predict the geographical range of a
set of species. However, instead of ‘ground truth’ target maps that are estimated by another model,
here we use expert curated range maps from the International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) 5 . This set of data contains a more taxonomically diverse set of species compared to the
Stats and Trends task, as it contains mammal and fish species, among others, in addition to birds.
Dataset: We select a subset of 3,938 species that overlap with our training species. For each species,
we take the expert generated range polygon(s), which indicates the geographical range of a given
species, and sample a set of points inside the polygons(s) and denote them as presence observations.
In addition, we sample another set of points, uniformly at random outside those polygons(s) and
denote them as absence observations. In total, we sample 2,000 observations per species, half
presence and half absence. A visualization of the resulting sampling process is shown in Figure A7.
Note that the absolute performance on this dataset in Table 1 is often well above 90%. We believe
this is due to the fact that the absence samples are “easy” because many of them are far away
from the presence samples. Alternative sampling processes could have been used, e.g. with more
emphasis on the boundary regions between presence and absence areas as denoted by the expert
maps. However, as the expert maps cannot necessarily be assumed to be the objective ground truth
(i.e. species ranges can shift over time), we instead opted for the strategy outlined above.
Evaluation: Again we use mean average precision (MAP) as the evaluation metric, which results
in a single score for a model averaged across all species.

E.3      G EO P RIOR : G EOGRAPHICAL P RIORS FOR C OMPUTER V ISION

Task: The goal of this task is to combine the outputs of the models trained for species range esti-
mation on the iNaturalist dataset with computer vision image classifier predictions. This evaluation
protocol has also been explored in other work, e.g. Berg et al. (2014); Mac Aodha et al. (2019). We
simply weight the probabilistic image classifier predictions for a given image with the species occu-
pancy predictions from the location where that image was taken. The intuition is that the occupancy
prediction down-weights the probability of a given species being predicted by the vision model if
the range estimation model predicts that the species is not likely to be present at that location.
Dataset: For the vision classifier, we use an image classification model developed by the iNaturalist
community science platform 6 . This model is an Xception network (Chollet, 2017) that has been
trained on 55,000 different taxonomic entities (i.e. classes) from over 27 million images. We take
the predictions from the final classification layer of the classifier, and do not apply any of their
sophisticated taxonomic post-processing. There are a total of 49,333 species in the set of 55,000
classes, the rest are higher order groups, e.g. genera. The images used to train the image classifier
come from observations that were added to iNaturalist prior to December 2021.

   5
       https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/spatial-data-download
   6
       https://www.inaturalist.org/blog/63931-the-latest-computer-vision-model-updates


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We then constructed a test set consisting of all research grade observations (i.e. those observations
for which there is a consensus from the iNaturalist community as to which species is present in the
image). The images in the test set only contain the set of species that were observed at training
time, i.e. we do not consider the open-set prediction problem. The observations were selected from
between January and May 2022 to ensure that they did not overlap with the training set. We take at
most ten observations per species, which results in 282,974 total observations from 39,444 species.
In practice, many species do not have 10 observations. In total there are 2,721 species, with 9,808
total images, that are not present in our range estimation training set. For each of the 282,974
observations, we extract the predictions from the deep image classifier across all 39,444 remaining
species.
Evaluation: Performance is evaluated in terms of top-1 accuracy, where the ground truth species
label is provided by the iNaturalist community. Without using any information about where an
image was taken, the computer vision model alone obtains an accuracy of 75.4%, which increases to
90.4% for top-5 accuracy. During evaluation, if a species is not present in a range model, we simply
set the output for the range model for that species to 1.0.

E.4       G EO F EATURE : E NVIRONMENTAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

Task: This task aims to evaluate how well features extracted from deep models trained to perform
species range estimation can generalize to other dense spatial prediction tasks. Unlike the other
benchmark tasks that use the species occupancy outputs directly, this is a transfer learning task. We
remove the classification head hϕ and evaluate the trained location encoder fθ in terms of down-
stream environmental prediction tasks. The intuition is that a model that is effective at range esti-
mation may have learned a good representation of the local environment. If so, that representation
should be transferable to other environmental tasks with minimal adaptation.
This task is inspired by the linear evaluation protocol that is commonly used in self-supervised
learning, e.g. Chen et al. (2020). In that setting, the features of the backbone model are frozen
and a linear classifier is trained on them to evaluate how effective they are on various downstream
classification tasks. In our case, instead of classification, we aim to regress various continuous
environmental properties from the learned feature representations of our range estimation models.
A related evaluation protocol was recently used in Rolf et al. (2021) for the case of evaluating models
trained on remote sensing data.
Dataset: The task contains nine different environmental data layers which have been collected using
Google Earth Engine 7 . The nine data layers are described in Table A2. For each of the layers, we
have rasterized the data so that the entire globe is represented as a 2004 × 4008 pixel image. Each
pixel represents the measured value for a given layer for the geographical region encompassed by
the pixel. Example images can be seen in Figure A8.
Evaluation: For evaluation, we crop the region of interest to the contiguous United States and grid
it into training and test cells. The spatial resolution of the training and testing cells are illustrated
in Figure A8 (right). Note, we simply ignore locations that are not in the training or test sets, e.g.
the ocean. This results in 51,422 training points and 50,140 test points. Features are then extracted
from the location encoder for the spatial coordinates specified in the training split, and then a linear
ridge regressor is trained on the train pixels and evaluated on the held out test pixels. The input
features are normalized to the range [0, 1]. We cross validate the regularization weighting term
α of the regressor on the training set, exploring the set α ∈ {0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0}.
Performance is reported as the coefficient of determination R2 on the test pixels, averaged across all
nine layers.


F       R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The information needed to implement and train the models outlined in this paper are provided in
Section C. In addition, the different training losses evaluated are described in Section 3.2. Upon
acceptance, we will provide code to enable researchers to build on our results.

    7
        https://earthengine.google.com


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    160
                                                                           3500


                                    140
                                                                           3000

                                    120
                                                                           2500

                                    100


                                          Mg C/ha


                                                                                  meters
                                                                           2000

                                    80

                                                                           1500
                                    60

                                                                           1000
                                    40

                                                                           500                                    Ignore
                                    20
                                                                                                                  Train
                                                                                                                  Test
                                    0                                      0


        AGC: Above Ground Carbon                    ELE: Elevation                         Train / Test Split


Figure A8: Here we illustrate two of the nine evaluation layers used in the Geo Feature prediction
task (left and middle). On the right we indicate which regions contain pixels that are in the train or
test split, or simply ignored during evaluation.


Table A2: Description and sources of the nine environmental spatial layers that are part of our Geo
Feature prediction task.
  Name     Task                                                        Units                       Range
  AGC      Above ground living biomass carbon stock density            Mg C/ha                     0 to 129
           of combined woody and herbaceous cover in 2010.
           NASA/ORNL/biomass carbon density/v1                     -
           agb
  ELE      GMTED2010: Global multi-resolution terrain elevation        meters                      -457 to 8746
           data 2010. Masked to land only. USGS/GMTED2010 -
           be75
  LAI      The sum of the one-sided green leaf area per unit ground    (see previous)              0 to 65531
           area. JAXA/GCOM-C/L3/LAND/LAI/V2 - LAI AVE
           - 2020
  NTV      Percent of a pixel which is covered by non-tree vegeta-     %                           0 to 100
           tion. JAXA/GCOM-C/L3/LAND/LAI/V2 - LAI AVE
           - 20202
  NOV      Percent of a pixel which is not vegetated.                  %                           0 to 100
           MODIS/006/MOD44B - Percent NonVegetated
  POD      UN      adjusted    estimated    population      density.   # of persons / km2          0 to 778120
           CIESIN/GPWv411/GPW UNWPP-Adjusted
            Population Density                                     -
           unwpp-adjusted population density
  SNC      Normalized difference snow index snow cover.                (see previous)              0 to 100
           MODIS/006/MOD10A1 - NDSI Snow Cover -
           2019
  SOM      Soil moisture, derived using a one-dimensional soil wa-     mm                          0 to 8882
           ter balance model. IDAHO EPSCORTERRACLIMATE -
           soil - 2020
  TRC      The percentage of pixel area covered by                     %                           0 to 100
           trees.          NASA/MEASURES/GFCC/TC/v3                -
           tree canopy cover - 2000-2020


G    E THICS
This work makes use of species observation data provided by the iNaturalist community. We ex-
plicitly only use data from the public data exports from iNaturalist to ensure that no data, that is not
already available publicly, related to sensitive species (e.g. those who are at risk of extinction) is
used by our models. As noted in the limitations section in the main paper, extreme care needs to be
taken when attempting to interpret any species range predictions from the models presented in this
paper. The models have not been evaluated on those types of downstream tasks.


                                                      24
