Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T HE P LUG AND P LAY OF L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR
T EXT- TO - IMAGE G ENERATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT
             Text-to-image (T2I) models enable controllable image generation through user-
             provided captions. A text encoder is typically used to map captions to a latent
             space, and it has been shown to be critical for model’s performance. However, re-
             placing or upgrading the text encoder in a T2I model is challenging due to the tight
             bond between the current encoder and the image decoder. It requires training the
             model from scratch, which can be prohibitively expensive. To address this prob-
             lem, we introduce a more efficient approach to align a pre-trained language model
             with the latent space of an existing T2I model. We propose a Model Translation
             Network (MTN) and a new training objective to align the representation spaces of
             the two text encoders using only a corpus of unlabeled text. We empirically find
             that MTN can be trained efficiently and can boost the performance of existing T2I
             models by upgrading their text encoder. Moreover, we find that MTN can align
             multilingual language models such as XLM-Roberta, thus allowing existing T2I
             models to generate high-quality images from captions beyond English.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Text-to-image (T2I) generative models have made great progress in the last few years thanks to
algorithmic advances and the availability of large-scale paired training datasets (Ramesh et al.,
2022; Yu et al., 2022a; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022). Diffusion-based T2I generative
models in particular have achieved remarkable results in terms of image quality (Ho & Salimans,
2022; Nichol et al., 2021). Despite these strong results, controllable generation for these methods is
still challenging: generated images are often not faithful to the captions, compositional capabilities
are lacking, and prompt engineering is often required to achieve the desired results (Parsons, 2022).
Moreover, most large-scale models have only been trained on English captions, greatly limiting their
use across the world.
To improve T2I models, recent research suggests that the ability of their text encoders to understand
and represent text is critical and is a bottleneck for their image generation performance (Saharia
et al., 2022; Croitoru et al., 2022). Text encoders in existing T2I models are often trained only on
short image captions, and their performance on complex prompts can be largely constrained by the
quality of the features extracted by the text encoder (Rombach et al., 2022). However, upgrading
the text encoder for an existing T2I model is challenging because the representation spaces of the
text encoder and image generator are tightly coupled (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022).
Training only the text encoder on a more complex and representative text corpus would break this
alignment, hindering the final image generation performance. Training the entire T2I model from
scratch (perhaps with higher quality image-caption pairs) would be prohibitively expensive (Ed-
wards, 2022).1
To solve this problem, we propose a method that can efficiently align off-the-shelf pre-trained lan-
guage models with image encoders of existing diffusion-based T2I models. With this method, the
existing text encoder of T2I models can be replaced with a more powerful language model or even
one for a language other than English as illustrated in Fig. 1. Crucially, the representation alignment
between text and image encoders is maintained without retraining from scratch. We refer to our pro-
posed method as Model Translation Network (MTN). MTN follows an encoder-decoder structure.
Specifically, given a trained T2I model and a pre-trained language model that we want to replace, the
    1
        The cost of training a Stable Diffusion model is around 600K USD.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Obtaining                                                                                          Generated Image
                                                                   MTN Encoder
                                                                                            Image Generator


                      Advanced Language Models
    T5-L



                                                            New Text Encoder
 T5-3B
                                                      Aligning             Upgrading

                                                            Old Text Encoder
 XLM-
 Roberta                                                     Current Coupled
                                                              Text Encoder,
              …                                                 i.e., Bert         //
                                                 //                                         Text Conditioning
           <prompt>                                                                                             <prompt>='An astronaut riding a horse.’



Figure 1: Illustration of our desired modularized T2I generation. With the proposed Model Transla-
tion Network (MTN), the existing image generators can be bridged to off-the-shelf language models
to expand their functionalities, i.e, multilingual generation, within a limited budget.

encoder of MNT firstly aligns the representation space of the pre-trained language model with that
of the T2I model’s image generator, by minimizing both element-wise and global-wise discrepancy.
Then, the decoder of MNT takes the aligned text representations as inputs, and maps them back to
the original representation space of the pre-trained language model by minimizing the reconstruc-
tion loss. The reason why we need this decoder during training is that some recent research reveals
that training to align existing models inevitably decreases feature discriminability (Chen et al., 2019;
Cui et al., 2020). Therefore we need to preserve rich semantics captured by the pre-trained language
model during the alignment training, ensuring that a decoder can recover the original representation
space of the pre-trained language model from the aligned one. The entire training of MTN requires
only a corpus of unlabeled text. At inference time, only the encoder of MTN is applied on top of the
pre-trained language model for representation alignment.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework, we have applied a stronger language
model, i.e, T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020), to upgrade existing text encoders of the Latent Diffusion
Model (Rombach et al., 2022). The competitive improvements in the FID score and user study
ranking reveal the benefits of our model over the baselines. Furthermore, our model has the po-
tential to bring new functionalities into existing T2I models, such as multilingual text-to-image
generation. We empirically find that MTN can align a multilingual language model such as XLM-
Roberta-L (Conneau et al., 2019) with existing T2I models. It enables the existing image generator
to understand text beyond English, such as French and Chinese, and to generate high-quality images
accordingly.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
              • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to consider the problem of efficiently
                aligning a pre-trained language model with a pre-trained T2I diffusion model.
              • Extensive experiments on text-to-image generation benchmarks demonstrate the superi-
                ority of our model over the baseline LDM method on both image quality and language
                controllability.
              • Our framework also enables text-to-image generation beyond English prompts without the
                need of multilingual image-text pairs for retraining.


2          R ELATED W ORKS
2.1          T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is one of the major frameworks in
text-to-image generation. The method in (Reed et al., 2016) was an early stage approach to use
a GAN to train a text-to-image generation network. Since then, other GAN based methods, e.g,
Stack-GAN (Zhang et al., 2017), Attn-GAN (Xu et al., 2018) and SD-GAN (Yin et al., 2019), have
obtained promising results. In addition, recent works showed more improvements on the generation
quality. DM-GAN (Zhu et al., 2019) improved text-to-image performance by introducing a dynamic
memory component. DF-GAN (Tao et al., 2022) designed a fusion module to fuse text and image
features. LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2021) took advantage of CLIP’s model to construct pseudo image-
text pairs, and proposed a GAN model to learn text-image pairs.


                                                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Auto-regressive transformer is another major framework in text-to-image generation. DALL-E
(Ramesh et al., 2021) and CogView (Ding et al., 2021) adopted an autoregressive transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017) to train the correspondences between visual tokens and text tokens. Parti
(Yu et al., 2022a) used a powerful visual encoder, ViT-VQGAN (Yu et al., 2022b), to improve re-
sults upon DALL-E. The method in (Gafni et al., 2022) is similar to CogView and DALL-E, while
introducing additional controlling elements to improve the tokenization process. NÜWA (Wu et al.,
2022b) and NUWA-infinity (Wu et al., 2022a) trained autoregressive visual synthesis model to sup-
port both text-to-image and text-to-video generation tasks.
Concurrently, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al.,
2020) became a main research focus. In such methods, noise is added to an image, and a score
network is trained to denoise and recover the input image. GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021) performed
guided inference with and without a classifier network to generate high-fidelity images. DALL-
E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) set new state-of-the-art results in the
text-to-image generation. In DALL-E 2, a prior to produce CLIP image embeddings conditioned
on text was learned, and a diffusion model was used to decode the image embeddings to an image.
In Imagen, a frozen large-scale text encoder T5-XXL (Raffel et al., 2020) was adopted to generate
embeddings, and a cascade of conditional diffusion models was used to map these embeddings
to images of increasing resolutions. Latent diffusion model and stable diffusion model (Rombach
et al., 2022) are state-of-the-art methods that apply the diffusion model on the latent embedding
space as in (Sinha et al., 2021; Vahdat et al., 2021). These methods are computationally friendly
while achieving impressive results.

2.2   K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION AND C ROSS - LINGUAL A LIGNMENT

Knowledge distillation is a technique to guide the training of a student network with a reference
teacher network (Buciluǎ et al., 2006). (Hinton et al., 2014) applied probabilities of the teacher as a
target for the student to learn. Since then, many methods around the idea of “what knowledge to be
distilled” have been proposed. Popular definitions include distance of features (Romero et al., 2015),
map attention (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2017), distribution-wise distillation (Passalis & Tefas,
2018) and inter-sample distance structure (Tung & Mori, 2019), etc. Despite the great success, they
mainly focus on the classification task with discrete outputs and pay less attention to representation
protection. Translating dense and high-dimensional features between large-scale language models
requires new solutions.
Cross-lingual alignment methods attempt to align the representation across different languages based
on a multilingual text model (Kulshreshtha et al.; Cao et al., 2020). (Kulshreshtha et al.) has com-
prehensively explored the different alignment methods, including rotation and finetuning alignment.
(Cao et al., 2020) has modeled the contextual token-wise embeddings to aggregate richer informa-
tion for alignment. Our paper considers another problem in aligning different text models with the
same or parallel data. This is essentially different from cross-lingual alignment, with more compli-
cated and challenging mismatches such as feature dimensions and variant token lengths.


3     P RELIMINARY
3.1   L ATENT D IFFUSION M ODEL

The Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) and its extension, i.e, Stable Diffusion,
which are variants of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020) family, are
selected as our baseline models due to their excellent balance in efficiency and visual quality.
In general, LDM is composed of two stages. Firstly, there is an auto-encoder (AE) pre-trained
by enormous images with the regularization in either KL-divergence or vector quantization (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017; Agustsson et al., 2017). An encoder network, i.e, E, is applied for latent
feature extraction as z = E(x), which can be mapped back to image space by a decoder network.
The input images x and reconstructed images x̂ are almost identical x ≈ x̂.
Secondly, LDM trains a diffusion model in the latent space (Sinha et al., 2021; Vahdat et al., 2021).
It follows the standard DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) with denoising loss and uses U-net (Ronneberger
et al., 2015) as the image decoder as in (Song & Ermon, 2019). To enable generative controllability,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                               𝓛𝒂𝒅𝒗               "𝒔𝒓𝒄
                                                                                                                                  𝒙


                                                                                                                                                                     Model Translation Network (MTN)
 𝒙𝒕𝒂𝒓                      𝒙𝒕𝒂𝒓                                      𝒙𝒕𝒂𝒓                                                   𝑫             𝑵


              Mismatch                                     Matched                                                                                       𝒙𝒂𝒍𝒊𝒈𝒏

                                                                                                      𝒙𝒕𝒂𝒓
                                       Aligning                                                                                 𝓛𝒎𝒔𝒆      𝑴



                                                                                     Reconstruction    𝑭𝒕                          𝒙𝒔𝒓𝒄


                                                                                                                                                                          𝓛𝒓𝒆𝒄
              Transformation                             Transformation                                                                    𝑭𝒔
𝒙𝒔𝒓𝒄          by MTN Encoder
                                𝒙𝒂𝒍𝒊𝒈𝒏                   by MTN Decoder   #𝒔𝒓𝒄
                                                                          𝒙                                                                                        Fixed
                                                                                                      Fixed Old
                                                                                                      Text                                                         New Text
                                                                                                      Encoder                                                      Encoder

                               Closed-loop Consistency                                                      <Text Corpus>                 <Parallel Text Corpus>


                                        (a)                                                                                       (b)
Figure 2: (a): illustration of features transformation throughout the model translation. (b): the
general pipeline and learning objectives of our proposed model translation network (MTN).

LDM has applied multiple conditioning signals (y) such as text, mask, or layout, encoded aside and
injected into the U-net, with the help of cross-attention layers. This can be formulated as:
                               LLDM := Ez∼E(x),ε∼N (0,1),t,y [∥ε − εθ (zt , t, cϕ (y))∥] ,                                                                                                             (1)

where t represents the time step, zt is the noise corrupted latent tensor at time step t, and z0 = E(x).
ε is the unscaled Gaussian noise, cϕ is the conditioning network parameterized by ϕ and εθ is
the Unet-like denoising network (a.k.a, image decoder). The parameters of both conditioning and
denoising networks, i.e, θ, ϕ, are trained by the LDM loss. During inference, clean images can be
generated via classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) as:
                                      ε̂θ (zt |y) = εθ (zt ) + s · (εθ (zt , cϕ (y)) − εθ (zt )),                                                                                                      (2)
where s is the guidance weight to balance text controllability and image fidelity.
The basic T2I LDM model is trained on Laion-400M (Schuhmann et al., 2021) dataset. The Stable
Diffusion Model (SDM) was trained with more epochs and training data, i.e, Laion2B-en and Laion-
high-resolution.

3.2     L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR T2I

LDM uses Bert (Devlin et al., 2018) as the text encoder jointly trained with the image decoder
using the DDPM loss. SDM uses a pre-trained CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) text encoder frozen
during training. It has been found that increasing the size of the text encoder is very helpful for
performance (Saharia et al., 2022). In order to upgrade existing models, our goal is to be able to
efficienlty plug in more advanced language models such as T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020) with more
parameters or XLM-Roberta (Devlin et al., 2018) for multilingual T2I.


4       M ODEL T RANSLATION N ETWORK (MTN)
The text encoder is one of the key components of T2I models, as generation requires precise and fine-
grained text embedding for guidance. The overall performance can be greatly boosted by increasing
the size of the text encoder (Saharia et al., 2022), however, upgrading an existing text model to a
more powerful one is challenging. Because existing T2I models are not modular, directly replacing
(or augmenting with) another pre-trained language model does not work as seen in Fig. 9 (a). The
key technical challenge is the mis-alignment between the new language model and the old image
decoder. Moreover, joint finetuning also falls short due to catastrophic forgetting occuring when
updating well trained parameters.
Considering these two different text models as source and target domains, we apply a neural network
to learn to align. As shown in Fig. 2, to efficiently upgrade the text encoder and simultaneously
protect existing knowledge, this paper has presented a general framework called Model Translation
Network (MTN). MTN works as an additional module to bridge the new language model and the
old image decoder as seen in Fig. 1.


                                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1   O BJECTIVES

Given a set of text corpus X = {xij |i = 1, ..., M, j = 1, ..., N } with M as length of tokens and N as
total quantity, the source language model F s and a target text encoder F t have mapped the raw text
data into embeddings denoted as S = {sij |i = 1, ..., Ms , j = 1, ..., N } where sij = F s (xij ) ∈ Rds
and T = {tij |i = 1, .., Mt , j = 1, ..., N } where tij = F t (xij ) ∈ Rdt . Due to the different
models, there is severe distribution mismatch between the source and target features p(s) ̸= p(t).
The MTN is an autoencoder whose encoder M (·, ΘM ) learns to map the new text features from a
source language model, i.e, s ∈ S, to align with the current target text encoder, i.e, t ∈ T , where
                                                                 ΘM
p(M (s, ΘM )) ≈ p(t). Therefore, this translation (i.e, F s −→       F t ) enables the image generator
to understand the new text features coming from the new language model without finetuning. To
achieve this aim, we consider it as a domain adaptation (Ganin et al., 2016; Qin et al., 2019; Long
et al., 2018) problem and apply both element-wise and distribution-wise alignment losses, which
includes the minimization of the mean square error (MSE) loss, i.e, Lmse , and the adversarial loss,
i.e, Ladv , measured over a discriminator network, i.e, D(·, ΘD ):
      Lmse (ΘM ) :=Ext ∼Xt ,xs ∼Xs [||F t (xt ) − M (F s (xs ), ΘM )||22 ],                          (3)
                                         t                                        s
 Ladv (ΘD , ΘM ) :=Ext ∼Xt [log D(F (xt ), ΘD )] + Exs ∼Xs [log 1 − D(M (F (xs ), ΘM ), ΘD )],
                                                                                            (4)
where Xs and Xt denote the source and target inputs respectively and they can be the same prompts
in English (e.g, LDM-Bert → T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020)) or in bilingual but parallel content for
multilingual T2I generation.
Some insightful investigations in transfer learning reveal that the cross-domain alignment will in-
evitably decrease feature discrimination (Chen et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2020). To project the rich
semantics necessary for model upgrading, we further apply a decoder network, i.e, N (·, ΘN ), for
feature reconstruction:
                 Lrec (ΘM , ΘN ) := Exs ∼Xs [||xs − N (M (F s (xs ), ΘM ), ΘN )||22 ].               (5)

MTN is trained in an end-to-end manner and the details of which can be referred to in Algorithm 1
and Sec. 5. (Ma et al., 2022) introduced that a universal learning engine should seek a compressive
closed-loop transcription with good property in structure-preserving. Our cross-model mapping also
requires a similar functionality. MTN desires stability after a loop whose input and output should
                                       ˆ ≈ ..., due to the constraint of reconstruction loss. Therefore,
keep almost equivalent, i.e, x ≈ x̂ ≈ x̂
inputting the reconstructed data x̂ to MTN is expected to be consistent with the previous loop. This
is helpful for accelerating MTN training.

4.2   A RCHITECTURE OF M ODEL T RANSLATION N ETWORK

The input data to alignment can be repre-
                                                                            Residual Module     MLP Block
sented as the sequence of tokens: Xi,∗ =
{xi,1 , xi,2 , ..., xi,S } where Xi,∗ ∈ X and             Tail Net
                                                                           Transpose[dim1,dim2]   LN
          C                                                                                      Linear
xi,j ∈ R , with sequence length S and to-
                                                MTN Encoder or Decoder


                                                                              Token MLP          GELU
ken dim C. Inspired by the methods of                             Body Net
                                                                                                  LN
image super-resolution (Lim et al., 2017;        *N    Residual Module
                                                                                                 Linear
                                                                           Transpose[dim1,dim2]
Ahn et al., 2018) to densely regress target                                                      GELU
data under different input-output dimen-                                                          LN
                                                         Head Net              Seq MLP
sions, the translator network stacks three                                                       Linear
sub-nets in sequence, as seen in Fig. 3.
The head net is only used for simple fea-
ture transformation. The body net has Figure 3: Detailed architecture of Model Translation
many residual modules for fine-grained Network.
representation learning. The tail network
is appended and is mainly employed for dimension conversion to match the target tensors. Every
residual module is implemented based on the MLP-based token mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Ma
et al., 2021) with high efficiency and strong ability in representation learning. Within the MLP-
mixer block, it consists of a Token Mixer and a Sequence Mixer for orthometric purposes. The


                                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Token Mixer learns the representation of each token with shared MLP, and the Sequence Mixer is
designed for learning the same channel in sequential tokens:
                TokMixer : U·,i =X·,i + W2 σ(W1 ∗ LNγ1 ,β1 (X)·,i ), i = 1, ..., C        (6)
                SeqMixer : Xj,· =Xj,· + W4 σ(W3 ∗ LNγ2 ,β2 (U)j,· ), j = 1, ..., S        (7)
where X·,· is the feature, LNγ,β denotes layer normalization parameterized by γ and β, and σ
indicates the non-linear operator such as GELU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016).

5 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate our proposed framework for the monolingual and mul-
tilingual text-to-image generation upon upgrading the text encoder of pre-trained models. More
details can be referred to in Appendix.
5.1   E XPERIMENTS S ETUP
Upon the shoulders of giants, this paper applies the Latent-Diffusion Model (LDM) and Stable
Diffusion Model (SDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) as the baselines with a similar model but different
text encoders and scalabilities. LDM uses a Bert (Devlin et al., 2018) as the text encoder that
is jointly updated with the image decoder based on DDPM loss, while SDM uses a frozen pre-
trained CLIP text encoder during training. The LDM is designed for the images in 256 × 256 and
SDM targets 512 × 512 images. Considering our limitations in data and computation resources, the
experiments on monolingual T2I are based on LDM with a lower cost of text encoder upgrading
than that of SDM. We implement the multilingual T2I generation upon the SDM.
Implementation. The MTN is implemented as the Fig. 3 with an encoder M and a decoder N in
symmetrical architecture consisting ∼51M parameters. For simplicity in denotation, we refer MTN
encoder as MTN in the following experiments, whose body net consists of 5 residual modules as de-
fault. We take the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) as the optimizer based on PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019). The learning rate is assigned as 1×10−4 for MTN training and 1×10−6 for LDM-T5-
MTN finetuning. The MTN model is trained on Nvidia-A100-40GB, requiring 1 to 5 GPU days.
Language Models. We apply the T5-
3B (Raffel et al., 2020) to upgrade the             Image Quality       Text Controllability
text encoder of LDM Bert. T5-3B has
6x more parameters than LDM Bert and
is trained by an enormous text corpus be-
yond the image captions. Furthermore,
to enable multilingual T2I generation, we
choose the XLM-Roberta-L (Devlin et al.,
2018) as the new text encoder to let SDM
image decoder understand languages be-
yond English.
Datasets. We have collected the text data
for MTN training. In monolingual T2I, Figure 4: User study of text controllability and im-
only English texts are required, and we age quality with the prompts from Drawbench (Saharia
extract 18M captions from Laion-400M et al., 2022) and Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022).
as training corpus, and more data will be
more helpful. Multilingual MTNs require parallel texts in different languages. These data are col-
lected by Wikimarix (Schwenk et al., 2019) and Googletrans with ∼2M sentences for each.
Ablations. T5+MTN refers to the LDM model with the stacking of T5 and MTN as the text encoder
where the LDM image decoder is unchanged. T5+FT represents finetuning of the LDM image
decoder with DDPM loss based on text conditions from a fixed T5. T5+MTN+FT is the final
version, including both MTN and joint finetuning with the image decoder. The finetuning takes ∼
100 GPU days of 116M image-text pairs filtered from Laion-400M by BLIP score (Li et al., 2022).

5.2   M ONOLINGUAL T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION

Monolingual T2I generation focuses on the comparison with LDM given the English text prompts.
We have decomposed our pipeline into two stages: alignment and finetuning. MTN helps to align


                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          a painting by grant wood of                              darth vader playing-with   a person walking in a       a person walking in a
                                                                        a sign that says text to
                   a cube made of brick   an astronaut couple,                                     raccoon in mars during     field of red flowers with   field of yellow flowers   a horse getting wet
                                                                        image
                                          american gothic style                                    sunset                     a yellow dress              with a red dress


LDM Original
T5+FT
T5+MTN
T5+MTN+FT


Figure 5: Monolingual generation in resolution 256 × 256 with guidance weight 7.5 and DDIM
steps 200. The details of each method can be referred to in Sec. 5.1.

the new language model whose potential can be better exploited by further finetuning of image text
pairs. This section verifies the benefits of our vanilla and finetuned models in both quantitative and
qualitative evaluations.


5.2.1                      Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

Tab. 1 reported the zero-shot FID score (Heusel et al., 2017) on COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014)
based on the pyorch-fid (Seitzer, 2020) package. Our re-implementation score of LDM is slightly
higher than the paper’s one (Rombach et al., 2022), which may because of different implementations.
The table shows the minor drop of T5+MTN from LDM since our current MTN model still leaves
some incorrect alignments, which could be fixed by either joint finetuning or collecting more text
corpus to train MTN. With the ∼100 GPU-days finetuning of a subset of the Laion dataset (i.e, 116M
image-text pairs), the overall performance has been considerably improved, even outperforming the
LDM by certain margins.
We have also conducted a user study to com- Table 1: FID on COCO. * indicates our re-
pare the image quality and text controllabil- implemented results. ZS denotes zero-shot.
ity in Fig. 4 by Amazon Turk (Buhrmester                            Method                  FID↓ ZS
et al., 2011). There are ∼1K prompts col-              CogView (Ding et al., 2021)          27.10 %
lected from Drawbench (Saharia et al., 2022)
                                                       LAFTTE (Zhou et al., 2021)           26.94 %
and Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022), which
                                                       GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021)          12.24 %
comprehensively cover various scenarios and
numerous difficult cases. We report the per-           Make-A-Secne (Gafni et al., 2022) 11.84 %
centages of users’ votes for the three meth-           LDM (Rombach et al., 2022)           12.63 !
ods in Fig. 4. The study of image quality is           LDM*                                 13.55 !
designed to evaluate the resolution, cleanness,        T5+FT                                23.30 !
and smoothness of object boundaries, where             T5+MTN                               14.32 !
our method shows fragile superiority. In the           T5+MTN+FT                            12.05 !
user study of controllability, ours outperformed
the LDM by 3%, which is a non-trivial improvement. Moreover, the p-value 2 is computed as 0.04
with three repeats of user study that is statistically significant according to the criteria of <0.05.

               2
                   https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.binomtest.html


                                                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 English: portrait of a cat painted     Chinese: 毕加索画的猫的肖              German: Porträt einer Katze von     Ukrainian: портрет кота,            Italian: ritratto di un gatto dipinto
 by Picasso                             像油画                            Picasso gemalt                      написаний Пікассо                   da Picasso


Korean: 피카소가 그린 고양이                   Greek: πορτρέτο μιας γάτας  French: portrait d'un chat peint par   Spanish: retrato de un gato pintado    Japanese: ピカソが描いた猫
초상화                                   ζωγραφισμένη από τον Πικάσο Picasso                                por Picasso                            の肖像


Figure 6: Multilingual generation results in resolution 512 × 512 of XLM-Roberta + MTN + SDM
decoder (sd-v1-4) with the same caption, i.e, “portrait of a cat painted by Picasso”. With the help
of different MTNs and multilingual text encoder, the SDM decoder can support different languages
including Japanese, Ukraine, German, Italian, Korean, Greek, Chinese, French and Spanish. The
guidance weight is assigned as 7.5 and PLMS (Liu et al., 2022) sampling steps are 50.

5.2.2         V ISUAL C OMPARISON

In Fig. 5, we have exhibited some generated images of four different methods. By comparing T5+FT
and T5+MNT+FT with similar finetuning costs (100 GPU-days), we can conclude that the proposed
MNT helps save much effort in plugging a new language model due to the high-quality images.
Moreover, the T5+MNT+FT shows stronger controllability in many cases compared with LDM,
such as “a cube made of brick” and “a horse getting wet”, whereas the LDM’s results fail to display
the concepts of “cube” and “wet”.

5.3       M ULTILINGUAL T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION

Our proposed framework is very general and generic to many language models, including the mul-
tilingual backbones. We choose the recent SDM as our base model with the pre-trained clip-vit-
large-patch14 as the text encoder to be upgraded by the multilingual one, i.e, XLM-Roberta-L. The
MTN helps to align such two backbones with the parallel corpus as training data. Thus, the old
SDM image decoder can successfully understand the text embeddings of other languages encoded
by MTN and XLM-Roberta-L without any additional parameters updating except MTN.

5.3.1         V ISUAL C OMPARISON

Fig. 6 shows the example of multilingual generation results with the prompt “portrait of a cat painted
by Picasso” in many languages. Most of the results reveal the content of “portrait of a cat painted”.
The “Picasso” is a challenging notion that rarely appears in our training data. Thus, more high-
quality parallel data will be greatly helpful. Compared with those finetuned over multilingual image
text pairs, our solution is far more efficient and cheaper.

5.3.2         H YBRID M ULTILINGUAL G ENERATION

The hybrid multilingual generation is more challenging that both the original SDM and third-party
translation toolbox cannot address. Our proposed MTN has surprising capability in this problem.
According to the results in Fig. 7, the multilingual backbone bonded with MTN gives the precise
guide to the SDM decoder even with the prompts in three different languages and randomly mixed.

5.4       A LIGNMENT A NALYSIS


                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      “彩⾊的, ピカソが描いた猫, sit on a table, 在吃东⻄”                            “⼀辆⽩⾊的, セダン, crash into a building”


        Stable Diffusion               XLM-Roberta+MTN               Stable Diffusion                 XLM-Roberta+MTN
                             (a)                                                              (b)
Figure 7: Hybrid multilingual generation in resolution of 512 × 512. There are three-different-
language texts in the input caption including Chinese, Japanese and English. The caption of (a) is
“colorful, a cat painted by Picasso, sit on a table, is eating food” and the caption of (b) is “a white,
sedan, crash into a building”. With our MTN infused ahead, the XLM-Roberta can guide SDM
decoder to generate reasonable results where the original SDM fails to work.
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                             Loss- mse
                                                                                                                                             Loss- rec



                                                                                                            10 0


                                                                                                     Loss
                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                            10


                                                                                                                      0   100    200   300     400       500

      w/o MTN              50-th MTN         150-th MTN         300-th MTN              500-th MTN                              Iterations

        (a)                                               (b)                                                                     (c)
Figure 9: Alignment analysis. (a): Initial result of direct replacement of a new text encoder, i.e,
LDM-Bert → T5-3B. (b): Results of MTN in different iterations with the new text backbone. The
prompt is “an astronaut riding a horse as a pencil drawing”. (c): Curve of Lmse and Lrec in training.
To understand how MTN maps the cross-
model features, we have visualized its tra-
jectory with the generative results in dif-
ferent iterations in Fig. 9. In the begin-
ning, the old image decoder could not
understand the new text embeddings at
all. Then, certain patterns such as “pen-
                                                   w/o MTN       MTN+5RMs       MTN+10RMs
cil drawing” appear after 300 iterations
of training with a significant decrease in
losses. Such a gap can finally be sealed at Figure 8: t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008)
the end where both Lmse and Lrec con- cross-model feature map visualization.
verged to small values.

5.5    T-SNE F EATURE M APS WITH D IFFERENT MTN S IZES

Fig. 8 illustrates the feature maps of different text encoders. Source features are collected from
LDM-Bert and target ones are achieved by T5-3B with the shared prompts from Drawbench and
Winoground. RMs represents the number of the residual modules. We can see that MTNs’ features
are precisely aligned with those of the source text model. There is no much difference between
larger and smaller MTNs. Considering efficiency, we choose the MTN-5RMs as the default model.

6     C ONCLUSION
Infusing the pre-trained language models into the existing T2I image generator is an existing di-
rection toward a more powerful AI system. However, the current text encoder cannot be easily
upgraded due to the tight match. This paper attempts to break such a strong constraint of the corre-
sponding image-text models towards flexible modularization and efficient upgrading. To address the
severe misalignment, we have proposed the model translation network (MTN) with both objectives
for cross-model alignment and originality protection. Empirically, it is beneficial for the overall
performance and enables versatile functionalities such as multilingual generation within a limited
budget. We wish this work to be inspirable to the community in large-scale AI system design.


                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Eirikur Agustsson, Fabian Mentzer, Michael Tschannen, Lukas Cavigelli, Radu Timofte, Luca
  Benini, and Luc Van Gool. Soft-to-hard vector quantization for end-to-end learned compression
  of images and neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00648, 3, 2017.
Namhyuk Ahn, Byungkon Kang, and Kyung-Ah Sohn. Fast, accurate, and lightweight super-
  resolution with cascading residual network. In ECCV, 2018.
Cristian Buciluǎ, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. Model compression. In SIGKDD,
  2006.
Michael Buhrmester, Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D. Gosling. Amazon’s mechanical turk: A new
 source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 2011.
Steven Cao, Nikita Kitaev, and Dan Klein. Multilingual alignment of contextual word representa-
  tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03518, 2020.
Xinyang Chen, Sinan Wang, Mingsheng Long, and Jianmin Wang. Transferability vs. discriminabil-
  ity: Batch spectral penalization for adversarial domain adaptation. In ICML, 2019.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek,
  Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Un-
  supervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.
Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models in
  vision: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04747, 2022.
Shuhao Cui, Shuhui Wang, Junbao Zhuo, Liang Li, Qingming Huang, and Qi Tian. Towards dis-
  criminability and diversity: Batch nuclear-norm maximization under label insufficient situations.
  In CVPR, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 NeurIPS, 2021.
Benj Edwards. With stable diffusion, you may never believe what you see online again, Sep
  2022. URL https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2022/09/
  with-stable-diffusion-you-may-never-believe-what-you-see-online-again/.
Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky, Siddharth Goyal, Man-
  deep Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav Chaudhary, et al. Beyond english-centric
  multilingual machine translation. JMLR, 2021.
Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman.
  Make-a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.13131, 2022.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. JMLR, 2016.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. NeurIPS, 2014.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.           Gaussian error linear units (gelus).     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. NeurIPS,
 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In
  NeurIPSW, 2014.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS,
  2020.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773. If you use this software, please cite it as below.
Saurabh Kulshreshtha, Jose Luis Redondo Garcia, and Ching-Yun Chang. Cross-lingual alignment
  methods for multilingual BERT: A comparative study.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.12086, 2022.
Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Enhanced deep resid-
  ual networks for single image super-resolution. In CVPRW, 2017.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09778, 2022.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Conditional adversarial
 domain adaptation. NeurIPS, 2018.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Xu Ma, Can Qin, Haoxuan You, Haoxi Ran, and Yun Fu. Rethinking network design and local
  geometry in point cloud: A simple residual mlp framework. In ICLR, 2021.
Yi Ma, Doris Tsao, and Heung-Yeung Shum. On the principles of parsimony and self-consistency
  for the emergence of intelligence. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering,
  2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Guy Parsons.     Dall-e 2 prompt                book.         https://dallery.gallery/
  the-dalle-2-prompt-book/, 2022.
Nikolaos Passalis and Anastasios Tefas. Learning deep representations with probabilistic knowledge
  transfer. In ECCV, 2018.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In NeurIPS. 2019.
Can Qin, Haoxuan You, Lichen Wang, C-C Jay Kuo, and Yun Fu. Pointdan: A multi-scale 3d
  domain adaption network for point cloud representation. NeurIPS, 2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. JMLR, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.
  Generative adversarial text-to-image synthesis. In ICML, 2016.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Adriana Romero, Nicolas Ballas, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Antoine Chassang, Carlo Gatta, and
  Yoshua Bengio. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. In ICLR, 2015.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In MICCAI, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Holger Schwenk, Vishrav Chaudhary, Shuo Sun, Hongyu Gong, and Francisco Guzmán. Wiki-
  matrix: Mining 135m parallel sentences in 1620 language pairs from wikipedia. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.05791, 2019.
Maximilian Seitzer. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/mseitzer/
 pytorch-fid, August 2020. Version 0.2.1.
Abhishek Sinha, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. D2c: Diffusion-decoding mod-
  els for few-shot conditional generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  12533–12548, 2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, 2015.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  NeurIPS, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Ming Tao, Hao Tang, Fei Wu, Xiao-Yuan Jing, Bing-Kun Bao, and Changsheng Xu. Df-gan: A
 simple and effective baseline for text-to-image synthesis. In CVPR, 2022.
Ashish V Thapliyal, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Xi Chen, and Radu Soricut. Crossmodal-3600: A massively
  multilingual multimodal evaluation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12522, 2022.
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and
  Candace Ross. Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic composi-
  tionality. In CVPR, 2022.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. Mlp-mixer: An
   all-mlp architecture for vision. NeurIPS, 2021.
Frederick Tung and Greg Mori. Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation. In CVPR, 2019.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space.
  NeurIPS, 34:11287–11302, 2021.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. NeurIPS, 2017.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. JMLR, 2008.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan Gomez, and
  Laukasz Kaiser. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.
Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Xiaowei Hu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Lijuuan Wang, Zicheng Liu, Yuejian
  Fang, and Nan Duan. Nuwa-infinity: Autoregressive over autoregressive generation for infinite
  visual synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09814, 2022a.
Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. NÜwa: Visual
  synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In ECCV, 2022b.
Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong
  He. Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial net-
  works. In CVPR, 2018.
Guojun Yin, Bin Liu, Lu Sheng, Nenghai Yu, Xiaogang Wang, and Jing Shao. Semantics disentan-
  gling for text-to-image generation. In CVPR, 2019.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022a.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku,
   Yuanzhong Xu, Baldridge Jason, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with im-
   proved vqgan. In ICLR, 2022b.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Paying more attention to attention: Improving the perfor-
  mance of convolutional neural networks via attention transfer. In ICLR, 2017.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris
  Metaxas. Stackgan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial
  networks. In ICCV, 2017.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang Gu,
  Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. Lafite: Towards language-free training for text-to-image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13792, 2021.
Minfeng Zhu, Pingbo Pan, Wei Chen, and Yi Yang. Dm-gan: Dynamic memory generative adver-
 sarial networks for text-to-image synthesis. In CVPR, 2019.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
This paper strictly follows the ICLR ethical research standards and laws. All datasets we employed
are publicly available, and all related publications and source codes are cited appropriately.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We adhere to ICLR reproducibility standards and ensure the reproducibility of our work in multiple
ways, including:

      • Besides the codes, we will share the our processed data and model checkpoints to the
        public.
      • We clearly present the design of MTN and joint finetuning in Section 5.1 and Section 4.2
      • Detailed framework and more experiments are presented in Supplementary Materials.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ETAILS OF M ODEL T RANSLATION N ETWORK (MTN)

Model Translation Network (MTN) is the key contribution of this paper, which needs to address
both cross-model alignment and feature protection. In this section, we will provide more details of
the MTN, including implementation/configuration, analysis of sizes, and other ablation studies.

A.1   A RCHITECTURE AND C ONFIGURATION

We have introduced the basic architecture of MTN in Sec. 4.2 in the main paper. MTN could have
variants in different sizes whose configurations can be referred to in Tab. 2. The MTN with three
residual modules is the smaller one, with 34M parameters in its encoder. The MTN-5RMs has 51M
parameters. In general, larger-size models inevitably result in slower speed and more computation
costs. Considering the sizes of the image decoder and text encoder as the basis, the MTN, working
as an injected module, should not be larger than these major characters. Otherwise, the inference
speed will be significantly slower, and it may need huge computations in the finetuning stage. We
empirically found that assigning RM as five is a satisfactory choice. The MTN-3RMs seems too
weak in representation learning. Except for the MLP-mixer, the self-attention-based model may
also be applied for implementing MTN. Exploring more suitable architectures of MTN is our future
work.


Table 2: Model configurations for our MTN. We introduce two configurations of MTN-3RMs and
MTN-5RMs.
    Stage     Dimensions        Block        MTN-3RMs                MTN-5RMs 
                                              Linear, LN, σ             Linear, LN, σ
                                Token       Linear, LN, σ           Linear, LN, σ 
  Head Net         77
                                 MLP
                                               Linear, LN                Linear, LN
                                                                                   
                                              Linear, LN, σ             Linear, LN, σ
                               Sequence     Linear, LN, σ           Linear, LN, σ 
                 1024
                                 MLP
                                               Linear, LN                Linear, LN
                                                                                 
                                            Linear, LN, σ             Linear, LN, σ
                                Token     Linear, LN, σ  × 3 Linear, LN, σ  × 5
  Body Net         77
                                 MLP
                                             Linear, LN                Linear, LN
                                                                                 
                                            Linear, LN, σ             Linear, LN, σ
                               Sequence 
                 1024                       Linear, LN, σ  × 3 Linear, LN, σ  × 5
                                 MLP
                                             Linear, LN                Linear, LN
                                                                                   
                                              Linear, LN, σ             Linear, LN, σ
                                Token       Linear, LN, σ           Linear, LN, σ 
  Tail Net         77
                                 MLP
                                               Linear, LN                Linear, LN
                                                                                   
                                              Linear, LN, σ             Linear, LN, σ
                               Sequence     Linear, LN, σ           Linear, LN, σ 
                 1280
                                 MLP
                                               Linear, LN                Linear, LN



A.2   E FFECTS OF MTN S IZES

Fig. 10 shows a visual comparison of some example prompts over three different methods. The
LDM Ori refers to the original LDM model with the checkpoint shared in its repo. MTN-3RMs and
MTN-5RMs are our models with 3 or 5 residual modules inside their body nets. The text encoder
is replaced as the T5-3B, and the image decoder is the same as LDM Ori. Both MTN models are
trained by the same text corpus, including 18M sentences. From the figure, we can notice that MTN-
3RMs fails on some complicated prompts such as “a virus monster is playing guitar, oil on canvas”
and “there is a penguin with a dog head standing” where the MTN-5RMs performs well. Therefore,
we can conclude that deep MTN is necessary for precise alignment.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         LDM Ori                    MTN-3RMs                MTN-5RMs


   a blue car


  an astronaut
  riding a horse
  as a pencil
  drawing


 a virus
 monster is
 playing
 guitar, oil on
 canvas



 there is a
 penguin with
 a dog head
 standing



Figure 10: Monolingual generation of example prompts in 256 × 256 with guidance weight 7.5 and
DDIM steps 200.


A.3   A BLATION OF L OSSES

To analyze the impacts of different losses, we visualize their t-SNE map in Fig. 11. We can notice
that just MSE loss cannot well align the feature of the two models. The reconstruction loss is
vital to keep discrimination and avoid overfitting. The adversarial loss seems not to show much
improvement in the figure. According to our empirical study, adversarial loss only brings limited
gains.
We have conducted the quantitative ablation study on a subset of COCO with 5k data randomly
selected. We chose T5-3B as the text encoder aligned with the LDM Unet with our MTN. FT
denotes the finetuning of Unet. We have reported the FID and CLIP scores in the following table
for comparison of image quality and image-text alignment. The testing data are inferred by DDIM
with 200 steps. The image size is 256×256. For a comprehensive analysis, the experiments are over


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    𝓛𝒎𝒔𝒆                          𝓛𝒎𝒔𝒆 + 𝓛𝒓𝒆𝒄             𝓛𝒎𝒔𝒆 + 𝓛𝒓𝒆𝒄 + 𝓛𝒂𝒅𝒗


    Figure 11: t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) cross-model feature map visualization.


               Table 3: Ablation study of T5+MTN+LDM over the 5K COCO subset

                    Ablations                             s=1.5           s=5              s=7.5
    loss-mse   loss-rec   loss-adv   Finetuning    CLIP↑      FID↓    CLIP↑    FID↓    CLIP↑    FID↓
       %          %          %           %         10.70      98.17   10.75   141.19   11.00   156.70
       %          %          %           !         18.98      35.76   22.05    49.14   22.49    53.11
       !          %          %           %         20.40      34.41   23.01    48.67   23.40    52.78
       !          !          %           %         20.53      33.14   23.23    45.96   23.57    48.67
       !          !          !           %         20.67      32.80   23.24    45.48   23.74    48.51
       !          !          !           !         21.14      30.93   23.88    41.92   24.17    44.58



three classifier-free guidances with s=1.5, 5, and 7.5 according to Eq. (2). The Tab 3 summarizes
the results of our ablation study. The first row represents the direct combination of T5 and LDM,
whose results do not make sense due to the severe misalignment. T5+LDM trained from scratch
can be referred to in the second row. The finetuning of Unet takes 100 GPU Days, whereas MTN
training needs only 5 GPU Days. Even with a ten times higher cost, its result is still inferior to those
of MTNs’. By comparing the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th rows, we can easily conclude the superiority of
the full-version model.

A.4   H YPER - PARAMETER A NALYSIS

More analysis of hyper-parameters is included here. The learning rate is one of the most important
sensitive hyper-parameters. In Tab. 4, we explored the different learning rates to try MTN to transfer
OpenClip-L to Clip-L for Stable Diffusion. It is benchmarking on the average CLIP score with 500
generative samples in the size of 512 × 512.

A.5   C LOSED - LOOP C ONSISTENCY

The closed-loop consistency is a helpful technique to accelerate MTN training. We have briefly
introduced it in Sec 4.1 in the main paper. Here, we provide more details as illustrated in Fig. 12.
The Fig. 13 and A.5 visualize the curves of alignment and reconstruction losses during training.

B     M ONOLINGUAL T2I G ENERATION
B.1   L ATENT D IFFUSION M ODEL

As seen in Fig. 15 and 16, we demonstrate more example results with the challenging prompts from
Drawbench (Saharia et al., 2022) and Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022). The baseline methods are
the original LDM and the finetuned LDM equipped with T5 as the text encoder. We can catch that
the images of T5+MTN+FT are better aligned with the text and reasonable in the layout of different
objects.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Table 4: Analysis of learning rate of MTN in OpenClip → CLIP.

                                       lr=1e-3                                  lr=1e-4       lr=1e-5   lr=1e-6
                             CLIP↑      27.27                                    29.53         27.17     19.40



                "𝒔𝒓𝒄
                𝒙                                                                 #𝒔𝒓𝒄
                                                                                  "
                                                                                  𝒙


                                                                                                          Model Transla,on Network (MTN)
                                        Model Transla,on Network (MTN)
                        𝑵                                                                 𝑵

                       𝓛𝒂𝒍𝒊𝒈𝒏                                                            𝓛𝒂𝒍𝒊𝒈𝒏


                                                                                                                                           𝓛𝒓𝒆𝒄
                                                                         𝓛𝒓𝒆𝒄
                        𝑴                                                                 𝑴



               𝒙𝒔𝒓𝒄                                                                "𝒔𝒓𝒄
                                                                                   𝒙                                                              …


                            Figure 12: Illustration of Closed-loop Consistency.


B.2   S TUDY OF D IFFERENT T EXT E NCODERS

our proposed framework is generic to a wide range of text encoders. In this subsection, we have
tried many different language models as the text encoder, including Bert-base (110M #params),
Roberta-Large (355M #params), Clip-text (123M #params), T5-large (770M #params) and T5-3B
(2.8B #params). All these pre-trained text encoders are aligned with the Latent Diffusion Model
(LDM) with our proposed model to replace the original LDM text encoder without any finetuning
of the LDM UNet.
These plug-and-play models are verified on a subset of COCO with 5k samples randomly selected.
We have reported the FID and CLIP scores in the following table for comparison of image quality
and image-text alignment. All the model translation networks (MTN) are trained by 18M sentences
sampled from the captions of Laion-400M. The testing data are inferred by DDIM with 200 steps.
The image size is 256×256. For a comprehensive analysis, we have conducted the experiments on
three classifier-free guidance with s=1.5 and 5. The results are summarized in Tab. 5.
From the table, we can notice that both FID and CLIP have increased with the rise of text model
sizes which is well aligned with the conclusion of Imagen(Saharia et al., 2022). The CLIP-text does
not perform well here due to the larger domain gap with text-only text models such as Bert.


B.3   M ODEL T RANSFER ACROSS VARIANT T OKEN L ENGTHS

MTN has a strong ability to overcome different lengths. The token number is assigned as 77, which
is fixed in both LDM and SDM. Our proposed MTN can overcome the variant length text encoders
without any finetuning of the Unet model. We have completed the experimental study and reported
its result in the Tab. 6 to verify this point. In this experiment, we have applied Roberta-L and its
tokenizers encoding maximum tokens in 77, 128, and 256, respectively. The guidance is 5, and other
settings follow the Tab. 3.


B.4   S TABLE D IFFUSION M ODEL

To illustrate the generics of our proposed framework, we also apply the T5-L to replace the CLIP
text encoder of Stable Diffusion (v1-4). As shown in Fig. 17, our model has revealed precise control-
lability and excellent visual quality compared with the standard Stable Diffusion model. Improving
Stable Diffusion with efficient finetuning is our following focus.


                                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          10 1                                                             10 1
                                                 Loss- mse                                                           Loss- mse
                                                 Loss- rec                                                           Loss- rec


                                                                                0
                                                                           10
          10 0


                                                                    Loss
   Loss


                                                                                -1
                                                                           10


               -1
          10

                                                                                -2
                                                                           10
                    0      100    200      300    400        500                     0   100     200   300     400     500       600
                                 Iterations                                                       Iterations

      Figure 13: with Closed-loop Consistency.                          Figure 14: without Closed-loop Consistency.


                        Table 5: Analysis of Different Text Encoders over the 5K COCO subset.

                    Bert-B (110M)       Roberta-L (355M)      CLIP-Text (123M)                 T5-L (770M)       T5-3B (2.8B)
                    CLIP↑     FID↓      CLIP↑    FID↓         CLIP↑              FID↓          CLIP↑   FID↓     CLIP↑        FID↓
  s=1.5             19.42     37.46     20.03    34.06        19.02              38.93         19.78   35.17    20.67        32.80
   s=5              21.97     55.35     22.85    45.88        21.85              47.32         22.76   47.91    23.24        45.48
  s=7.5             22.68     55.21     23.25    48.96        22.38              49.66         23.23   50.02    23.74        48.51



We also have applied OpenCLIP-L-14 to replace CLIP-L-14 with the similar architecture on Stable
Diffusion. The quantitative evaluation is reported in Tab. 7. This is tested on COCO-5k with the
guidance as 5.

B.5       C OMPUTATION C OST VS P ERFORMANCE

The conditional generation itself is a very challenging task where how the text encoder aligns with
image Unet still needs to be discovered. We empirically find that replacing the text encoder can
achieve the comparable results with the source model, but it takes a lot of effort to outperform it.
The Unet may cause this as the bottleneck. In this section, we share a precise cost of computations
with the different sizes of the training set in Tab. 8. This is benchmarked as the same as previous
experiments on COCO-5K with T5-3B to replace the LDM text encoder with MTN. From the table,
we can see that the performance has increased with the rise of data as well as the computation cost.
Moreover, we also include T5+LDM trained from scratch as a baseline. For a fair comparison, we
have tried our best to train the T5+LDM with ∼140 GPU Days which is comparable with the sum
of MTN116 and MTN116+FT. The results are shown in Tab. 9.


                                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Model Transfer with variant token lengths (SrcTokenLength →TargetTokenLength) over
the 5K COCO subset with the guidance as 5. Roberta-L (Liu et al., 2019) is applied as the new text
encoder to replace LDM text encoder.

                                          77→77      128→77        256→77
                                 CLIP↑     22.85      23.19         23.37
                                 FID↓      45.88      45.67         45.53



Table 7: Transfer from OpenCLIP-L-14 (Ilharco et al., 2021) to CLIP-L-14 on Stable Diffusion.

                                                           CLIP↑     FID↓
                                OpenCLIP+MTN+SDM           24.66     36.18
                                   CLIP (Ori SDM)          25.53     35.34



C        M ULTILINGUAL T2I G ENERATION
To verify the functionalities for multilingual T2I generation, we have shown more results in Fig. 18
and Fig. 19. There is one MTN for one language. To build an automatic pipeline, the model is
expected to choose which MTN to use according to the detection of incoming languages.

C.1       C OMPARISON WITH M ULTILINGUAL T RANSLATION M ODEL

Our proposed framework is model agnostic which should be able to overcome variants domain gaps
between models and languages. The cross-lingual alignment is applied as verification of proof of
concept. Compared with the standard translation + DM, our proposed MTN needs less training
and fewer parameters to train. For quantitative evaluation, we have compared it with a popular
multilingual translation model M2M100-418M (Fan et al., 2021) (418M #params) trained by 7.5B
parallel sentences. In contrast, our MTN uses far fewer training data ( 2M sentences for each pair).
The results are listed in Tab. 10 where we reported the Multilingual-CLIP score 3 calculated over the
100 randomly selected multilingual image-caption pairs from Crossmodal dataset (Thapliyal et al.,
2022). All the images are sampled by PLMS (Liu et al., 2022) with 50 steps in the resolution of 512
× 512.
The cosine similarity of Multilingual-CLIP text and image embeddings is reported here. From
the Tab. 10, we can see that the MTN is only slightly weaker than M2M-418M despite the huge
efficiency in training data. Such a result reflects the great potential of MTN in multilingual T2I by
aligning the cross-lingual model with the consideration of data efficiency.


    3
        https://huggingface.co/M-CLIP/XLM-Roberta-Large-Vit-L-14


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Table 8: Analysis of MTN’s training cost.

                                                    Data Size
                                             5M      18M 116M
                               CLIP↑        20.92    23.24 23.71
                               FID↓         48.63    45.48 43.17
                             GPU Days↓       1.67     5.89    41.20


                    Table 9: Analysis of Performance and Computation Cost

                                             CLIP↑      FID↓    GPU Days↓
                            LDM              23.79      42.83        -
                           T5 + FT           23.29      45.62     ∼140
                        T5 + MTN18M          23.24      45.48      5.89
                     T5 + MTN18M + FT        23.88      41.92     ∼100
                       T5 + MTN116M          23.71      43.17     41.20
                     T5 + MTN116M + FT       24.14      41.53     ∼100


Table 10: Comparison with translation model, i.e, M2M100-418M (Fan et al., 2021), for multilin-
gual generation. The Multilingual-CLIP↑ score over Crossmodal (Thapliyal et al., 2022) benchmark
is reported here.

                            M2M100-418M+SDM           XLM-Roberta+MTN+SDM
                Chinese          24.50                        22.01
                Franch           25.08                        23.09
                Spanish          23.83                        22.91
                Korean           22.35                        21.46
               Japanese          23.73                        23.99
               Ukrainian         23.99                        22.81
                 Italian         21.08                        22.40


                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    LDM Original           T5+FT           T5+MTN           T5+MTN+FT



 A green colored
 banana.


 A pink colored
 car.



 A stop sign
 on the right
 of a
 refrigerator.


 An elephant
 under the sea.


 New York
 skyline with
 “hello world”
 written with
 fireworks on the
 sky.

Figure 15: Monolingual generation of Drawbench prompts in 256 × 256 with guidance weight 7.5
and DDIM steps 200.


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   LDM Original           T5+FT             T5+MTN           T5+MTN+FT

 A blanket is
 on a dog with
 spots.



 A child with
 a fake beard
 and an adult.


 A human
 being on a
 device that
 intercepts the
 sun’s rays.


 A parked car
 is partially
 inside a tree.



 A person is
 close to the
 water and in
 the sand.



 A person
 stands and
 a dog sits.



  Blue
  pants and
  green top.



  Wood
  floors with
  concrete-
  walls.


Figure 16: Monolingual generation of Winoground prompts in 256 × 256 with guidance weight 7.5
and DDIM steps 200.
                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Stable Diffusion (v1-4)                     T5-L + MTN


 “An astronaut
 riding a horse.”


 “A pink car.”


 “A shark in the
 dessert.”


Figure 17: Monolingual generation of example prompts in 512 × 512 with guidance weight 7.5 and
50 PLMS (Liu et al., 2022) sampling steps.


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Chinese: 蓝⾊的车                    Korean:파란 차               German: ein blaues Auto       Ukrainian: синій автомобіль   Italian: una macchina blu


 Greek: ένα μπλε αυτοκίνητο       French: une voiture bleue        Esperanto: blua aŭto         Spanish: un carro azul           Japanese: 青い車


  Chinese: 一只哈士奇在绿              Korean: 허스키가 그린 위를 달리            German: Ein Husky läu\ auf      Ukrainian: По зелені         Italian: Un husky corre sul
  地上奔跑                          고 있다                             dem Grün                        біжить хаскі                 green


  Greek: Ένα χάσκι τρέχει στο    French: Un husky court sur le    Esperanto: Husky kuras      Spanish :Una husky se está     Japanese: ハスキーがグリーンを
  πράσινο                        green                            sur la verdo                ejecutando en el verde         走っている



Figure 18: Multilingual generation results in 512 × 512 of XLM-Roberta + MTN + SDM decoder
(sd-v1-4) with the same input captions, i.e, “a blue car” and “a husky running on green field”, in
English. It can support different languages including Japanese, Ukraine, German, Italian, Korean,
Greek, Esperanto, Chinese, French and Spanish with only different MTNs. The guidance weight is
7.5 and PLMS (Liu et al., 2022) sampling steps are 50.


                                                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 Korean: 오후           German:                     Ukrainian: Імпресіоністська   Italian: Pittura
 Chinese: 下午的花园的印
                                 정원의 인상파              Impressionismusmalerei      картина післяобіднього        impressionista di un
 象派绘画
                                 그림                   eines Nachmittagsgartens    саду                          giardino pomeridiano


Greek: Ζωγραφική             French: Peinture          Esperanto: Impresionisma    Spanish: Pintura               Japanese: 午後の庭の
ιμπρεσιονισμού ενός          impressionniste d'un      pentraĵo de posttagmeza     impresionista de un            印象派絵画
απογευματινού κήπου          jardin d'après-midi       ĝardeno                     jardín de tarde


 Chinese: 有钻⽯的⾦⾊皇冠            Korean: 다이아몬드가          German: eine goldene        Ukrainian: золота корона з    Italian: una corona d'oro
                              달린 황금 왕관                Krone mit Diamanten         діамантами                    con diamanti


Greek: ένα χρυσό στέμμα με   French: une couronne      Esperanto: ora krono        Spanish: una corona de         Japanese: ダイヤモン
διαμάντια                    d'or avec des diamants    kun diamantoj               oro con diamantes              ドをあしらった⻩⾦
                                                                                                                  の王冠



Figure 19: Multilingual generation results in 512 × 512 of XLM-Roberta + MTN + SDM decoder
(sd-v1-4) with the same input captions, i.e, “Impressionism painting of a garden in afternoon” and
“a golden crown with diamonds”, in English.


                                                               26
