Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DA XB ENCH : B ENCHMARKING D EFORMABLE O BJECT
M ANIPULATION WITH D IFFERENTIABLE P HYSICS
    Siwei Chen1† , Yiqing Xu1† , Cunjun Yu1† , Linfeng Li1 , Xiao Ma2 , Zhongwen Xu2 , David Hsu1
 1
     National University of Singapore 2 Sea AI Lab‡



                                            A BSTRACT
           Deformable object manipulation (DOM) is a long-standing challenge in robotics
           and has attracted significant interest recently. This paper presents DaXBench,
           a differentiable simulation framework for DOM. While existing work often fo-
           cuses on a specific type of deformable objects, DaXBench supports fluid, rope,
           cloth . . . ; it provides a general-purpose benchmark to evaluate widely differ-
           ent DOM methods, including planning, imitation learning, and reinforcement
           learning. DaXBench combines recent advances in deformable object simula-
           tion with JAX, a high-performance computational framework. All DOM tasks
           in DaXBench are wrapped with the OpenAI Gym API for easy integration with
           DOM algorithms. We hope that DaXBench provides to the research community a
           comprehensive, standardized benchmark and a valuable tool to support the devel-
           opment and evaluation of new DOM methods. The code and video are available
           online∗ .


1        I NTRODUCTION
Deformable object manipulation (DOM) is a crucial area of research with broad applications, from
household (Maitin-Shepard et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2022) to industrial set-
tings (Miller et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2022). To aid in algorithm development and prototyping, several
DOM benchmarks (Lin et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021) have been developed using deformable ob-
ject simulators. However, the high dimensional state and action spaces remain a significant challenge
to DOM.
Differentiable physics is a promising direction for developing control policies for deformable ob-
jects. It implements physical laws as differentiable computational graphs (Freeman et al., 2021; Hu
et al., 2020), enabling the optimization of control policies with analytical gradients and therefore
improving sample efficiency. Recent studies have shown that differentiable physics-based DOM
methods can benefit greatly from this approach (Huang et al., 2021; Heiden et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023). To facilitate fair comparison and further advancement of DOM techniques,
it is important to develop a general-purpose simulation platform that accommodates these methods.
We present DaXBench, a differentiable simulation framework for deformable object manipulation
(DOM). In contrast with current single-task benchmarks, DaXBench encompasses a diverse range
of object types, including rope, cloth, liquid, and elasto-plastic materials. The platform includes
tasks with varying levels of difficulty and well-defined reward functions, such as liquid pouring,
cloth folding, and rope wiping. These tasks are designed to support high-level macro actions and
low-level controls, enabling comprehensive evaluation of DOM algorithms with different action
spaces.
We benchmark eight competitive DOM methods across different algorithmic paradigms, includ-
ing sampling-based planning, reinforcement learning (RL), and imitation learning (IL). For plan-
ning methods, we consider model predictive control with the Cross Entropy Method (CEM-MPC)
(Richards, 2005), differentiable model predictive control (Hu et al., 2020), and a combination of
     †
       These authors contributed equally.
     ‡
       This work is partially completed at the SEA AI Lab.
     ∗
       The link of the project is https://github.com/AdaCompNUS/DaXBench.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the two. For RL domains, we consider Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
with non-differentiable dynamics, and Short-Horizon Actor-Critic (SHAC) (Xu et al., 2022) and An-
alytic Policy Gradients (APG) (Freeman et al., 2021) with analytical gradients. For IL, Transporter
networks (Seita et al., 2021) with non-differentiable dynamics and Imitation Learning via Differen-
tiable physics (ILD) (Chen et al., 2023) are compared. Our experiments compare algorithms with
and without analytic gradients on each task, providing insights into the benefits and challenges of
differentiable-physics-based DOM methods.
DaXBench provides a deformable object simulator, DaX, which combines recent advances in de-
formable object simulation algorithms (Xu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023) with the high-performance
computational framework JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). This integration allows for efficient auto-
differentiation and parallelization across multiple accelerators, such as multiple GPUs. All task
environments are wrapped with the OpenAI Gym API (Brockman et al., 2016), enabling seamless
integration with DOM algorithms for fast and easy development. By providing a comprehensive
and standardized simulation framework, we aim to facilitate algorithm development and advance
the state of the art in DOM. Moreover, our experimental results show that the dynamics model in
DaXBench enables direct sim-to-real transfer to a real robot for rope manipulation, indicating the
potential applicability of our simulation platform to real-world problems.

2     R ELATED W ORKS

2.1   D EFORMABLE O BJECT S IMULATORS

Recent advancements in Deformable Object Manipulation (DOM) have been partially attributed to
the emergence of DOM simulators in recent years. SoftGym (Lin et al., 2021) is the first DOM
benchmark that models all liquid, fabric, and elastoplastic objects and introduces a wide range of
standardized DOM tasks. ThreeDWorld (Gan et al., 2020) enables agents to physically interact with
various objects in rich 3D environments, but it is non-differentiable and does not support methods
based on differentiable physics.
On the other hand, several differentiable DOM simulators emerge, such as ChainQueen (Hu et al.,
2019), Diff-PDE (Holl et al., 2020), PlasticineLab (Huang et al., 2021), DiSECt (Heiden et al.,
2021), and DiffSim (Qiao et al., 2020). However, each simulator specializes in modeling a single
type of deformable object and supports only a limited range of object-specific tasks. For example,
PlasticineLab (Huang et al., 2021) and DiSECt (Heiden et al., 2021) model only the elasto-plastic
objects, including tasks such as sculpting, rolling and cutting the deformable objects. Since the
dynamics of each deformable object are vastly different, the physic engine specialized in modeling
one type of deformable object cannot be easily extended to another. DaXBench bridges this gap
by offering a general-purpose simulation framework that covers a wide range of deformable objects
and the relevant tasks. We provide a fairground for comparing and developing all types of DOM
methods, especially the differentiable ones.

2.2   D EFORMABLE OBJECT MANIPULATION ALGORITHMS

These challenges make it difficult to apply existing methods for rigid object manipulation directly
to DOM. Methods designed for DOM must be able to handle a large number of degrees of freedom
in the state space and the complexity of the dynamics. Despite these challenges, many interesting
approaches have been proposed for DOM. Depending on the algorithmic paradigms, we categorize
DOM methods into three groups: planning, Imitation Learning (IL), and Reinforcement Learning
(RL). Our discussion below focuses on the general DOM methods for a standardized set of tasks. We
refer to (Sanchez et al., 2018; Khalil & Payeur, 2010) for a more detailed survey on prior methods
for robot manipulation of deformable objects.
Reinforcement Learning algorithms using differentiable physics such as SHAC (Xu et al., 2022)
and APG (Freeman et al., 2021) are also explored. These methods use the ground-truth gradients on
the dynamics to optimize the local actions directly, thereby bypassing the massive sampling for the
policy gradient estimation.
Imitation Learning is another important learning paradigm for DOM. To overcome the “curse of
history”, the existing works such as (Seita et al., 2021; Sundaresan et al., 2020; Ganapathi et al.,


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Application                                    Parallelization
                                                          Differen-
       Engine                         Elasto-                         # of simulations   Multi-Device
                    Liquid   Fabric             Mixture   tiability
                                      plastic                           per process       Training
    PlasticineLab     ✗        ✗        ✓         ✗          ✓             Single              ✗
       DiSECt         ✗        ✗        ✓         ✗          ✓             Single              ✗
       DiffSim        ✗        ✓         ✗        ✗          ✓             Single              ✗
      SoftGym         ✓        ✓         ✗        ✗          ✗             Single              ✗
     DaXBench         ✓        ✓        ✓         ✓          ✓            Multiple            ✓

          Table 1: Comparison among the simulators for Deformable Object Manipulation.


2021) overcome the enormous state/action space by learning the low dimensional latent space and
simplifying the primitive actions to only pick-and-place. ILD (Chen et al., 2023) is another line of IL
method that utilizes the differentiable dynamics to match the entire trajectory all at once; therefore,
it reduces the state coverage requirement by the prior works.
Motion planning for DOM has been explored in (Wi et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2022; Lippi et al.,
2020; Nair & Finn, 2019; Yan et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022). These methods overcome the enormous
DoFs of the original state space by learning a low-dimensional latent state representation and a cor-
responding dynamic model for planning. The success of these planning methods critically depends
on the dimensionality and quality of the learned latent space and the dynamic model, which in itself
is challenging.
We believe that the development of a general-purpose simulation framework with a differentiable
simulator can provide a platform for comparing existing DOM methods. Such a framework enables
researchers to gain a better understanding of the progress and limitations of current DOM methods,
which in turn can provide valuable insights for advancing DOM methods across all paradigms.


3     DA XB ENCH : D EFORMABLE - AND -JAX B ENCHMARK

DaXBench is a general-purpose differentiable DOM simulation platform that covers a wide range
of deformable objects and manipulation tasks. To facilitate benchmarking of DOM methods from
all paradigms, particularly differentiable methods, we developed our own differentiable simulator,
Deformable-and-JAX (DaX), which is both highly efficient and parallelizable. In this section, we
first provide a brief overview of our simulator, DaX, and then focus on introducing the benchmark
tasks we have implemented for DaXBench.

3.1    DA X

DaX is a differentiable simulator designed to model various types
of deformable object manipulation with high parallelization capa-
bilities. A comparison with other existing simulators can be found
in Table 1. DaX is implemented using JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018),
which supports highly parallelized computation with excellent au-
tomatic differentiation directly optimized at the GPU kernel level.
Moreover, DaX can be seamlessly integrated with the numerous Figure 1: An example of a bowl
learning algorithms implemented using JAX, allowing for the en- of soup with tofu and vegetables.
                                                                    All materials including the soup
tire computation graph to be highly parallelized end-to-end.
                                                                        are simulated by DaX using par-
State Representations and Dynamic Models DaX adopts differ- ticles. Moreover, the entire sim-
ent state representations and dynamic systems to model different ulation is fully differentiable and
types of deformable objects with distinct underlying deformation highly parallelizable.
and dynamics. To model liquid and rope, which undergo significant deformation, DaX represents
their states using particles and uses Moving Least Square Material Point Method (MLS-MPM) (Hu
et al., 2018; Sulsky et al., 1994) to model their dynamics on the particle level. For cloth, which only
undergoes limited deformation, DaX models its state using mesh and uses a less computationally
expensive mass-spring system to model its dynamics. These modeling choices allow DaX to strike


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Pour Soup.       (b) Push Rope.         (c) Whip Rope.         (d) Fold T-shirt.      (e) Unfold Cloth.

Figure 2: We illustrate different deformable object manipulation tasks in this work. A template is
provided to readily expand this set to many other similar tasks.


a balance between modeling capacity and complexity. For more information on the object models
used in DaX please refer to Appendix section A.1.
Designed for Customization DaX allows full customization of new tasks based on the existing
framework. Objects with arbitrary shapes and different rigidness can be added to the simulator with
ease. Moreover, primitive actions can also be customized. For a code example of how to customize
a new environment in DaX, please refer to Appendix section A.2.
Saving Memory DaX uses two tricks to optimize the efficiency and memory consumption of the
end-to-end gradient computation, namely lazy dynamic update and “checkpointing method” (Qiao
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2016; Griewank & Walther, 2000). To optimize the time and memory
consumption of MPM for a single timestep, DaX lazily updates the dynamic of a small region
affected by the manipulation at that step. Moreover, DaX only stores the values of a few states
(i.e., checkpoints) during the forward pass. During the backward propagation, DaX re-computes
segments of the forward values starting from every stored state in reverse order sequentially for the
overall gradient. For more details on these techniques, please refer to Appendix section A.4.

3.2     B ENCHMARK TASKS

DaXBench provides a comprehensive set of Deformable Object Manipulation tasks, including liq-
uid pouring, rope wiping, cloth folding, and sculpting elastoplastic objects, as illustrated in Figure
2. These tasks are representative of the common deformable objects encountered in daily life. Ad-
ditionally, we propose several new challenging long-horizon tasks that require finer-grained control,
allowing for better benchmarking of the scalability of DOM methods. The horizon of each task
is determined by how many steps a human expert takes to finish the task. DaXBench provides a
standardized platform for comparing existing methods and future work on DOM. In this section, we
provide detailed information on the tasks supported by DaXBench.
Long Horizon Tasks The time complexity for the search-based planning method grows exponen-
tially with the planning horizon, known as the “curse of history”; this is exacerbated by the large
state space of deformable objects. However, the existing DOM benchmark tasks typically have rela-
tively short horizons. For example, the cloth folding and unfolding tasks in SoftGym consist of only
1-3 steps. DaXBench addresses this limitation by providing tasks with longer horizons, enabling
better evaluation of the scalability of search-based planning methods.
Tasks without Macro-Actions A macro-action can be seen as executing raw actions for multiple
steps. For example, we can define a pick-and-place or push macro-action as a 6-dimensional real
vector (x, y, z, x′ , y ′ , z ′ ) representing the start (x, y, z) and end (x′ , y ′ , z ′ ) positions of the gripper,
and the raw actions are Cartesian velocities of the gripper. Macro-actions reduce the dimension of
the action space and the effective horizon, and hence make scaling easier for the DOM methods.
However, macro-actions might be too coarse for some tasks. For example, when whipping a rope to
hit a target location, the momentum needs to be adjusted at a relatively high frequency throughout
the execution, making macro-actions unsuitable. DaXBench includes tasks that do not have suitable
macro-actions to provide a more comprehensive evaluation of DOM methods.
3.2.1     L IQUID M ANIPULATION

Pour-Water Pour a bowl of water into the target bowl as quickly as possible. The agent directly
controls the velocity and rotation (in Cartesian space) of the gripper that holds the bowl. In particular,


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the action space of the agent is a 4-dimensional vector a = (vx , vy , vz , w), for which (vx , vy , vz )
represents the linear velocity of the gripper, and w denotes the angular velocity around the wrist.
Pour-Soup Pour a bowl of soup with various solid ingredients into the target bowl as fast as possible.
The actions are the same as those of Pour-Water. This task is more challenging than Pour-Water due
to the additional interactions between the liquid and the solid ingredients. In particular, the agent
needs to promptly react when a solid ingredient is transferred, so as to 1) adjust for the sudden
decrease in load on the gripper and 2) control the momentum of the ingredient when hitting the soup
surface to minimize spilling.
Neither tasks have suitable high-level macro-actions and the task horizons are 100 steps.


3.2.2   ROPE M ANIPULATION

Push-Rope Push the rope to the pre-specified configuration as quickly as possible. We randomly
initialize the configuration of the rope. The agent uses a single gripper to execute the push macro-
actions. The horizon for this task is 6 steps.
Whip-Rope Whip the rope into a target configuration. The agent holds one end of the rope and
controls the gripper’s velocity to whip the rope. In particular, the action space of this task is a 3-
dimensional vector a = (vx , vy , vz ) that denotes the velocity of the gripper in the Cartesian space.
This task cannot be completed by the abstract macro-actions since the momentum and the deforma-
tion of the rope has to be adjusted at a relatively high frequency. The task horizon is 70 steps.


3.2.3   C LOTH M ANIPULATION

Fold-Cloth Fold a piece of flattened cloth and move it to a target location. This task has two
variants: the easy version requires the agent to execute 1 fold and the difficult version 3 folds. For
both variants, the task begins with the cloth lying flat on the table at an arbitrary position. The
agent executes pick-and-place macro-actions. The task horizon is 3 and 4 for the easy and difficult
versions respectively.
Fold-T-shirt Fold a T-shirt to a target location. The task begins with the T-shirt lying flat on the
table at an arbitrary position. The agent executes pick-and-place macro-actions. The task horizon is
4.
Unfold-Cloth Flatten a piece of folded cloth to a target location as fast as possible. This task also
has two variants that differ in the initial configurations of the folded cloth: the cloth in the easy
version has been folded once and that in the difficult version has been folded three times. This task
has the same action space as the Fold-Cloth task. The task horizon is 10 steps for both variants.
All of these tasks share similar APIs to the OpenAI Gym’s standard environments. We provide
a general template to define tasks in our simulator. This not only better organizes the existing task
environments but also allows the users to customize the existing task environments to better suit their
research requirements. The variables and constants defined in the template are easily interpretable
quantities that correspond to real physical semantics. This allows the users to better understand the
environment, which can also help with the development and debugging process.


4   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we aim to answer the following two questions: 1) Are the existing representative
methods capable of solving the tasks in DaXBench? 2) Within each paradigm, will the differentiable
simulator help in completing the tasks?
To investigate these two questions, we benchmark eight representative methods of deformable object
manipulation, covering planning, imitation learning, and reinforcement learning. Each paradigm has
different assumptions and requirements for input knowledge. We summarize the baseline methods
and the relevant information in Table 2.


                                                   5
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Paradigms          Reinforcement Learning            Imitation Learning                                 Planning
              Methods            PPO        SHAC      APG          Transporter       ILD       CEM-MPC              diff-MPC      diff-CEM-MPC
            # expert demos        —             —      —               10               1           —                 —                  —
         Reward function          ✓             ✓       ✓              —             —               ✓                 ✓                 ✓
         Differentiability        ✗             ✓       ✓              ✗             ✓               ✗                 ✓                 ✓

            Table 2: Methods on Deformable Object Manipulation with respect to different setups.

     0.7        Fold-T-Shirt                0.5     Fold-Cloth-3                            Unfold-Cloth-1                        Unfold-Cloth-3
                                                                                 0.7                                       0.6
     0.6                                    0.4                                  0.6                                       0.5
     0.5                                    0.3                                  0.5                                       0.4
Reward


                                       Reward


                                                                            Reward


                                                                                                                      Reward
     0.4                                                                         0.4                                       0.3
     0.3                                    0.2                                  0.3
     0.2                                    0.1                                  0.2                                       0.2
     0.1                                                                         0.1                                       0.1
     0.0                                    0.0                                  0.0                                       0.00
        0                      2000            0                    2000            0                        2000                                  2000
                Iteration                            Iteration                                Iteration                             Iteration
                Shape-Rope                           Pour-Soup                                Pour-Water                           Whip-Rope
     0.75                                   0.45                                 0.30                                      0.8
                                            0.40                                 0.25                                      0.6
     0.70                                   0.35


                                                                                                                      Reward
Reward


                                       Reward


                                                                            Reward
                                            0.30                                 0.20                                      0.4
     0.65                                   0.25                                 0.15                                                           PPO
     0.60                                   0.20                                                                           0.2                  APG
                                            0.15                                 0.10                                                           SHAC
     0.550                                  0.10                                 0.05                                      0.0
                               2000             0                   2000             0                       2000             0                    2000
                 Iteration                           Iteration                                Iteration                             Iteration

    Figure 3: Learning curves of three benchmarked RL algorithms: PPO, APG, and SHAC. The
    y-axis shows the episode reward, scaled from 0 to 1, with larger values being closer to the goal
    state. The x-axis is the number of training iterations. All methods are trained in the same number
    of batched environments. We report the mean and variance of the performance for 5 seeds and each
    seed has 20 rollouts with different initializations. We refer the readers to Table 4 for the numerical
    results in the appendix.


    4.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

    Reward function For each task, the goal is specified by the desired final positions of the set of
    particles, g, representing the deformable object. In this setup, the reward can be intuitively defined
    by how well the current object particles match with those of the goal. Hence, we define the ground-
    truth reward as rgt (s, a) = exp(−λD(s′ , g)), where s′ is the next state resulted from a at the current
    state s, and D(s, g) is a non-negative distance measure between the positions of the object’s particles
    s and those of the goal g.
    However, using the ground-truth reward alone is inefficient for learning. The robot’s end-effector can
    only change the current object pose by contacting it. Therefore, to most efficiently manipulate the
    object to the desired configuration, we add an auxiliary reward to encourage the robot to contact the
    object. We define the auxiliary reward as raux (s, a) = exp(−L2 (s, a)), where L2 (s, a) measures the
    L2 distance between the end-effector and the object. During training, we use the sum of the ground-
    truth and auxiliary reward functions rgt + raux , and during evaluation, we only use the ground-truth
    reward rgt .

    4.2       R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

    Methods. We benchmark PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), SHAC (Xu et al., 2022), and APG
    (Freeman et al., 2021) as the representative RL methods. PPO is a widely used model-free non-
    differentiable RL method with competitive performance, while SHAC and APG are the two latest
    RL methods that utilize the differentiable simulator. The computation graph of SHAC is illustrated
    in Figure 4a. By comparing the performance of the DaXBench tasks across these three methods, we
    aim to further study the benefits and limitations of applying the differentiable physics to RL.
    Overall Performance. The learning curves of RL methods are shown in Figure 3. The performance
    difference between PPO and the differentiable RL methods shows opposite trends in the high-level
    macro-action-based and local-level control tasks. To our surprise, for most of the short-horizon


                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            Imitation Learning                              Planning
  Task Type        Task         Transporter        ILD             Expert     CEM-MPC     Diff-MPC     Diff-CEM-MPC
                Fold-Cloth-1    0.19±0.04      0.76±0.04         0.91±0.00    0.74±0.07   0.29±0.07      0.80±0.04
                Fold-Cloth-3    0.40±0.05      0.82±0.05         0.89±0.00    0.62±0.08   0.14±0.02      0.66±0.07
  High-level    Fold-T-shirt    0.46±0.02      0.59±0.11         0.85±0.00    0.58±0.04   0.29±0.06      0.66±0.01
               Unfold-Cloth-1   0.48±0.01      0.64±0.03         0.87±0.00    0.57±0.04   0.30±0.05      0.67±0.02
               Unfold-Cloth-3   0.30±0.00      0.52±0.02         0.87±0.00    0.57±0.01   0.26±0.04      0.58±0.01
                 Push-Rope      0.70±0.00      0.76±0.02         0.93±0.00    0.71±0.01   0.70±0.01      0.71±0.01
                Whip-Rope           —          0.70±0.06         1.00± 0.00   0.34±0.01   0.37±0.00      0.33±0.01
  Low-level     Pour-Water          —          0.32±0.03         0.91± 0.06   0.58±0.01   0.30±0.00      0.58±0.01
                Pour-Soup           —          0.42±0.12         0.85± 0.00   0.56±0.01   0.44±0.00      0.55±0.02

Table 3: Task performance for the planning and imitation learning methods. We report the mean and
standard error for the policy/control sequences evaluated under 20 seeds.


macro-action-based tasks, PPO performs consistently better than the differentiable RL methods.
This seems to contradict the experiment results of SHAC (Xu et al., 2022), which shows stronger
performance than PPO in its own simulator on a wide range of context-rich MuJoCo tasks. How-
ever, for long-horizon tasks with low-level controls, the differentiable RL methods, especially APG,
outperform PPO by a large margin.
Main Challenge for the differentiable-physics-based RL methods: Exploration. We argue
that, on high-level macro-action-based tasks, the main limiting factor of the performance of
differentiable-physics-based RL is the lack of exploration during training. The need to balance
this trade-off is exaggerated by the enormous DoFs and the complex dynamics unique to the DOM
tasks. Especially for the high-level macro-action-based tasks, their non-smooth/discontinuous/non-
convex optimization landscape necessitates using a good exploration strategy. However, the existing
differentiable-physics-based RL methods rely exclusively on the simulation gradient to optimize
the policy. They are not entropy regularized; hence, they may quickly collapse to the local opti-
mal. Without explicit exploration, the differentiable-physics-based RL methods fail to reach the
near-optimal state using the simulation gradients alone. Taking Fold-Cloth-3 as an example, if the
randomly initialized policy never touches the cloth, the local simulation gradients cannot guide the
agent to touch the cloth since the rewards and, consequently, the gradients for all not-in-contact
actions are zero.
Differentiable-physics-based RL are sensitive to the Optimization Landscape. Differentiable-
physics-based RL can largely improve the performance of some low-level control tasks if the opti-
mization landscape is smooth and convex. Taking Whip-Rope as an example, the optimal low-level
control sequence is a smooth motion trajectory that lies on a relatively smooth and well-behaved
plane for the gradient-based methods. This explains why APG outperforms the non-differentiable-
physics-based PPO by a large margin.

4.3   I MITATION L EARNING

Methods. We benchmark Transporter (Seita et al., 2021) and ILD (Chen et al., 2023) as the
two representative Imitation Learning DOM methods. Transporter is a popular DOM method that
is well-known for its simple implementation and competitive performance. We use particles as
input to evaluate the performance of Transporter in our experiment for a fair comparison. The
original implementation of Transporter uses RGBD as input. We refer the readers to the Appendix
section D for the performance of the Transporter with RGB channels. ILD is the latest differentiable-
physics-based IL method; it utilizes the simulation gradients to reduce the required number of expert
demonstrations and to improve performance. Note that since Transporter abstracts its action space to
pick-and-place actions to simplify the learning, it cannot be extended to the low-level control tasks.
Our comparison of the IL methods will first focus on the high-level macro-action-based tasks, then
we will analyze the performance of ILD with the expert.
Overall performance For the high-level macro-action-based tasks, ILD outperforms Transporter by
a large margin for all tasks. For example, ILD outperforms Transporter in Fold-Cloth-1, Fold-Cloth-
3, and Unfold-Cloth-1. We highlight that this significant performance gain is achieved by using a
much smaller number of expert demonstrations. We attribute this improvement to the additional
information provided by the simulation gradients, where now ILD can reason over the ground-truth


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) SHAC.                               (b) ILD.                         (c) Diff CEM-MPC.
Figure 4: Computation graphs for the differentiable algorithms. We use SHAC, ILD, and Diff
CEM-MPC to represent the differentiable algorithms for planning, RL, and IL respectively. The
black/green arrows correspond to the forward/backward propagation respectively.


dynamics to bring the trajectory closer to the expert, at least locally. As illustrated in Figure 4, the
gradients used to optimize each action comes from the globally optimal expert demonstrations 1)
at the current step and 2) in all the steps after. In contrast, the gradients used in SHAC only count
the reward at the current step. The differentiable RL faces the challenge of exploding/vanishing
gradients and lack of exploration. Differentiable IL alleviates these problems by having step-wise,
globally optimal guidance from expert demonstrations.
Challenge for ILD: Unbalanced State Representations. ILD does not perform well on tasks like
Pour-Water and Pour-Soup with unbalanced state representations, for example, 1000 × 3 features
of particles and 6 gripper states. The learned signals from the particles overwhelm the signals from
the gripper states. Therefore, ILD cannot learn useful strategies with unbalanced learning signals.
Softgym (Lin et al., 2021) also concurs with the results that policies with reduced state representation
perform better than those with the full state. A more representative representation of the states needs
to be considered and we leave it for future study.
In conclusion, differentiable methods can optimize the policies efficiently if the optimization land-
scape is well-behaved. For tasks that require tremendous explorations or with sparse rewards,
gradient-based methods suffer severely from the local minima and gradient instability issues.

4.4   P LANNING

Methods. We benchmark the classic CEM-MPC (Richards, 2005) as a representative random shoot-
ing method that uses a gradient-free method to optimize the action sequences for the highest final
reward. To study the effect of using differentiable physics, we implement two versions of differ-
entiable MPC. The basic computation graph for both is illustrated in Figure 4c. In particular, both
differentiable MPC baselines maximize the immediate reward of each action using differentiable
physics. The difference lies in the initial action sequences: diff-MPC is initialized with a random
action sequence, while diff-CEM-MPC with an action sequence optimized by CEM-MPC.
Overall Performance. The diff-CEM-MPC performs consistently better than or on par with CEM-
MPC, while Diff-MPC fails to plan any reasonable control sequences for most of the tasks.
Simulation Gradients as Additional Optimization Signals. The vastly different performance be-
tween the two versions of the differentiable baselines brings us insights into how differentiable
physics helps in planning. Simulation gradients provide additional signals in the direction to opti-
mize the actions, thereby reducing the sample complexity. However, similar to any gradient-based
optimization methods, differentiable planning methods are sensitive to the non-convex/non-smooth
optimization landscape and face a major limitation of being stuck at the local optimal solution.
DOM’s enormous DoFs of DOM and complex dynamics exacerbate these challenges for the differ-
entiable DOM planning methods.
Differentiable Planning needs Good Initialization. We attribute the poor performance of Diff-
MPC to its random control sequence initialization. In particular, this control sequence may sig-
nificantly deviate from the optimal one over the non-smooth/non-convex landscape, such that the
simulation gradients alone cannot bring the control sequence back to the optimal. In contrast, Diff-
CEM-MPC is initialized with the optimized control sequence by CEM-MPC, which relies on itera-
tive sampling followed by elite selection to escape the local optimality. Hence, the control sequence
fed into the differentiable step is already sufficiently close to the globally optimal solution. The


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             (a)                                                 (b)
Figure 5: We deploy CEM-MPC in a Push-Rope task to straighten the rope in 6 steps on a
real robot. (a) The system structure. CEM-MPC uses our DaX simulator as the predictive model.
Given the current state estimated from a point cloud image, CEM-MPC plans the best action to be
executed by the robot. (b) The states after each of the 6 pushes. We compare the dynamics in reality
and in simulation. Top: state trajectory in a real robot experiment. Bottom: the next state predicted
by DaX given the estimated current state and the corresponding planned action.


simulation gradients help diff-CEM-MPC to optimize the action sequences further locally, which
explains the performance gain.
To summarize, the differentiable simulator can further optimize the near-optimal control sequences
locally with much low sample complexity. Yet, its performance critically relies on a good initializa-
tion and a locally smooth optimization landscape.

4.5   S IM -2-R EAL G AP

Granted that the physical engine of DaX is built upon a state-of-the-art simulation method, the
fidelity and correctness still need to be tested. To testify to the correctness of our simulated dynamics
to real-world physics, we carry out a real robot experiment on a Kinova Gen 3 robot. We deploy
CEM-MPC with DaX as the predictor model to a Push-Rope task, as shown in Figure 5. Our study
finds that the resultant state trajectories are similar in simulation and in reality. This validates the
fidelity of the tasks implemented based on our engine, and the performance of the DOM methods
in our simulator provides hints about their performance on the real robot. We refer the reader to the
appendix for details. In addition, the differentiability of DaX enables system identification that can
reduce the sim-2-real gap (Le Lidec et al., 2021; Murthy et al., 2021). We can get an error term by
comparing the observations in simulation and in reality; by differentiating this error with respect to
the simulator parameters, we get gradients for parameter tuning.

5     C ONCLUSION
We introduced DaXBench, a general-purpose differentiable simulation framework for various de-
formable object manipulation tasks. To our knowledge, DaXBench is the first platform that sim-
ulates liquid, rope, fabric, and elastoplastic materials while being differentiable and highly par-
allelizable. In addition to common DOM tasks, we also proposed several novel tasks, including
WhipRope and PourSoup, to study the performance of DOM methods on long-horizon tasks with
low-level controls. Our task coverage provides a comprehensive platform to compare existing DOM
methods from all paradigms, and our empirical study sheds light on the benefits and limitations of
differentiable-physics-based methods in DOM. We believe that DaXBenchcan assist in the algorith-
mic development of DOM methods, particularly those based on differentiable physics, across all
paradigms.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singa-
pore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-PhD-2021-08-015T, AISG2-PhD-2022-01-036T, and
AISG2-PhD-2021-08-014) and A∗ STAR under the National Robotics Program (Grant No. 192 25
00054).

E THICS S TATEMENT
DaXBench provides a benchmark for deformable object manipulation (DOM). We believe that
DaXBench and its simulator DaX have no potential negative societal impacts. In addition, our
work is on benchmarking the DOM methods in simulator, so we do not collect any data or conduct
experiments with human subjects. In summary, we have read the ICLR Code of Ethics and ensured
that our work conforms to them.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In this paper, imitation learning and planning experiments are averaged over 20 random rollouts and
RL approaches use 100 rollouts. We have included our source code as an easy-to-install package in
the supplementary material.

R EFERENCES
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Siwei Chen, Xiao Ma, and Zhongwen Xu. Imitation learning via differentiable physics. In Proc.
  IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear
  memory cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06174, 2016.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax - A differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Damian Mrowca, Martin Schrimpf, James Traer, Julian
  De Freitas, Jonas Kubilius, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, Megumi Sano, Kuno Kim, Elias
  Wang, Michael Lingelbach, Aidan Curtis, Kevin Feigelis, Daniel M. Bear, Dan Gutfreund, David
  Cox, Antonio Torralba, James J. DiCarlo, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Josh H. McDermott, and Daniel
  L. K. Yamins. Threedworld: A platform for interactive multi-modal physical simulation. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Aditya Ganapathi, Priya Sundaresan, Brijen Thananjeyan, Ashwin Balakrishna, Daniel Seita, Jen-
  nifer Grannen, Minho Hwang, Ryan Hoque, Joseph E Gonzalez, Nawid Jamali, et al. Learning
  dense visual correspondences in simulation to smooth and fold real fabrics. In Proc. IEEE Int.
  Conf. on Robotics & Automation, pp. 11515–11522. IEEE, 2021.
Andreas Griewank and Andrea Walther. Algorithm 799: Revolve: An implementation of check-
  pointing for the reverse or adjoint mode of computational differentiation. ACM Trans. Math.
  Softw., 26(1), mar 2000.
Eric Heiden, Miles Macklin, Yashraj Narang, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Fabio Ramos. Disect:
  A differentiable simulation engine for autonomous robotic cutting. In Proc. Robotics: Science &
  Systems, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Philipp Holl, Vladlen Koltun, and Nils Thuerey. Learning to control pdes with differentiable physics.
  In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2020.
Yuanming Hu, Yu Fang, Ziheng Ge, Ziyin Qu, Yixin Zhu, Andre Pradhana, and Chenfanfu Jiang. A
  moving least squares material point method with displacement discontinuity and two-way rigid
  body coupling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4), 2018.
Yuanming Hu, Jiancheng Liu, Andrew Spielberg, Joshua B Tenenbaum, William T Freeman, Jiajun
  Wu, Daniela Rus, and Wojciech Matusik. Chainqueen: A real-time differentiable physical simu-
  lator for soft robotics. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation, pp. 6265–6271. IEEE,
  2019.
Yuanming Hu, Luke Anderson, Tzu-Mao Li, Qi Sun, Nathan Carr, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, and
  Fredo Durand. Difftaichi: Differentiable programming for physical simulation. In Proc. Int.
  Conf. on Learning Representations, 2020.
Zhiao Huang, Yuanming Hu, Tao Du, Siyuan Zhou, Hao Su, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Chuang
  Gan. Plasticinelab: A soft-body manipulation benchmark with differentiable physics. In Proc.
  Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2021.
Fouad F. Khalil and Pierre Payeur. Dexterous robotic manipulation of deformable objects with
  multi-sensory feedback - a review. In Agustin Jimenez and Basil M Al Hadithi (eds.), Robot
  Manipulators, chapter 28. IntechOpen, Rijeka, 2010. doi: 10.5772/9183. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5772/9183.
Quentin Le Lidec, Igor Kalevatykh, Ivan Laptev, Cordelia Schmid, and Justin Carpentier. Differen-
  tiable simulation for physical system identification. IEEE Robotics & Automation Letters, 6(2),
  2021.
Xingyu Lin, Yufei Wang, Jake Olkin, and David Held. Softgym: Benchmarking deep reinforcement
  learning for deformable object manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 432–448.
  PMLR, 2021.
Martina Lippi, Petra Poklukar, Michael C. Welle, Anastasiia Varava, Hang Yin, Alessandro Marino,
 and Danica Kragic. Latent space roadmap for visual action planning of deformable and rigid
 object manipulation. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots & Systems, 2020.
Xiao Ma, David Hsu, and Wee Sun Lee. Learning latent graph dynamics for visual manipulation of
  deformable objects. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation, pp. 8266–8273. IEEE,
  2022.
Jeremy Maitin-Shepard, Marco Cusumano-Towner, Jinna Lei, and Pieter Abbeel. Cloth grasp point
   detection based on multiple-view geometric cues with application to robotic towel folding. In
   Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation. IEEE, 2010.
Stephen Miller, Mario Fritz, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. Parametrized shape models for
  clothing. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation. IEEE, 2011.
Stephen Miller, Jur Van Den Berg, Mario Fritz, Trevor Darrell, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel. A
  geometric approach to robotic laundry folding. Int. J. Robotics Research, 31(2), 2012.
J. Krishna Murthy, Miles Macklin, Florian Golemo, Vikram Voleti, Linda Petrini, Martin Weiss,
   Breandan Considine, Jérôme Parent-Lévesque, Kevin Xie, Kenny Erleben, Liam Paull, Florian
   Shkurti, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Sanja Fidler. gradsim: Differentiable simulation for system
   identification and visuomotor control. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2021.
Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05829, 2019.
Yi-Ling Qiao, Junbang Liang, Vladlen Koltun, and Ming C. Lin. Scalable differentiable physics for
  learning and control. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, 2020.
Yi-Ling Qiao, Junbang Liang, Vladlen Koltun, and Ming C. Lin. Efficient differentiable simulation
  of articulated bodies. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arthur George Richards. Robust constrained model predictive control. PhD thesis, Massachusetts
  Institute of Technology, 2005.
Jose Sanchez, Juan-Antonio Corrales, Belhassen-Chedli Bouzgarrou, and Youcef Mezouar. Robotic
  manipulation and sensing of deformable objects in domestic and industrial applications: a survey.
  Int. J. Robotics Research, 37(7), 2018.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Daniel Seita, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Erwin Coumans, Vikas Sindhwani, Ken Goldberg,
  and Andy Zeng. Learning to rearrange deformable cables, fabrics, and bags with goal-conditioned
  transporter networks. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation, pp. 4568–4575. IEEE,
  2021.
Bokui Shen, Zhenyu Jiang, Christopher Choy, Leonidas J. Guibas, Silvio Savarese, Anima Anand-
  kumar, and Yuke Zhu. Acid: Action-conditional implicit visual dynamics for deformable object
  manipulation. In Proc. Robotics: Science & Systems, 2022.
Deborah Sulsky, Zhen Chen, and Howard L Schreyer. A particle method for history-dependent
  materials. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering, 118(1-2), 1994.
Priya Sundaresan, Jennifer Grannen, Brijen Thananjeyan, Ashwin Balakrishna, Michael Laskey,
  Kevin Stone, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ken Goldberg. Learning rope manipulation policies using
  dense object descriptors trained on synthetic depth data. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics &
  Automation, pp. 9411–9418. IEEE, 2020.
Youngsun Wi, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, and Nima Fazeli. Virdo: Visio-tactile implicit represen-
  tations of deformable objects. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation, 2022.
Jie Xu, Miles Macklin, Viktor Makoviychuk, Yashraj Narang, Animesh Garg, Fabio Ramos, and
   Wojciech Matusik. Accelerated policy learning with parallel differentiable simulation. In Proc.
   Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2022.
Wilson Yan, Ashwin Vangipuram, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Learning predictive representa-
 tions for deformable objects using contrastive estimation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp.
 564–574. PMLR, 2021.
Jihong Zhu, Andrea Cherubini, Claire Dune, David Navarro-Alarcon, Farshid Alambeigi, Dmitry
   Berenson, Fanny Ficuciello, Kensuke Harada, Jens Kober, Xiang Li, et al. Challenges and outlook
   in robotic manipulation of deformable objects. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 29(3):
   67–77, 2022.


                                                12
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
     A.1   O BJECTS

     DaXBench models a variety of deformable objects of different dimensionalities, ranging from 0-
     dimensional liquid, 1-dimensional rope, to 2-dimensional cloth. The underlying deformation and the
     dynamics vary distinctly for each dimension. In general, the lower the dimension is, the higher the
     degrees of freedom (DoFs) of the system, thus the more complex modeling that system becomes. We
     use two different representations to model the deformable objects to balance the modeling capacity
     with its complexity: water and rope are modeled using Material Point Method (MPM), while the
     cloth is modeled using a mass-spring system.
     Modelling Water and Rope using MPM Material Point Method (MPM) demonstrates strong mod-
     eling capacity and flexibility. MPM models the deformable objects as a set of particles; each particle
     is represented by its position and some properties such as mass. The dynamics and the deformation
     of the object are computed by simulating the interactions among all individual particles, conforming
     to some pre-defined physics rules. This Particle-level representation and the dynamics simulation
     allow MPM to model the object under severe deformation. We, therefore, choose to use MPM to
     model water and rope that can undergo severe deformation, for they can exploit the model capacity
     of MPM to its full potential.
     Modelling Cloth using Mass-Spring System Cloth only undergoes limited deformation as it has
     to conform to the canonical shape of the initial cloth through manipulation. This limited deformable
     does not require the strong modeling capacity of MPM, which is computationally expensive. There-
     fore, rather than modeling the deformation on the Particle-level, we choose to model the cloth using
     the mass-spring system, which is a simpler model that uses the physical constraints as a prior.

     A.2   C ODE E XAMPLE
 1   import numpy as np
 2   from core.envs.registration import env_functions
 3
 4   env = env_functions["fold_cloth3"](batch_size=32, seed=1)
 5   obs, state = env.reset(env.simulator.key_global)
 6
 7   actions = np.random.uniform(0, 1, (env.batch_size, env.action_size))
 8   obs, reward, done, info = env.step_diff(actions, state)
                             Listing 1: Example of Running Cloth Environment

 1 import jax
 2 import numpy as np
 3 from core.envs.registration import env_functions
 4
 5 env = env_functions["fold_cloth3"](batch_size=32, aux_reward=True)
 6 obs, state = env.reset(env.simulator.key_global)
 7 actions = np.random.uniform(0, 1, (env.batch_size, env.action_size))
 8
 9 @jax.jit
10 @jax.grad
11 def compute_grad(actions, state):
12     obs, reward, done, info = env.step_diff(actions, state)
13     return -reward.sum()
14
15   print("action gradients", compute_grad(actions, state))
                        Listing 2: Example of Computing Action Gradients via DaX


     A.3   JAX TO PARALLELIZE

     One major limitation of the existing simulators is the lack of support for highly paralleled sampling.
     The key challenges for Deformable Object Manipulation are the complex governing equations and


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Detect the active              (b) Update the defor-               (c) Shift back the up-
      region.                            mation.                             date active region.

Figure 6: We demonstrate how to use the active region to reduce the computation complexity for the
simulation. Taking rope for example, the original environment, denoted as the black background, is
of size 128 × 128 × 128, while the active region, where the region that will be actively changed due
to the current deformation highlighted in red, is of size 32 × 6 × 32, as illustrated in (a). To avoid
updating all the particles in the environment, in ( b), we shift the active region to the top corner, the
origin of the environment, and update the dynamic and observation. Finally, in ( c), we shift the
updated active region back to align its original coordinates.


the enormous state space. The complex governing equations invalidate most of the analytical ap-
proaches since solving the complex governing equations is intractable. On the other hand, the suc-
cess of the sampling-based methods hinges on the reasonable coverage of the state space. The lack
of support for highly paralleled sampling to better cover the state space is a major impediment to
the works on Deformable Object Manipulation. DaXBench fills in this gap by implementing its
simulator using JAX, which supports highly paralleled sampling with great automatic differentia-
tion. Using our implementation, we can finish an iteration (both forward and backward pass) for
128 rollouts with 80 timesteps on a server with 4 2080-Ti GPUs in 3 seconds.


A.4   S AVING M EMORY

Lazy Dynamic Update DaXBench optimizes the time and memory consumption of MPM by only
updating the dynamic of a small region affected by the manipulation at each step. MPM models
and updates the state and dynamics on the Particle-level; its time and memory consumption is pro-
portional to the size of the environment, which can be arbitrarily large. Our insight is that, though
the deformable object can potentially interact with the entire environment, only a small region will
be affected at each time. This inspires DaXBench to optimize the time and memory consumption
of running MPM by exclusively considering the active region during the interactions. Using this
trick, DaXBench effectively reduces the computation time by two orders of magnitude on average.
Taking the rope for example, the original environment is of size 128 × 128 × 128. However, a grid
of size 32 × 6 × 32 is sufficient to cover the region of interaction between the environment and the
rope. Therefore, we first detect the active region of size 32 × 6 × 32, then we perform a linear
transformation to shift the active region to the origin, perform the update due to deformation and
interaction, finally we shift the updated active region to align with its original coordinates.
Checkpointing method DaXBench only stores the values of a few states (i.e. checkpoints), and
re-evaluates the sub-step gradients online during the back-propagation to reduce the memory con-
sumption for long horizon problems. The checkpointing method has been proven useful in saving the
memory consumption for differentiable simulations in many prior works (Qiao et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2016; Griewank & Walther, 2000). To make the simulator end-to-end differentiable, every
value in the neural network that is computed during the forward pass has to be saved, as they are
needed to compute the gradient during the backward pass. The computation complexity scales up
quickly w.r.t. the length of the task horizon. This is a significant problem for our simulator for high
DoFs deformable object manipulation, as the memory required for each timestep’s update is enor-
mous compared to its rigid body counterpart. To overcome the large memory consumption issue,
DaXBench trade-offs the computation complexity slightly for large memory consumption improve-
ment: DaXBench only stores the values of a few states (i.e. checkpoints) at the forward pass; during
the backward propagation, DaXBench re-compute segments of the forward values starting from ev-
ery stored state in the reverse order sequentially for the overall gradient. With this trick, DaXBench


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Task Type                   Task                           PPO                          APG                 SHAC
                        Fold Cloth 1                  0.40±0.13                    0.36±0.06                0.34±0.07
                        Fold Cloth 3                  0.21±0.11                    0.19±0.09                0.22±0.22
 High-level             Fold T-shirt                  0.61±0.08                    0.40±0.05                0.44±0.09
                       Unfold Cloth 1                 0.72±0.01                    0.42±0.02                0.50±0.03
                       Unfold Cloth 3                 0.56±0.00                    0.39±0.02                0.48±0.03
                         Rope Push                    0.75±0.02                    0.72±0.02                0.75±0.01
                           Wipe Rope                  0.25±0.10                    0.83±0.01                0.66±0.03
 Low-level                 Pour Water                 0.27±0.02                    0.27±0.02                0.28±0.00
                           Pour Soup                  0.27±0.08                    0.27±0.00                0.32±0.13

Table 4: Reinforcement Learning Methods Task Results. We report the mean and standard error over 20
random seeds for each entry.


now doubles the computation complexity, but saves an arbitrary amount of memory, depending on
the intervals of the states saved.

A.5    D ISCONTINUOUS G RADIENT

As an end-to-end differentiable simulator, the effectiveness of DaXBench rests on the accuracy of
the gradient computed. We found that for deformable object manipulation, the action not in contact
with the object will cause the gradient to be discontinuous, which causes the estimate of the gradient
after this action to suffer from high variance and poor accuracy in the backward propagation. To
mitigate this problem, for every action input by the agent or the human user, DaXBench will perform
local adjustment such that the action will always make the gripper in contact with the deformable
objects. This ensures that our gradient is end-to-end continuous therefore improving the accuracy of
the estimated gradient.

B     S IM -2-R EAL G AP

To verify that the dynamics of our simulated tasks have high fidelity and a small Sim2Real gap, we
carry out a real robot experiment. We deploy CEM-MPC to the PushRope task on a Kinova Gen3
robot. CEM-MPC uses our DaX simulator as the predictive model. Given a state, CEM-MPC plans
the next best push action (x, y, z, x′ , y ′ , z ′ ). The state is estimated from a point cloud image, and
the Cartesian space push action is transformed to the joint space trajectory via an inverse kinematics
module. Note we are not verifying the sim2real gap caused by the inaccuracy of state estimation or
kinematics; we are interested in whether the dynamics of DaX can correctly guide the CEM-MPC
to succeed in the task. The experiment is included in our supplementary video.

C     RL A LGORITHMS N UMERICAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

We report the numerical experiment performance for the RL algorithms in Table 4. This is to sup-
plement the learning curve in the main text. These numerical results report the final performance of
the learning curves in Figure 3.

                                                                    Imitation Learning
              Task Type             Task      Transporter     Transporter-RGB        ILD         Expert
                              Fold-Cloth-1    0.19±0.04           0.86±0.07       0.76±0.04    0.91±0.00
                              Fold-Cloth-3    0.40±0.05           0.56±0.25       0.82±0.05    0.89±0.00
              High-level      Fold-T-shirt    0.46±0.02           0.83±0.05       0.59±0.11    0.85±0.00
                             Unfold-Cloth-1   0.48±0.01           0.76±0.06       0.64±0.03    0.87±0.00
                             Unfold-Cloth-3   0.30±0.00           0.70±0.06       0.52±0.02    0.87±0.00
                               Push-Rope      0.70±0.00           0.86±0.09       0.76±0.02    0.93±0.00
                               Whip-Rope          —                  —            0.70±0.06    1.00± 0.00
              Low-level        Pour-Water         —                  —            0.32±0.03    0.91± 0.06
                               Pour-Soup          —                  —            0.42±0.12    0.85± 0.00

Table 5: Task performance for the planning and imitation learning methods. We report the mean and
standard error for the policy/control sequences evaluated under 20 seeds.



                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    T RANSPORTER WITH I MAGE AS I NPUT
We reported the performance of two different versions of Transporter in Table 5: Transporter, which
uses 3D particles and projects them onto an image to form a height map; and Transporter-RGB,
which adds RGB channels and projects the particles onto the image plane, giving it white color with
a black background. We have found that an explicit process of rendering particles into RGB images
significantly enhances the performance of Transporter.


                                                16
