Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C HIRO D IFF : M ODELLING CHIROGRAPHIC DATA WITH
D IFFUSION M ODELS
 Ayan Das1,2 , Yongxin Yang1,3 , Timothy Hospedales1,4,5 , Tao Xiang1,2 & Yi-Zhe Song1,2
 1
  SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey; 2 iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on AI;
 3
  Queen Mary University of London; 4 University of Edinburgh, 5 Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge
 a.das@surrey.ac.uk, yongxin.yang@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk,
 {t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT
         Generative modelling over continuous-time geometric constructs, a.k.a chiro-
         graphic data such as handwriting, sketches, drawings etc., have been accom-
         plished through autoregressive distributions. Such strictly-ordered discrete fac-
         torization however falls short of capturing key properties of chirographic data – it
         fails to build holistic understanding of the temporal concept due to one-way visi-
         bility (causality). Consequently, temporal data has been modelled as discrete to-
         ken sequences of fixed sampling rate instead of capturing the true underlying con-
         cept. In this paper, we introduce a powerful model-class namely Denoising Dif-
         fusion Probabilistic Models or DDPMs for chirographic data that specifically ad-
         dresses these flaws. Our model named “C HIRO D IFF”, being non-autoregressive,
         learns to capture holistic concepts and therefore remains resilient to higher tem-
         poral sampling rate up to a good extent. Moreover, we show that many important
         downstream utilities (e.g. conditional sampling, creative mixing) can be flexi-
         bly implemented using C HIRO D IFF. We further show some unique use-cases like
         stochastic vectorization, de-noising/healing, abstraction are also possible with this
         model-class. We perform quantitative and qualitative evaluation of our framework
         on relevant datasets and found it to be better or on par with competing approaches.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Chirographic data like handwriting, sketches, drawings etc. are ubiquitous in modern day digi-
tal contents, thanks to the widespread adoption of touch screen and other interactive devices (e.g.
AR/VR sets). While supervised downstream tasks on such data like sketch-based image retrieval
(SBIR) (Liu et al., 2020; Pang et al., 2019), semantic segmentation (Yang et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2020), classification (Yu et al., 2015; 2017) continue to flourish due to higher commercial demand,
unsupervised generative modelling remains slightly under-explored. Recently however, with the
advent of large-scale datasets, generative modelling of chirographic data started to gain traction.
Specifically, models have been trained on generic doodles/drawings data (Ha & Eck, 2018), or more
“specialized” entities like fonts (Lopes et al., 2019), diagrams (Gervais et al., 2020; Aksan et al.,
2020), SVG Icons (Carlier et al., 2020) etc. Building unconditional neural generative models not
only allows understanding the distribution of chirographic data but also enables further downstream
tasks (e.g. segmentation, translation) by means of conditioning.


Figure 1: Unconditional samples from C HIRO D IFF trained on VMNIST, KanjiVG and Quick,
Draw!.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Latent space interpolation (Top) with C HIRO D IFF using DDIM sampler and (Bottom)
with auto-regressive model. C HIRO D IFF’s latent space is much more effective with compositional
structures for complex data.
By far, learning neural models over continuous-time chirographic structures have been facilitated
broadly by two different representations – grid-based raster image and vector graphics. Raster for-
mat, the de-facto representation for natural images, has served as an obvious choice for chirographic
structures (Yu et al., 2015; 2017). The static nature of the representation however does not pro-
vide the means for modelling the underlying creative process that is inherent in drawing. “Creative
models”, powered by topology specific vector formats (Carlier et al., 2020; Aksan et al., 2020; Ha
& Eck, 2018; Lopes et al., 2019; Das et al., 2022), on the other hand, are specifically motivated
to mimic this dynamic creation process. They build distributions of a chirographic entity (e.g., a
sketch) X with a specific topology (drawing direction, stroke order etc), i.e. pθ (X). Majority of
the creative models are designed with autoregressive distributions (Ha & Eck, 2018; Aksan et al.,
2020; Ribeiro et al., 2020). Such design choice is primarily due to vector formats having variable
lengths, which is elegantly handled by autoregression. Doing so, however, restrict the model from
gaining full visibility of the data and fails to build holistic understanding of the temporal concepts. A
simple demonstration of its latent-space interpolation confirms this hypothesis (Figure 2). The other
possibility is to drop the ordering/sequentiality of the points entirely and treat chirographic data as
2D point-sets and use prominent techniques from 3D point-cloud modelling (Luo & Hu, 2021a;b;
Cai et al., 2020). However, point-set representation does not fit chirographic data well due to its
inherently unstructured nature. In this paper, with C HIRO D IFF, we find a sweet spot and propose a
framework that uses non-autoregressive density while retaining its sequential nature.
Another factor in traditional neural chirographic models that limit the representation is effective
handling of temporal resolution. Chirographic structures are inherently continuous-time entities
as rightly noted by Das et al. (2022). Prior works like SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018) modelled
continuous-time chirographic data as discrete token sequence or motor program. Due to limited vis-
ibility, these models do not have means to accommodate different sampling rates and are therefore
specialized to learn for one specific temporal resolution (seen during training), leading to the loss
of spatial/temporal scalability essential for digital contents. Even though there have been attempts
(Aksan et al., 2020; Das et al., 2020) to directly represent continuous-time entities with their un-
derlying geometric parameters, most of them still possess some form of autoregression. Recently,
SketchODE (Das et al., 2022) approached to solve this problem by using Neural ODE (abbreviated
as NODE) (Chen et al., 2018) for representing time-derivative of continuous-time functions. How-
ever, the computationally restrictive nature of NODE’s training algorithm makes it extremely hard
to train and adopt beyond simple temporal structures. C HIRO D IFF, having visibility of the entire
sequence, is capable of implicitly modelling the sampling rate from data and consequently is robust
to learning the continuous-time temporal concept that underlies the discrete motor program. In that
regard, C HIRO D IFF outperforms Das et al. (2022) significantly by adopting a model-class superior
in terms of computational costs and representational power while training on similar data.
We chose Denoising Diffusion Probabilstic Models (abbr. as DDPMs) as the model class due to their
spectacular ability to capture both diversity and fidelity (Ramesh et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2022).
Furthermore, Diffusion Models are gaining significant popularity and nearly replacing GANs in
wide range of visual synthesis tasks due to their stable training dynamics and generation quality.
A surprising majority of existing works on Diffusion Model is solely based or specialized to grid-
based raster images, leaving important modalities like sequences behind. Even though there are
some isolated works on modelling sequential data, but they have mostly been treated as fixed-length
entities (Tashiro et al., 2021). Our proposed model, in that regard, is one of the first models to exhibit
the potential to apply Diffusion Model on continuous-time entities. To this end, our generative model
generates X by transforming a discretized brownian motion with unit step size.
We consider learning stochastic generative model for continuous-time chirographic data both in un-
conditional (samples shown in Figure 1) and conditional manner. Unlike autoregressive models,
C HIRO D IFF offers a way to draw conditional samples from the model without an explicit encoder


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


when conditioned on homogeneous data (see section 5.4.2). Yet another similar but important ap-
plication we consider is stochastic vectorization, i.e. sampling probable topological reconstruction
X given a perceptive input R(X) where R is a converter from vector representation to perceptive
representation (e.g. raster image or point-cloud). We also learn deterministic mapping from noise
to data with a variant of DDPM namely Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model or DDIM which al-
lows latent space interpolations like Ha & Eck (2018) and Das et al. (2022). A peculiar property of
C HIRO D IFF allows a variant of the traditional interpolation which we term as “Creative Mixing”,
which do not require the model to be trained only on one end-points of the interpolation. We also
show a number of unique use-cases like denoising/healing (Su et al., 2020; Luo & Hu, 2021a) and
controlled abstraction (Muhammad et al., 2019; Das et al., 2022) in the context of chirographic data.
As a drawback however, we loose some of the abilities of autoregressive models like stochastic
completion etc.
In summary, we propose a Diffusion Model based framework, C HIRO D IFF, specifically suited for
modelling continuous-time chirographic data (section 4) which, so far, has predominantly been
treated with autoregressive densities. Being non-autoregressive, C HIRO D IFF is capable of capturing
holistic temporal concepts, leading to better reconstruction and generation metrics (section 5.3). To
this end, we propose the first diffusion model capable of handling temporally continuous data modal-
ity with variable length. We show a plethora of interesting and important downstream applications
for chirographic data supported by C HIRO D IFF (section 5.4).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Causal auto-regressive recurrent networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014) were
considered to be a natural choice for sequential data modalities due to their inherent ability to encode
ordering. It was the dominant tool for modelling natural language (NLP) (Bowman et al., 2016),
video (Srivastava et al., 2015) and audio (van den Oord et al., 2016). Recently, due to the break-
throughs in NLP (Vaswani et al., 2017), interests have shifted towards non-autoregressive models
even for other modalities (Girdhar et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019). Continuous-time chirographic
models also experienced a similar shift in model class from LSTMs (Graves, 2013) to Transformers
(Ribeiro et al., 2020; Aksan et al., 2020) in terms of representation learning. Most of them however,
still contains autoregressive generative components (e.g. causal transformers). Lately, set struc-
tures have also been experimented with (Carlier et al., 2020) for representing chirographic data as
a collection of strokes. Due to difficulty with generating sets (Zaheer et al., 2017), their objective
function requires explicit accounting for mis-alignments. C HIRO D IFF finds a middle ground with
the generative component being non-autoregressive while retaining the notion of order. A recent un-
published work (Luhman & Luhman, 2020) applied diffusion models out-of-the-box to handwriting
generation, although it lacks right design choices, explanations and extensive experimentation.
Diffusion Models (DM), although existed for a while (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), made a break-
through recently in generative modelling (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ramesh et al.,
2021; Nichol et al., 2022). They are arguably by now the de-facto model for broad class of im-
age generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) due to their ability to achieve both fidelity and diversity.
With consistent improvements like efficient samplers (Song et al., 2021a; Liu et al., 2022), latent-
space diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), classifier(-free) guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022; Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021) these models are gaining traction in diverse set of vision-language (VL) problem.
Even though DMs are generic in terms of theoretical formulation, very little focus have been given
so far in non-image modalities (Lam et al., 2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022).

3   D ENOISING D IFFUSION P ROBABILISTIC M ODELS (DDPM)
DDPMs (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) are parametric densities realized by a stochas-
tic “reverse diffusion” process that transforms a predefined isotropic gaussian prior p(XT ) =
N (XT ; 0, I) into model distribution pθ (X0 ) by de-noising it in T discrete steps. The sequence of
T parametric de-noising distributions admit markov property, i.e. pθ (Xt−1 |Xt:T ) = pθ (Xt−1 |Xt )
and can be chosen as gaussians (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) as long as T is large enough. With the
model parameters defined as θ, the de-noising conditionals have the form
                          pθ (Xt−1 |Xt ) := N (Xt−1 ; µθ (Xt , t), Σθ (Xt , t))                     (1)


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Brownian Motion


                                                                                                    Sampled data
Real data


                         Forward Diffusion                             Reverse Diffusion

Figure 3: The forward and reverse diffusion on chirographic data. The “disconnected lines” effect is
due to the pen-bits being diffused together. We show the topology by color map (black to yellow).


Sampling can be performed with a DDPM sampler (Ho et al., 2020) by starting at the prior XT ∼
p(XT ) and running ancestral sampling till t = 0 using pθ∗ (Xt−1 |Xt ) where θ∗ denotes a set of
trained model parameters.
Due to the presence of latent variables X1:T , it is difficult to directly optimize the log-likelihood
of the model pθ (X0 ). Practical training is done by first simulating the latent variables by a given
“forward diffusion” process which allows sampling X1:T by means of
                                                   √
                             q(Xt |X0 ) = N (Xt ; αt X0 ; (1 − αt )I)                               (2)
with αt ∈ (0, 1), a monotonically decreasing function of t, that completely specifies the for-
ward noising process. By virtue of Eq. 2 and simplifying the reverse conditionals in Eq. 1 with
Σθ (Xt , t) := σt2 I, Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015); Ho et al. (2020) derived an approximate variational
bound Lsimple (θ) that works well in practice
                                                              h                             i
               Lsimple (θ) = EX0 ∼q(X0 ),t∼U [1,T ], ϵ∼N (0,I) ||ϵ − ϵθ (Xt (X0 , ϵ), t)||2
where
√       a reparameterized
            √                Eq. 2 is used to compute a “noisy” version of X0 as Xt (X0 , ϵ) =
  αt X0 + 1 − αt ϵ. Also note that the original parameterization of µθ (Xt , t) is modified in favour
of ϵθ (Xt , t), an estimator to predict the noise
                                                 ϵ given a noisy sample
                                                                      Xt at any step t. Please note
                                                        β
that they are related as µθ (Xt , t) = √1−β Xt − √1−α ϵθ (Xt , t) where βt ≜ 1 − ααt−1
                                          1              t                                t
                                                                                             .
                                             t                     t


4           D IFFUSION M ODEL FOR CHIROGRAPHIC DATA

Just like traditional approaches, we use the polyline sequence X = · · · , x(j) , p(j) , · · · where
the j-th point is x(j) ∈ R2 and p(j) ∈ {−1, 1} is a binary bit denoting the pen state, signaling an end
of stroke. This representation is popularized by Ha & Eck (2018) and known as Three-point format.
We employ the same pre-processing steps (equispaced resampling, spatial scaling etc) laid down by
Ha & Eck (2018). Note that the cardinality of the sequence |X| may vary for different samples.
C HIRO D IFF is fairly similar to the standard DDPM described in section 3, with the sequence X
treated as a vector arranged by a particular topology. However, we found     it beneficial not
                                                                                              to di-

rectly use absolute points sequence X but instead use velocities V = · · · , v(j) , p(j) , · · · ,
where v(j) = x(j+1) − x(j) which can be readily computed using crude forward/backward differ-
                                                                                              ′
ences. Upon generation, we can restore its original form by computing x(j) = j ′ ≤j v(j ) . By
                                                                                   P
modelling higher-order derivatives (velocity instead of position), the model focuses on high-level
concepts rather than local temporal details (Ha & Eck, 2018; Das et al., 2022). We may use X and
V interchangeably as they can be cheaply converted back and forth at any time.
Please note that we will use the subscript t to denote the diffusion step and the superscript (j) to
denote elements in the sequence. Following section 3, we define C HIRO D IFF, our primary chi-
rographic generative model pθ (V ) also as DDPM. We use a forward diffusion process termed as
                                                   (j) (j)
“sequence-diffusion” that diffuses each element (v0 , p0 ) independently analogous to Eq. 2


                                           Q|V | (j) (j) Q|V |   (j) (j)
                             q(Vt |V0 ) = j=1 q(vt |v0 ) j=1 q(pt |p0 ), with
               (j) (j)        (j) √      (j)             (j) (j)        (j) √  (j)
            q(vt |v0 ) = N (vt ; αt v0 , (1 − αt )I), q(pt |p0 ) = N (pt ; αt p0 , (1 − αt )I)


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Forward Diffusion (Lower sampling)                 Reverse Diffusion (Higher sampling)


    Figure 4: The reverse process started with higher cardinality |X| than the forward process.


                                                                  Q|V |    (j) Q|V |   (j)
Consequently, the prior at t = T has the form q(VT ) =              j=1 q(vT )  j=1 q(pT ) where individual
                                                      (j)   (j)
elements are standard normal, i.e. q(vT ) = q(pT ) = N (0, I). Note that we treat the binary pen
state just like a continuous variable, an approach recently termed as “analog bits” by Chen et al.
(2022). Our experimentation show that it works quite well in practice. While generating, we map
the analog bit to its original discrete states {−1, 1} by simple thresholding at p = 0.
With the reverse sequence diffusion process modelled as parametric conditional gaussian kernels
similar to section 3, i.e. pθ (Vt−1 |Vt ) := N (Vt−1 ; µθ (Vt , t), σt2 I) and analogous change in parame-
terization (from µθ to ϵθ ), we can minimize the following loss
                                                                 h                            i
                Lsimple (θ) = EV0 ∼q(V0 ), t∼U [1,T ], ϵ∼N (0,I) ||ϵ − ϵθ (Vt (V0 , ϵ), t)||2          (3)
With a trained ϵθ∗ , we can run DDPM sampler as Vt−1 ∼ pθ∗ (Vt−1 |Vt ) (refer to section 3) iteratively
for t = T → 1. A deterministic variant, namely DDIM (Song et al., 2021a), can also be used as
                                       √
                         √         Vt − 1 − αt ϵθ∗ (Vt , t)    p
                Vt−1 = αt−1               √                   + 1 − αt−1 ϵθ∗ (Vt , t)               (4)
                                            αt
Unlike the usual choice of U-Net in pixel-based perception models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021b; Ramesh et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2022), C HIRO D IFF requires a sequence encoder as
ϵθ (Vt , t) in order to preserve and utilize the ordering of elements. We chose to encode each element
                                                                  (j)
in the sequence with the entire sequence as context, i.e. ϵθ (vt , Vt , t). Two prominent choices for
such functional form are Bi-directional RNN (Bi-RNN) and Transformer encoder (Lee et al., 2019)
with positional embedding. We noticed that Bi-RNN works quite well and provides much faster and
better convergence. A design choice we found beneficial is to concatenate the absolute positions
Xt along with Vt to the model, i.e. ϵθ (·, [Vt ; Xt ], t), exposing the model to the absolute state of
the noisy data at t instead of drawing dynamics only. Since Xt can be computed from Vt itself,
we drop Xt from the function arguments now onward just for notation brevity. Please note that the
generation process is non-causal as it has access to the entire sequence while diffusing. This gives
rise to a non-autoregressive model and thereby focusing on holistic concepts instead of low-level
motor program. This design allows the reverse diffusion (generation) process to correct any part of
sequence from earlier mistakes, which is a not possible in auto-regressive models.

Transforming “Brownian motion” into “Guided motion”:                  C HIRO D IFF’s generation pro-
cess has an interesting interpretation. Recall that the reverse diffusion process begins at VT =
           (j) (j)                                        (j)
[· · · , (vT , pT ), · · · ] where each velocity element vT ∼ N (0, I). Due to our velocity-position
                                                                          (j)    P (j ′ )
encoding described above, the original chirographic structure is then xT = j ′ vT which, by
definition, is a discretized brownian motion with unit step size. With the reverse process unrolled in
time, the brownian motion with full randomness transforms into a motion with structure, leading to
realistic data samples. We illustrate the entire process in Figure 3.

Length conditioned re-sampling: A noticeable property of C HIRO D IFF’s generative process is
that there is no hard conditioning on the cardinality of the sequence |X| or |V | due to our choice of
the parametric model ϵθ (·, t). As a result, we can kick-off the generation (reverse diffusion) process
                                       QL         (j)   (j)
by sampling from a prior p(VT ) = j=1 q(vT )q(pT ) of any length L, potentially higher than
what the model was trained on. We hypothesize and empirically show (in section 5.3) that if trained
to optimiality, the model indeed captures high level geometric concepts and can generate similar
data with higher sampling rate (refer to Figure 4) with relatively less error. We credit this behaviour
to the accessibility of the entire sequence Vt (and additionally Xt ) to the model ϵθ (·). With the full
sequence visible, the model can potentially build an internal (implicit) global representation which
explains the resilience on increased temporal sampling resolution.


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               (A) Recons. (VMNIST)              (B) Recons. (KanjiVG)            (C) Recons. (QuickDraw)   (D) Convergance/Sampling time (wrt ours)        (E) Generation FID (uncond.)
                    0.05                               0.6                               0.6                                                                           60
                                 Ours                              Ours                               Ours                         VMNIST                                         VMNIST
                                 S.RNN                 0.5         S.RNN                 0.5          S.RNN                        KanjiVG                             50         KanjiVG

 Chamfer Distance
                    0.04                                                                                                           QD
                                 S.ODE                             CoSE                               S.ODE                                                            40         QD
                                 CoSE                  0.4                               0.4          CoSE
                    0.03                                                                                                                                               30
                                                       0.3                               0.3
                                                                                                                                                                       20
                    0.02                               0.2                               0.2                                                                           10
                    0.01                               0.1                               0.1                                                                            0
                           1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00          1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00          1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00        Ours CoSE S.RNN S.ODE                         Ours      CoSE      S.RNN
                                Sampling rate factor              Sampling rate factor              Sampling rate factor
Figure 5: (A, B, C) Reconstruction CD against sampling rate factor. (D) Relative convergence time
& sampling time (transparent bars) w.r.t our method. (E) FID of unconditional generation (averaged
over multiple classes for QD).
5                       E XPERIMENTS & R ESULTS
5.1                        DATASETS
VectorMNIST or VMNIST (Das et al., 2022) is a vector analog of traditional MNIST digits
dataset. It contains 10K samples of 10 digits (’0’ to ’9’) represented in polyline sequence format.
We use 80-10-10 splits for our all our experimentation.

KanjiVG1 is a vector dataset containing Kanji characters. We use a preprocessed version of the
dataset2 which converted the original SVGs into polyline sequences. This dataset is used in order to
evaluate our method’s effective on complex chirographic structures with higher number of strokes.

Quick, Draw! (Ha & Eck, 2018) is the largest collection of free-hand doodling dataset with
casual depictions of given concepts. This dataset is an ideal choice for evaluating a method’s effec-
tiveness on real noisy data since it was collected by means of large scale crowd-sourcing. In this
paper, we use the following categories: {cat, crab, bus, mosquito, fish, yoga, flower}.

5.2                        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

C HIRO D IFF’s forward process, just like traditional DDPMs, uses a linear noising schedule of
  βmin = 10−4 · 1000/T, βmax = 2 × 10−2 · 1000/T as found out by Nichol & Dhariwal (2021);

Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) to be quite robust. We noticed that there isn’t much performance differ-
ence with different diffusion lengths, so we choose a standard value of T = 1000. The parametric
                        (j)
noise estimator ϵθ (vt , Vt , t) is chosen to be a bi-directional GRU encoder (Cho et al., 2014) where
each element of the sequence is encoded while having contextual information from both direction
of the sequence, making it non-causal. We use a 2-layer GRU with D = 48 hidden units for VM-
NIST and 3-layer GRU for QuickDraw (D = 128) and KanjiVG (D = 96). We also experimented
with transformers with positional encoding but failed to achieve reasonable results, concluding that
positional encoding is not a good choice for representing continuous time. We trained all of our
models by minimizing Eq. 3 using AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) and step-wise
LR scheduling of γe = 0.9997·γe−1 at every epoch e where γ0 = 6×10−3 . The diffusion time-step
t ∈ 1, 2, · · · , T was made available to the model by concatenating sinusoidal positional embeddings
(Vaswani et al., 2017) into each element of a sequence at every layer. We noticed the importance of
reverse process variance σt2 in terms of generation quality of our models. We found σt2 = 0.8β̃t to
work well in majority of the cases, where β̃t = 1−α      t−1
                                                      1−αt βt as defined by Ho et al. (2020) to be true
variance of the forward process posterior. Please refer to the project page3 for full source code.

5.3                        Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATIONS

In order to assess the effectiveness of our model for chirographic data, we perform quantitative eval-
uations and compare with relevant approaches. We measure performance in terms of representation
learning, generative modelling and computational efficiency. By choosing proper dimensions for
competing methods/architectures, we ensured approximately same model capacity (# of parame-
ters) for fare comparison.

                    1
                      Original KanjiVG: kanjivg.tagaini.net
                    2
                      Pre-processed KanjiVG: github.com/hardmaru/sketch-rnn-datasets/tree/master/kanji
                    3
                      Our project page: https://ayandas.me/chirodiff


                                                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Reconstruction We construct a condi-


                                               SketchRNN Condition
tional variant of C HIRO D IFF with an en-
coder EV being a traditional Bi-GRU for
fully encoding a given data sample V
into latent code z. The decoder, in our


                                                 CoSE
case, is a diffusion model described in sec-


                                                  ChiroDIff SketchODE
tion 4. We sample from the conditional
model pθ (V0 |z = EV (V )) which is effec-
tively same as standard DDPM but with
the noise-estimator ϵθ∗ (Vt , t, z) addition-
ally conditioned on z. We expose the la- Figure 6: 1st and 2nd column for each example depicts
tent variable z to the noise-estimator by sampling rate 1 & 2 respectively while reconstructing.
simply concatenating it with every ele-
ment j at all timestep t ∈ [1, T ]. We also evaluate C HIRO D IFF’s ability to adopt to higher tem-
poral resolution while sampling, proving our hypothesis that it captures concepts at a holistic level.
We encode a sample with EV , and decode explicitly with a higher temporal sampling rate (refer to
section 4). We compare our method with relevant frameworks like SketchODE (Das et al., 2022),
SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018) and CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020). Since autoregressive models like
SketchRNN has no explicit way to increase temporal resolution, we train different models with re-
sampled data, which is already disadvantageous. We quantitatively compare them with Chamfer
Distance (CD) (Qi et al., 2017) (ignore the pen-up bit) for conditional reconstruction. Figure 5
shows the reconstruction CD against sampling rate factor (multiple of the original data cardinality)
which shows the resilience of our model against higher sampling rate. SketchRNN being autore-
gressive, fails at high sampling rate (longer sequences), as visible in Figure 5(A, B & C). CoSE and
SketchODE being naturally continuous, has a relatively flat curve. Also, we couldn’t reasonably
train SketchODE on the complex KanjiVG dataset (due to computational and convergance issues)
and hence omitted from Figure 5. Qualitative examples of reconstruction shown in Fig. 6.

Generation We assess the generative performance of C HIRO D IFF by sampling unconditionally
(in 50 steps with DDIM sampler) and compute the FID score against the real data samples. Since
the original inception network is not trained on chirographic data, we train our own on Quick, Draw!
dataset (Ha & Eck, 2018) following the setup of (Ge et al., 2021). We compare our method with
SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018) and CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020) on all three datasets. Quantitative
results in Figure 5(E) show a consistent superiority of our model in terms of generation FID. Quick-
Draw FID values are averaged over the individual categories used. Qualitative samples are shown
in Figure 1 and more in appendix A.1 with potential drawbacks highlighted. We also conducted a
small scale user study to validate our generated samples and found our method to be superior (see
appendix A.3 for details).

Computational Efficiency We also compare our method with competing methods in terms of
ease of training and convergence. We found that our method, being from Diffusion Model family,
enjoys easy training dynamics and relatively faster convergence (refer to Figure 5(D)). We also
provide approximate sampling time for unconditional generation.

5.4     D OWNSTREAM A PPLICATIONS

5.4.1    S TOCHASTIC VECTORIZATION
An interesting use-case of generative chirographic model is stochastic vectorization, i.e. recreating
plausible chirographic structure (with topology) from a given perceptive input. This application is
intriguing due to human’s innate ability to do the same with ease. The recent success of diffusion
models in capturing distributions with high number of modes (Ramesh et al., 2021; Nichol et al.,
2022) prompted us to use it for stochastic vectorization, a problem of inferring potentially multi-
modal distribution. We simply condition our generative model on a perceptive input X = R(X) =
{x(j) |(x(j) , p(j) ) ∈ X}, i.e. we convert the sequence into a point-set (also densely resample them
as part of pre-processing). We employ a set-transformer encoder ER (·) with max-pooling aggregator
(Lee et al., 2019) to obtain a latent vector z and condition the generative model similar to section 5.3,
i.e. pθ (V |z = ER (X )). We evaluated the conditional generation with Chamfer Distance (CD) on
test set and compare with Das et al. (2021) (refer to Figure 7).


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.4.2   I MPLICIT C ONDITIONING
Unlike explicit conditioning mechanism (includes an encoder)
described in section 5.3, C HIRO D IFF allows a form of “Im-


                                                                        Chamfer Distance
plicit Conditioning” which requires no explicit encoder. Such
conditioning is more stochastic and may not be used for re-
construction, but can be used to sample similar data from a
pre-trained model pθ∗ . Given a condition X0cond (or V0cond ),
we sample a noisy version at t = Tc < T (a hyperparam-
eter) using the forward diffusion (Eq. 2) process as VTcond   =
√        cond  √                                         c
  αTc V0      + 1 − αTc ϵ where ϵ ∼ N (0, I). We then utilize
the trained model pθ∗ to gradually de-noise VTcond  . We run the
reverse process from t = Tc till t = 0
                                                c
                                                                 Figure 7: Stochastic vectoriza-
                                                                 tion. Note the different topolo-
                                                                 gies (color map) of the samples.
   Vt−1 ∼ pθ∗ (Vt−1 |Vt ), for Tc > t > 0, with VTc := VTcond
                                                          c


The hyperparameter Tc controls how much the generated samples correlate the given condition. By
starting the reverse process at t = Tc with the noisy condition, we essentially restrict the generation
to be within a region of the data space that resembles the condition. Higher the value of Tc , the
generated samples will resemble the condition more (refer to Figure 8). We also classified the
generated samples for VMNIST & Quick, Draw! and found it to belong to the same class as the
condition 93% of the time in average.

5.4.3   H EALING
The task of healing is more prominent in 3D
point-cloud literature (Luo & Hu, 2021a). Even
though the typical chirographic (autoregres-
sive) models offer “stochastic completion” (Ha
& Eck, 2018), it does not offer an easy way
to “heal” a sample due to uni-directional gen-
eration. It is only very recently, works have
emerged that propose tools for healing bad
sketches (Su et al., 2020). With diffusion model
family, it is fairly straightforward to solve this
problem with C HIRO D IFF. Given a “poor” chi-
                                                                                 Bad   Healed Bad   Healed
rographic data X̃0 , we would like to generate
samples from a region in pθ∗ (X0 ) close to X̃0         Figure 8: Implicit conditioning and healing.
in terms of semantic concept. Surprisingly, this problem can be solved with the “Implicit Condi-
tioning” described in section 5.4.2. Instead of a real data as condition, we provide the poorly drawn
data X̃0 (equivalently Ṽ0 ) as condition. Just as before, we run the reverse process starting at t = Th
with VTh := ṼTh in order to sample from a healed data distribution around Ṽ0 . Th is a similar
hyperparameter that decides the trade-off between healing the given sample and drifting away from
it in terms of high-level concept. Refer to Figure 8 (right) for qualitative samples of healing (with
Th = T /5).

5.4.4   C REATIVE M IXING
Creative Mixing is a chirographic task of merging two high-level concepts into one. This task is
usually implemented as latent-space interpolation in traditional autoencoder-style generative models
(Ha & Eck, 2018; Das et al., 2022). A variant of C HIRO D IFF that uses DDIM sampler (Song et al.,
2021a), can be used for similar interpolations. We use a pre-trained conditional model to decode
the interpolated latent vector using VT = 0 as a fixed point. Given two samples V01 and V02 , we
compute the interpolated latent variable as zinterp = (1 − δ)EV (V01 ) + δEV (V02 ) for any δ ∈ [0, 1]
and run DDIM sampler shown in Eq. 4 with the noise-estimator ϵθ∗ (Vt , t, zinterp ).
This solution works well for some datasets (KanjiVG & VMNIST; shown in Figure 9 (left)). For
others (Quick, Draw), we instead propose a more general method inspired by ILVR (Choi et al.,
2021) that allows “mixing” using the DDPM sampler itself. In fact, it allows us to perform mixing


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: (Left) Latent-space semantic interpolation with DDIM. (Right) Creative Mixing shown as
three-tuples consisting of X0 , X0ref and the mixed sample respectively.

without one of the samples (reference sample) being known to the trained model. Given two samples
of potentially different concepts, X0 and X0ref (or equivalently V0 and V0ref ), we sample from a pre-
trained conditional model given V0 , but with a modified reverse process
                               ′          ′            ref
                       Xt−1 = Xt−1 − Φω (Xt−1 ) + Φω (Xt−1 )
                         ′                                        ref       ref
                where, Vt−1 ∼ pθ∗ (Vt−1 |Vt , z = EV (V0 ), and Vt−1  ∼ q(Vt−1  |V0ref )

where Φω (·) is a temporal low-pass filter that reduces high-frequency details of the input data along
temporal axis. We implement Φω (·) using temporal 1D convolution of window size ω = 7. Please
note that for the operation in Eq. 5.4.4 to be valid, the sequences must be of same length. We simply
resample the conditioning sequence to match the cardinality of the reverse process. The three-tuples
presented in Figure 9(right) shows the mixing between different categories of Quick, Draw!.

5.4.5   C ONTROLLED A BSTRACTION
                                                              Visual abstraction is a relatively new
                                                              task (Muhammad et al., 2019; Das
                                                              et al., 2022) in chirographic literature
                                                              that refers to deriving a new distri-
                                                              bution (possibly with a control) that
                                                              holistically matches the data distribu-
                                                              tion, but more “abstracted” in terms
                                                              of details. Our definition to the prob-
Figure 10: With reduced reverse process variance σt2 = k· β̃, lem matches that of Das et al. (2022),
generated samples looses high-frequency details but retains but with an advantage of being able
abstract concepts.                                            to use the same model instead of re-
                                                              training for different controls.
The solution of the problem lies in the sampling process of C HIRO D IFF, which has an abstraction
effect when the reverse process variance σt2 is low. We define a continuous control k ∈ [0, 1]
as hyperparameter and use a reverse process variance of σt2 = k · β̃t . The rationale behind this
method is that when k is near zero, the reverse process stops exploring the data distribution and
converges near the dominant modes, which are data points conceptually resembling original data but
more “canonical” representation (highly likely under data distribution). Figure 10 shows qualitative
results of this observation on Quick, Draw!.

6   C ONCLUSIONS , L IMITATIONS & F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we introduced C HIRO D IFF, a non-autoregressive genera-
tive model for chirographic data. ChiroDiff is powered by DDPM and
offers better holistic modelling of concepts that benefits many down-
stream tasks, some of which are not feasible with competing autore-
gressive models. One limitation of our approach is that vector represen-
tations are more susceptible to noise than raster images (see Figure 11
(Top)). Since we empirically set the reverse (generative) process vari- Figure 11: (Top) Noisy
ance σt2 , the noise sometimes overwhelms the model-predicted mean vector and raster data at
(see Figure 11 (Bottom)). Moreover, due the use of velocities, the ac- same α. (Bottom) Failures
cumulated absolute positions also accumulate the noise in proportion to due to noise.
its cardinality. One possible solution is to modify the noising process to be adaptive to the generation
or the data cardinality itself. We leave this as a potential future improvement on C HIRO D IFF.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Emre Aksan, Thomas Deselaers, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Otmar Hilliges. Cose: Compositional
  stroke embeddings. NeurIPS, 2020.

Samuel R. Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Dai, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Samy Bengio.
  Generating sentences from a continuous space. In CoNLL, 2016.

Ruojin Cai, Guandao Yang, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Zekun Hao, Serge J. Belongie, Noah Snavely,
  and Bharath Hariharan. Learning gradient fields for shape generation. In ECCV, 2020.

Alexandre Carlier, Martin Danelljan, Alexandre Alahi, and Radu Timofte. Deepsvg: A hierarchical
  generative network for vector graphics animation. NeurIPS, 2020.

Tian Qi Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential
  equations. In NeurIPS, 2018.

Ting Chen, Ruixiang Zhang, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Analog bits: Generating discrete data using
  diffusion models with self-conditioning. ArXiv, abs/2208.04202, 2022.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
  ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder
  for statistical machine translation. In EMNLP, 2014.

Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. ILVR:
  conditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In ICCV, 2021.

Ayan Das, Yongxin Yang, Timothy Hospedales, Tao Xiang, and Yi-Zhe Song. Béziersketch: A
  generative model for scalable vector sketches. In ECCV, 2020.

Ayan Das, Yongxin Yang, Timothy M. Hospedales, Tao Xiang, and Yi-Zhe Song. Cloud2curve:
  Generation and vectorization of parametric sketches. In CVPR, 2021.

Ayan Das, Yongxin Yang, Timothy M Hospedales, Tao Xiang, and Yi-Zhe Song. Sketchode: Learn-
  ing neural sketch representation in continuous time. In ICLR, 2022.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.

Songwei Ge, Vedanuj Goswami, Larry Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Creative sketch generation. In
  ICLR, 2021.

Philippe Gervais, Thomas Deselaers, Emre Aksan, and Otmar Hilliges. The DIDI dataset: Digital
  ink diagram data. CoRR, 2020.

Rohit Girdhar, João Carreira, Carl Doersch, and Andrew Zisserman. Video action transformer net-
  work. In CVPR, 2019.

Alex Graves.     Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.

David Ha and Douglas Eck. A neural representation of sketch drawings. In ICLR, 2018.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. CoRR, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput., 1997.

Emiel Hoogeboom, Victor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant diffu-
  sion for molecule generation in 3d. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), ICML, 2022.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Ian Simon, Curtis Hawthorne, Noam
  Shazeer, Andrew M. Dai, Matthew D. Hoffman, Monica Dinculescu, and Douglas Eck. Music
  transformer: Generating music with long-term structure. In ICLR, 2019.

Max W. Y. Lam, Jun Wang, Dan Su, and Dong Yu. BDDM: bilateral denoising diffusion models for
 fast and high-quality speech synthesis. In ICLR, 2022.

Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam R. Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set
  transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In ICML,
  2019.

Fang Liu, Changqing Zou, Xiaoming Deng, Ran Zuo, Yu-Kun Lai, Cuixia Ma, Yong-Jin Liu, and
  Hongan Wang. Scenesketcher: Fine-grained image retrieval with scene sketches. In ECCV, 2020.

Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. In ICLR, 2022.

Raphael Gontijo Lopes, David Ha, Douglas Eck, and Jonathon Shlens. A learned representation for
  scalable vector graphics. In ICCV, 2019.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2019.

Troy Luhman and Eric Luhman.          Diffusion models for handwriting generation.        CoRR,
  abs/2011.06704, 2020.

Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Score-based point cloud denoising. In ICCV, 2021a.

Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud generation. In CVPR,
  2021b.

Umar Riaz Muhammad, Yongxin Yang, Timothy M Hospedales, Tao Xiang, and Yi-Zhe Song.
 Goal-driven sequential data abstraction. In ICCV, 2019.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, 2021.

Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
  Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), ICML, 2022.

K. Pang, K. Li, Y. Yang, H. Zhang, T. M. Hospedales, T. Xiang, and Y. -Z. Song. Generalising
  fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval. In CVPR, 2019.

Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J. Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on
  point sets for 3d classification and segmentation. In CVPR, 2017.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.),
  ICML, 2021.

Leo Sampaio Ferraz Ribeiro, Tu Bui, John P. Collomosse, and Moacir Ponti.         Sketchformer:
  Transformer-based representation for sketched structure. In CVPR, 2020.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. CVPR, 2021.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR,
   2021a.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and
  Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In ICLR,
  2021b.
Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan Salakhudinov. Unsupervised learning of video
  representations using lstms. In ICML, 2015.
Guoyao Su, Yonggang Qi, Kaiyue Pang, Jie Yang, and Yi-Zhe Song. Sketchhealer: A graph-to-
  sequence network for recreating partial human sketches. In BMVC, 2020.
Yusuke Tashiro, Jiaming Song, Yang Song, and Stefano Ermon. CSDI: conditional score-based
  diffusion models for probabilistic time series imputation. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Aäron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
  Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew W. Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model
  for raw audio. In ISCA, 2016.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Fei Wang, Shujin Lin, Hanhui Li, Hefeng Wu, Tie Cai, Xiaonan Luo, and Ruomei Wang. Multi-
  column point-cnn for sketch segmentation. Neurocomputing, 2020.
Minkai Xu, Lantao Yu, Yang Song, Chence Shi, Stefano Ermon, and Jian Tang. Geodiff: A geomet-
 ric diffusion model for molecular conformation generation. In ICLR, 2022.
Lumin Yang, Jiajie Zhuang, Hongbo Fu, Xiangzhi Wei, Kun Zhou, and Youyi Zheng. SketchGNN:
  Semantic sketch segmentation with graph neural networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 2021.
Qian Yu, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, Tao Xiang, and Timothy Hospedales. Sketch-a-net that beats
  humans. In BMVC, 2015.
Qian Yu, Yongxin Yang, Feng Liu, Yi-Zhe Song, Tao Xiang, and Timothy Hospedales. Sketch-a-net:
  A deep neural network that beats humans. IJCV, 122:411–425, 2017.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabás Póczos, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J. Smola. Deep sets. In NeurIPS, 2017.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   Q UALITATIVE COMPARISONS

We make qualitative comparison of all the competing methods mentioned in this paper. We compare
unconditionally generated samples for SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018), CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020)
and C HIRO D IFF, with reconstructed samples for SketchODE (Das et al., 2022) since it is not pri-
marily a generative model. The qualitative samples given below (figure 12, 13 & 14) for all three
datasets from different models provide insights into their capabilities and drawbacks (we explicitly
highlighted some of them).
                      SketchRNN


                                                                            trajectories
                                                                              Broken
                                                                            variations
                      CoSE


                                                                              Less
                      SketchODE


                                                                            smooth
                                                                             Too
                      ChiroDiff


Figure 12: We show qualitative samples from different models trained on VectorMNIST dataset. We
notice some common failure case in other models which is mitigated in C HIRO D IFF. SketchRNN
suffers from broken trajectories, CoSE suffers from less variability due to it’s stroke-based genera-
tion and SketchODE produces overly smooth trajectories due to the truely continuous nature of the
underlying representation.
                                                                                           compositionality
          SketchRNN


                                                                                              Broken
                                                                                           structures
                                                                                           Repeated
          CoSE
          ChiroDiff


Figure 13: We show qualitative samples from different models trained on KanjiVG dataset. This
dataset is particularly suitable for assessing model’s capability to deal with large number of strokes
and difficult compositionality. SketchRNN suffers from broken compositionality due to lack of
holistic representation (causality), CoSE suffers from repeated stroke/structure in generation.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                            end-of-sketch
                SketchRNN


                                                                                               Broken

                                                                                                token
                                                                                                Less variation
                CoSE


                                                                                                Oversmoothening
                SketchODE
                ChiroDiff


Figure 14: We show qualitative samples from different models trained on QuickDraw dataset. We
noticed similar issues as mentioned for VectorMNIST dataset in Fig. 12.


A.2   TABLE FOR QUANTITATIVE RESULTS

In this subsection, we provide the quantitative results of all of our experiments mentioned in the
main paper in tabular format (table 1 & 2) in order to complement the graphical results of Fig. 5 &
7.
                     Datasets                   VMNIST                       KanjiVG                 Quick, Draw!
                 Scale-factor            1.0       1.5    2.0         1.0      1.5   2.0         1.0     1.5      2.0
 SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018)            0.0123    0.0137 0.0190       0.163    0.237 0.413       0.163 0.227 0.373
     CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020)         0.0213    0.0235 0.0280       0.143    0.172 0.235       0.133 0.172 0.244
  SketchODE (Das et al., 2022)         0.0279    0.0311 0.0346         –        –     –         0.411 0.431 0.474
          C HIRO D IFF (ours)          0.0121    0.0135 0.0176       0.121    0.155 0.206       0.11 0.136 0.204

                                               Datasets     VMNIST    KanjiVG    Quick, Draw!
                            SketchRNN(Ha & Eck, 2018)        1.31       2.7          1.3
                               CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020)      1.1       1.42         1.2
                            SketchODE (Das et al., 2022)      5.2         –          6.1
                                    C HIRO D IFF (ours)       1.0        1.0         1.0

                                               Datasets     VMNIST    KanjiVG    Quick, Draw!
                            SketchRNN(Ha & Eck, 2018)        0.18       0.26         0.28
                               CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020)     0.31       0.40         0.46
                            SketchODE (Das et al., 2022)     0.63         –          0.86
                                    C HIRO D IFF (ours)       1.0        1.0          1.0

                                                Datasets    VMNIST    KanjiVG    Quick, Draw!
                            SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018)       13.11     32.12        39.71
                                CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020)    10.05      23.8        35.46
                                     C HIRO D IFF (ours)     10.57     15.31        25.12

Table 1: Three tables above provide the quantitative results complementing fig. 5. The first table
shows reconstruction Chamfer Distance (CD) for various methods and datasets. The second and
third tables depict the relative convergence and sampling time w.r.t ours. The third table shows
unconditional generation FIDs.


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Datasets    VMNIST   KanjiVG   Quick, Draw!
                     Cloud2Curve (Das et al., 2021)     0.07    0.106       0.230
                              C HIRO D IFF (ours)      0.014    0.172       0.130

Table 2: The above table shows reconstruction CD between two methods comparing their stochastic
vectorization capabilities. This table complements graphical results of Fig. 7.


A.3   Q UALITATIVE USER STUDY

We conduct a small scale user validation study in order to verify the effectiveness of our generative
model. We first sampled a set of 20 samples from each model, i.e. C HIRO D IFF, SketchRNN (Ha &
Eck, 2018), CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020) and SketchODE as shown in appendix A.1. We show the set
of generated samples along with 20 real samples side-by-side to 10 users independently and asked
them to assess which one is realistic. Below tables shows the # of users identifying the generated
samples to be real. As can be inferred from the table, samples generated by C HIRO D IFF are labelled
to be realistic by more users than competing methods.

                                                      VMNIST   KanjiVG    QuickDraw
                     SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2018)         5         0           5
                         CoSE (Aksan et al., 2020)      6         3           4
                      SketchODE (Das et al., 2022)      2         –           0
                              C HIRO D IFF (ours)       6         5           6

        Table 3: Results of the user study. # of users labelled generated samples to be real.


                                                      15
