Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ERFORMANCE B OUNDS FOR M ODEL AND P OLICY
T RANSFER IN H IDDEN - PARAMETER MDP S
 Haotian Fu1 , Jiayu Yao2 , Omer Gottesman1 , Finale Doshi-Velez2 & George Konidaris1
 1
   Brown University, 2 Harvard University



                                            A BSTRACT
         In the Hidden-Parameter MDP (HiP-MDP) framework, a family of reinforcement
         learning tasks is generated by varying hidden parameters specifying the dynamics
         and reward function for each individual task. The HiP-MDP is a natural model for
         families of tasks in which meta- and lifelong-reinforcement learning approaches
         can succeed. Given a learned context encoder that infers the hidden parameters
         from previous experience, most existing algorithms fall into two categories: model
         transfer and policy transfer, depending on which function the hidden parameters
         are used to parameterize. We characterize the robustness of model and policy
         transfer algorithms with respect to hidden parameter estimation error. We first
         show that the value function of HiP-MDPs is Lipschitz continuous under certain
         conditions. We then derive regret bounds for both settings through the lens of
         Lipschitz continuity. Finally, we empirically corroborate our theoretical analysis by
         varying the hyper-parameters governing the Lipschitz constants of two continuous
         control problems; the resulting performance is consistent with our theoretical
         results.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Hidden-parameter Markov Decision Processes (HiP-MDPs)
(Doshi-Velez & Konidaris, 2016) describe a family of related             {s1, a1, r1, s2, ⋯}
tasks by modeling task variations with a set of low-dimensional
hidden parameters. HiP-MDPs are widely used in recent meta-
                                                                                          Context
Reinforcement Learning (RL) and lifelong RL works, in which                               encoder
an agent needs to quickly adapt to new tasks by transferring
the knowledge from previous tasks. To solve HiP-MDPs,                           ω(θ)
most existing algorithms first infer the hidden parameters from
                                                                          Sample
previous experience (e.g. by learning a context encoder that
maps trajectories to a hidden parameter estimate θ), then use                     θ
                                                                                            T ̂ & R̂
the estimated hidden parameters to solve new tasks with either     s
model (Killian et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2022)
or policy transfer (Yao et al., 2018; Rakelly et al., 2019)            π                   Planner
algorithms. As shown in Figure 1, in model transfer, the
inferred hidden parameters are used to build a simulator of
the environment, which can then be used for planning. In               a                        a
policy transfer, the inferred hidden parameters are used to Policy Transfer             Model Transfer
parameterize the policy of the new task directly. Previous
works have observed mixed empirical evidence for when each Figure 1: Difference between model
approach performs better (Yao et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020; and policy transfer in HiP-MDPs.
Fu et al., 2022). In this work, we take a step in the theoretical
direction by studying the regret bounds of model and policy transfer algorithms, respectively, which
helps characterize the robustness of these algorithms.
Two main factors affect the performance of HiP-MDP algorithms: (1) the estimation accuracy of the
hidden parameter used as an input to either the learned model or policy, and (2) the quality of the
learned model or policy (i.e., given an accurately estimated hidden parameter, whether the agent can
reach the optimal performance). In practice, the HiP-MDP tasks considered in most recent meta-RL
papers (e.g., changing the physical properties of MuJoCo-simulated robots) are relatively easy to


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


solve when the hidden parameters are given. We therefore assume the learned model and policy are
optimal and theoretically analyze how hidden parameter estimation error affects the final performance
of model and policy transfer algorithms.
Our contributions are as follows. We first derive the conditions under which the value function of
HiP-MDPs is Lipschitz continuous. We then derive upper bounds for regret in model and policy
transfer algorithms, respectively, when the estimation error of the hidden parameters is bounded. We
also give an upper bound for multi-step prediction error in model transfer. We further prove that the
derived bounds are tight when the transition dynamics, reward function and policy are linear and
deterministic. As far as we are aware, these are the first theoretical results about policy and model
transfer performance bounds in HiP-MDPs. Given the same hidden parameter estimation error bound,
our results characterize when model or policy transfer can be more robust than the other: a slower
increase in the Lipschitz constant with respect to the hidden parameter implies more robustness.
In addition to theoretical analysis, we empirically study the performance of model and policy transfer
algorithms in two continuous control domains. For each domain, we control the Lipschitz constants
of the HiP-MDPs by altering the hyper-parameters of the environments. The results are consistent
with our theoretical understanding of how the regrets of model and policy transfer algorithms scale
with respect to the estimation error of the hidden parameters: a slower increase in Lipschitz constant
with respect to the hidden parameter implies a smaller performance decay.


2   BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

HiP-MDPs model the variations in the transition dynamics and reward functions by assigning each
task a hidden parameter θ, drawn from the distribution PΩ . The agent neither observes θ nor has
access to the the distribution PΩ that generates the task family. For a given task, parameterized
by θ ∈ Θ, the stochastic dynamics are given by T (s′ |s, a; θ) and the deterministic reward function
by R(s, a; θ). We consider continuous state and action space in this work (s ∈ S, a ∈ A). Upon
encountering a new task, the agent estimates the new dynamics, T̂ , and the new reward function, R̂,
by inferring a distribution ω̂(θ) over the hidden parameter. If our estimation of θ is accurate, then
ω̂(θ) should be close to the true distribution ω(θ), i.e. peaking at the true θ for this specific task.
We assume the learned dependency of T̂ and R̂ on θ is accurate. Thus, if the estimation of θ is also
accurate, the agent can solve the task completely.
The HiP-MDP is an important setting widely used in recent meta/lifelong RL papers (see Appendix G).
A number of approaches have been proposed to infer the hidden parameter θ of HiP-MDPs in the
latent representation space, such as using Bayesian models to leverage prior knowledge (Killian et al.,
2017; Yao et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2022), or training a context encoder that maps trajectories to the
latent parameter (Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020).
Given the inferred hidden parameters, various RL algorithms have been used to adapt to the new
tasks. The downstream RL algorithm given the inference of the hidden parameter includes training
an off-policy actor-critic that takes in the estimated parameter as an additional input (Rakelly et al.,
2019; Fakoor et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2021), or leveraging recurrent neural networks (Zintgraf et al.,
2020; Duan et al., 2016), or planning based on the learned transition model that also takes in the
inferred parameter (Lee et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2020). Yet, in practice, there is no clear winner
among these algorithms, leaving the question that what factors affect the performance of different
algorithms, and how. Nair & Doshi-Velez study a similar problem but in a different setting where the
hidden parameters are given (contextual MDP) and derive sample complexity bounds for model-based
learning. In this work, we quantify how errors and uncertainty in estimating θ affect the performance
of model and policy transfer methods through the lens of Lipschitz continuity.
Given a distance metric on the space M , dM , Lipschitz continuity quantifies the smoothness of a
function as follows.
Definition 2.1. A function f : M1 7→ M2 is uniformly Lipschitz continuous if

                                                    dM2 (f (x1 ), f (x2 ))
                               KfM1 ,M2 := sup                             .                        (1)
                                             x1 ,x2   dM1 (x1 , x2 )

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We use KfM1 in some places for simplicity of notation. Throughout the work, we use the Euclidean
distance for d in the case of point vectors and the Wasserstein distance in the case of probability
distributions. The main goal of this work can now be stated as deriving the relation between
d(ω(θ), ω̂(θ)) ≤ ϵ, and the performance of model transfer and policy transfer methods.
The Wasserstein Metric can be linked to Lipschitz continuity using duality (Villani, 2008):
                                             Z
                  W (ω1 , ω2 ) =     sup        (f (x)ω1 (x) − f (x)ω2 (x))dx.                               (2)
                                           M ,M2
                                       f :Kf 1   ≤1

Given a distribution ω(θ) over the hidden parameters, we define the generalized transition, reward
and value functions in HiP-MDPs as:
                           Z                                      Z
              ′                  ′
         Tg (s |s, a, ω) = T (s |s, a; θ)ω(θ)dθ, Rg (s, a, ω) = R(s, a; θ)ω(θ)dθ,
                            Zθ                                Z θ
                Vg (s, ω) = V (s, θ)ω(θ)dθ, Qg (s, a, ω) = Q(s, a, θ)ω(θ)dθ.
                                θ                                         θ
These generalised functions are an expectation over the uncertainty in the hidden parameter. All the
Q and V functions we use below refer to the generalized function Qg and Vg .
We are now equipped to formally state all the smoothness assumptions we make about the HiP-MDPs:
                                    S
Definition 2.2. A HiP-MDP is (KR      , KTS , KR A
                                                   , KTA , KR
                                                            Ω
                                                              , KTΩ )-Lipschitz if, for all ω ∈ Ω, and s ∈ S
and a ∈ A:
                                      S
|Rg (s1 , a, ω))−Rg (s2 , a, ω))| ≤ KR  dS (s1 , s2 ), W (Tg (·|s1 , a, ω)), Tg (·|s2 , a, ω))) ≤ KTS dS (s1 , s2 )
                                      A
|Rg (s, a1 , ω))−Rg (s, a2 , ω))| ≤ KR  dA (a1 , a2 ), W (Tg (·|s, a1 , ω)), Tg (·|s, a2 , ω))) ≤ KTA dA (a1 , a2 )
                                    Ω
|Rg (s, a, ω1 )−Rg (s, a, ω2 )| ≤ KR  dΩ (ω1 , ω2 ), W (Tg (·|s, a, ω1 ), Tg (·|s, a, ω2 )) ≤ KTΩ dΩ (ω1 , ω2 )
To simplify notation, we will write that a HiP-MDP is Lipschitz continuous when all the constants
can be implied from the context.
In the following theoretical analysis, we assume the HiP-MDPs are Lipschitz. Intuitively, this implies
that when the hidden parameters of two MDPs are close, their transition dynamics and reward
functions are similar, and for a given task, transitions dynamics and rewards do not change much
given small changes in the states and actions. Similar assumptions have commonly been made in
previous works (Hinderer, 2005; Asadi et al., 2018; Gottesman et al., 2021; Gelada et al., 2019; Ren
et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2019). We extend the smoothness assumption to the hidden parameters for a
better understanding about the role of hidden parameter estimation error in the final performance.
In addition to the smoothness assumptions about the HiP-MDPs, we make the following assumptions
about the smoothness of policies.
Definition 2.3. A policy π(a|s, ω(θ)) is (KπS , KπΩ )-Lipschitz continuous if:
                                           W (π(·|s1 , ω(θ)), π(·|s2 , ω(θ)))
                         KπS := sup sup                                       ,
                                  ω s1 ,s2             dS (s1 , s2 )
                                                   W (π(·|s, ω1 (θ)), π(·|s, ω2 (θ)))
                            KπΩ := sup sup
                                      s   ω1 ,ω2         W (ω1 (θ), ω2 (θ))
are finite.
We evaluate policies by calculating their expected discounted reward given a distribution of initial
states, µ(s):                             Z
                                       Jπµ :=          Vgπ (s, ω(θ))µ(s)ds.                                  (3)
                                                   s

Lipschitz continuity in MDPs has been studied by many previous works (Hinderer, 2005; Rachelson
& Lagoudakis, 2010; Tang et al., 2020; Gottesman et al., 2021). Pirotta et al. (2015) propose to use
Lipschitz continuity property of MDPs to speed up policy gradient algorithms. Asadi et al. (2018)
show how the magnitude of the Lipschitz constant of the transition dynamics affects the performance
of model-based RL algorithm’s performance is influenced by the magnitude of the Lipschitz constant
of the model. Gelada et al. (2019) leverages Lipschitz continuity assumptions in regular MDPs to
learn state abstractions. However, none of them conduct theoretical analysis on HiP-MDPs.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3       L IPSCHITZ VALUE FUNCTION OF H I P-MDP S
Our first main result is showing under which conditions the value functions are Lipschitz continuous
for HiP-MDPs. We show this through a combination of Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 4.3 & 5.2 in the
following sections. Theorem 3.1 mainly studies the Lipschitz continuity with respect to S and A
while the hidden parameter is fixed. This can be seen as a generalization of theorems derived in prior
papers (Rachelson & Lagoudakis, 2010; Pirotta et al., 2015; Asadi et al., 2018; Gelada et al., 2019)
that study Lipschitz value function for a regular MDP.
                          S
Theorem 3.1. For a (KR      , KTS , KR
                                     A
                                       , KTA , KRΩ
                                                   , KTΩ )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP with a (KπS , KπΩ )-Lipschitz
                 S        S A         1
policy π, if γ(KT + Kπ KT ) < 1, the value function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to S and
A with constants bounded by:
           A                       |Q(s, a1 , ω) − Q(s, a2 , ω)|     K A − γ(KRA S
                                                                                KT − KR   S A
                                                                                            KT )
         KQ  π := sup sup sup                                     ≤ R
                   ω     s a1 ,a2          dA (a1 , a2 )                1 − γ(KT + Kπ KTA )
                                                                               S      S

           S                       |Q(s1 , a, ω) − Q(s2 , a, ω)|     K S − γKπS (KRS A
                                                                                     KT − KRA S
                                                                                              KT )
          KQ π := sup sup sup                                       ≤ R           S        A
                     ω    a s1 ,s2          dS (s1 , s2 )                 1 − γ(KT + KπS KT )
                                              |V (s1 , ω) − V (s2 , ω)|
                     KVS π := sup sup sup                               ≤ KQS       A  S
                                                                              π + KQπ Kπ .
                                ω    a s1 ,s2         dS (s1 , s2 )

Proof. (sketch) We derive the value difference bound by decomposing it into the combination of
the Q-value difference with respect to S & A using our previous definitions and the Bellman update
                                        A         S
rule (9). Then we get the bounds for KQ  π and KQπ respectively by applying the dual form of the

Wasserstein Metric (Equation 2) and with the fixed-point iteration. See appendix E for all proofs.

The above theorem shows the conditions under which the value functions of HiP-MDPs are Lipschitz
continuous with respect to states and actions. We can get the following corollary when the policy is
optimal:
Corollary 3.2. If the policy π is optimal and γKTS < 1, then:
                                  S                  A        S A
                      S        KR            A     KR  + γKR    KT − γKTS KR  A
                    KQ  ∗ ≤            , KQ    ∗ ≤                              .
                            1 − γKT  S                      1 − γKT S

                          S       A
Note that in contrast to KQ ∗ , KQ∗ is affected by the smoothness of the transition dynamics and

reward functions with respect to action space (KTA and KRA
                                                           ).
                                                               S
Theorem 3.1 and Corollary 3.2 also directly apply to a (KR       , KTS , KR
                                                                          A
                                                                            , KTA )-Lipschitz regular MDP
          S
with a Kπ -Lipschitz policy, as the Lipschitz continuity assumptions with respect to hidden parameters
                                                                                         S
are not used in both the final results and proofs. Specifically, the upper bound for KQ    ∗ in Corollary 3.2

recovers the results in Asadi et al. (2018); Gelada et al. (2019). If we assume the Lipschitz constants
for state and action are the same, we get Corollary E.1, which recovers the results in Rachelson &
Lagoudakis (2010); Pirotta et al. (2015). For regular MDPs, our results are more general compared
to prior work as (1) we do not assume that the Lipschitz constants for state and action are the same
because that is usually not the case in practice; (2) our theory applies to all Lipschitz policies rather
than only the optimal policy.
One of our major goals in this work is to derive the conditions for Lipschitz value functions of
HiP-MDPs. Theorem 3.1 shows that the value functions in HiP-MDPs are Lipschitz continuous with
respect to S and A under certain conditions. To complete the theorem for Lipschitz value function
in HiP-MDPs, we must also explore the conditions under which the value function is Lipschitz
continuous with respect to the remaining input of Q-function in HiP-MDPs, ω. As we shown in the
next two sections, exploring this actually results in different bounds for policy transfer and model
transfer. By leveraging the results of Lipschitz value functions, we then find how the estimation
error d(ω(θ), ω̂(θ)) ≤ ϵ of the hidden parameter at test time will affect the performance of model
and policy transfer algorithms respectively. We quantify the performance gap by deriving the upper
bound of the regret as a function of the error in estimating the hidden parameter. Note that throughout
the following analysis, we abstract out the discussion of how ω̂(θ) is estimated, and assume it is given
with an estimation error bounded by ϵ.
    1
        We make this assumption in many of our following theorems. See appendix F for explanations.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4    P ERFORMANCE BOUNDS OF M ODEL T RANSFER IN H I P-MDP S
We now focus on the regret of model transfer in HiP-MDPs induced by the hidden parameter
estimation error, d(ω(θ), ω̂(θ)) ≤ ϵ. We assume that the agent has learnt an accurate transition
function T̂g (s′ |s, a, ω(θ)) and reward function R̂g (s, a, ω(θ)). Upon encountering a new task, the
agent first estimates the hidden parameter and then feeds it into the learned transition function T̂g
and reward function R̂g . The agent will use them to generate samples and train a task-specific policy.
The algorithm framework can be found in Algorithm 2 and Figure 1. Note that a similar paradigm
has been widely used (Lee et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2020) in complex continuous control tasks.
We first derive a bound of the compounding error of dynamics prediction given the estimation error ϵ
in hidden parameter at test time, with the Lipschitz model class (Asadi et al., 2018) assumption (we
include a definition in appendix E):
Theorem 4.1. Assume the estimation error for hidden parameter θ is bounded by ϵ, that is,
W (ω(θ), ω̂(θ)) ≤ ϵ. Further assume an accurately learned T̂g induced by a Lipschitz model
class Fg with the Lipschitz constant KT̂Ω and KT̂S , a fixed sequence of actions a0 , · · · , an−1 , and an
initial state distribution µ(s). Then ∀n ≥ 1, the n-step prediction error ξ(n):
                                                                             n−1
                                                                             X
                        ξ(n) := W (T̂gn (·|µ, ω), T̂gn (·|µ, ω̂)) ≤ KT̂Ω ϵ         (KT̂S )i ,                (4)
                                                                             i=0

where T̂gn (·|µ, ω)) := T̂g (·|T̂g (·|...T̂g (·|µ, a0 , ω)..., an−2 , ω), an−1 , ω) is a generalized n-step tran-
sition function, and T̂gn (·|µ, ω̂)) is defined similarly.

The result shows how the multi-step prediction error ξ of a generalized transition function in HiP-
MDP scales with respect to the hidden parameter estimation error ϵ. Additionally, the smoothness of
the transition function also affects the multi-step prediction error. As we show in the experiments,
this multi-step prediction bound can have a huge impact on the planning performance for model
transfer.
Instead of directly planning, some methods choose to further learn the policy using the learned model.
We investigate the value estimation difference and regret of model transfer induced by the hidden
parameter estimation error. Note that the remaining theoretical results in this paper do not involve the
Lipschitz model class assumption.
                                          Ω
Lemma 4.2. Given a HiP-MDP with learned (KR̂ , KT̂Ω )-Lipschitz transition model T̂ , reward
function R̂, in model transfer, the generalized value function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to
Ω with a constant bounded by:
                                   KVΩπ ≤ KR̂
                                           Ω      Ω
                                              + γKQ      S   Ω
                                                   π + γKQπ K .
                                                             T̂

We get the above bound for the Lipschitz value function when assuming the Lipschitz continuity
of transition and reward function with respect to only the hidden parameter. The lemma shows the
relationship between KVΩπ and KQ Ω
                                  π in model transfer case. Then, by further assuming the Lipschitz

continuity of dynamics & policy in Lemma 9, we can get the following bound leveraging the dual
form of Wasserstein Metric (Equation 2), and computing the fixed point of recurrence.
                                                    S
Theorem 4.3. Given a HiP-MDP with learned (KR̂        , KT̂S , KR̂
                                                                A
                                                                   , KT̂A , KR̂
                                                                             Ω
                                                                                , KT̂Ω )-Lipschitz transition
dynamics T̂ , reward function R̂, in model transfer, if γ(KTS + KπS KTA ) < 1, the generalized value
function corresponding to the KπS -Lipschitz policy π(a|s) is Lipschitz continuous with respect to Ω
with a constant bounded by:
                                                Ω        S    Ω
                                              KR  + γKQ    π KT
                                      KVΩπ ≤                    .                                 (5)
                                                   1−γ
                                                                        S
Now if we further use the bounds derived in Theorem 3.1 to substitute KQ   π (for Theorem 5.2 we
            A                            Ω
substitute KQπ ), we can get a bound of KV π that does not depend on KQπ .
                                                                               Ω
Compared to Lemma 4.2, the bound derived in Theorem 4.3 does not depend on KQ    π by leveraging

Bellman equation (the details can be found in our proofs). In general, Theorem 4.3 characterizes


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


how the value estimation difference in model transfer is affected by the reward/transition functions’
robustness to the hidden parameter. Theorem 4.3 and 3.1 together show that the value function of a
HiP-MDP for model transfer is Lipschitz continuous under certain conditions.
Then we can derive the regret of model transfer given hidden parameter estimation error ϵ. Here
we further assume the agent gets the optimal policy in the “simulated environment” created by the
learned transition and reward function. We first introduce the following lemma:
Lemma 4.4. Given a (KR         S
                                 , KTS , KR
                                          Ω
                                            , KTΩ )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP, for the optimal policy π ∗ ,
    ∗                 ∗                               ∗                ∗
|V π (s, ω1 (θ)) − V π (s, ω2 (θ))| ≤ maxa∈A |Qπ (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − Qπ (s, a, ω2 (θ))|.

Given the optimal policy, this lemma shows the relationship between value estimation difference and
Q-value estimation difference. Combining the results in Corollary 3.2, we have:
                                          S
Lemma 4.5. Given a HiP-MDP with learned (KR̂ , KT̂S , KR̂
                                                       Ω
                                                          , KT̂Ω )-Lipschitz transition model T̂ ,
reward function R̂, the optimal policy π̂ ∗ (a|s) for T̂ and R̂, starting from state distribution µ(s),if
γKT̂S < 1, the regret of model transfer given hidden parameter estimation error ϵ is bounded by:
                                              Ω                  S Ω
                                             KR̂               γKR̂ KT̂
                         |Jπµ∗ − Jπ̂µ∗ | ≤         ·ϵ+                          · ϵ,                 (6)
                                             1−γ          (1 − γ)(1 − γKT̂S )

Besides the reward and transition functions’ smoothness with respect to the hidden parameter θ, the
derived bound also shows that the distance between the expected return of the learned policy π̂ ∗
                                                            S
and the environment’s true optimal policy increases with KR̂  and KT̂S , given the hidden parameter
estimation error ϵ. In other words, the performance of model transfer algorithms decreases as the
sensitivity of the dynamics changes in states increases, which aligns with the intuition that the
model-based methods need to accurately predict state transitions and expected rewards given states.
Furthermore, for the theorems derived in this section, we show that (proofs included in the appendix):
Claim 4.6. Given a linear and deterministic transition function, the bound derived in Theorem 4.1 is
tight. Given a linear and deterministic transition function and reward function, Lemma 4.5 is tight.

5   P ERFORMANCE BOUNDS OF P OLICY T RANSFER IN H I P-MDP S
We now focus on the regret bound induced by policy transfer algorithms in HiP-MDPs. We assume
the error bound of the hidden parameters is the same (i.e., d(ω(θ), ω̂(θ)) ≤ ϵ), and that the agent has
learnt an accurate joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)) during training. Upon encountering a new task, the agent
feeds the estimated hidden parameter into the learned policy instead of the model. The agent will then
directly use the joint policy to interact with the environment. The algorithm framework can be found
in Algorithm 1 and Figure 1. Similar policy transfer paradigm has also been widely used (Yao et al.,
2018; Rakelly et al., 2019). We investigate how the estimation error for the hidden parameter will
affect the performance of the joint policy on a new task and compare with the performance bounds
derived above for model transfer cases.
Lemma 5.1. Given a HiP-MDP with learned KπΩ -Lipschitz joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)), in policy
transfer, the generalized value function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to Ω with a constant
bounded by:
                                        KVΩπ ≤ KQ  Ω       A    Ω
                                                     π + KQπ Kπ .


We obtain the above bound for the Lipschitz value function when assuming the Lipschitz continuity
of the learned policy with respect to only the hidden parameter. The lemma shows the relationship
between KVΩπ and KQ   Ω
                       π in the policy transfer case. Then, similar to model transfer, if we further

assume the Lipschitz continuity of the dynamics and the policy and compute the fixed point of the
recurrence of the Bellman update, we can get the following bound:
                           A
Theorem 5.2. Given a (KR     , KTA , KR
                                      S
                                        , KTS )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP, in policy transfer, the generalized
value function corresponding to the pretrained (KπS , KπΩ )-Lipschitz joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)), if
γ(KTS + KπS KTA ) < 1, is Lipschitz continuous with respect to Ω with a constant bounded by
                                                      KπΩ KQ
                                                           A
                                                            π
                                             KVΩπ ≤           .                                      (7)
                                                       1−γ

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                     Ω
Compared to Lemma 5.1, the bound derived in Theorem 5.2 does not depend on KQ          π by leveraging

Bellman equation. Theorem 5.2 characterizes how the value estimation difference in policy transfer
is affected by the policy’s robustness to the hidden parameter. Theorem 5.2 and 3.1 together show the
value function of a HiP-MDP for policy transfer is Lipschitz continuous under certain conditions.
Different from the bound in Theorem 4.3 for model transfer, for policy transfer methods this value
estimation error is also affected by the policy’s robustness with respect to the hidden parameters, as
well as the Q-value’s robustness to the actions (only with respect to states in Theorem 4.3), with no
dependence on the reward and transition functions’ smoothness with respect to the hidden parameters.
We can further derive the Lipschitz constant of the expected discounted reward (regret) starting from
the state distribution µ. Similar to what we did in model transfer case, if we also assume the learned
joint policy over ω(θ) is optimal, by leveraging the results in Corollary 3.2, we have:
                            A
Lemma 5.3. Given a (KR        , KTA , KR
                                       S
                                         , KTS )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP, a pretrained KπΩ -Lipschitz optimal
joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)), starting from state distribution µ(s), if γKTS ≤ 1, the regret of policy
transfer induced by hidden parameter estimation error ϵ is bounded by:
                                          γKπΩ (KR
                                                 A
                                                    + γKRS A
                                                           KT − γKTS KR
                                                                      A
                                                                        )
                        |Jπµ∗ − Jπµ | ≤                        S
                                                                          · ϵ,                        (8)
                                                 (1 − γ)(1 − γKT )

Comparing the derived performance bound with the one in Lemma 4.5, we find that the distance
between the expected return of the learned joint policy π and the environment’s true optimal policy π ∗
increases also with KTA and KR A
                                 , besides KTS and KR S
                                                        . In other words, the performance of the policy
transfer decreases as the sensitivity of the dynamics changes in both states and actions increases,
while the model-based method is not quite sensitive to the dynamics change in actions. This result is
reasonable as policy-based method is influenced mostly by direct impact of actions. Regarding the
tightness of the derived bound, we get similar results as for model transfer:
Claim 5.4. Given a linear and deterministic transition function, reward function and policy, the
bounds derived in Lemma 5.3 are tight.

Summary Besides characterizing the robustness of model and policy transfer methods with respect
to hidden parameter estimation error separately, Lemma 4.5 and 5.3 also imply that, policy transfer
methods are expected to perform more robust when difference in effects of different actions is
small, whereas model transfer methods are expected to perform better when neighboring states have
relatively similar dynamics. Given these bounds, one direct implication to HiP-MDP algorithms in
practice is that we can infer the performance trend of policy transfer and model transfer algorithms
by either qualitatively or quantitatively estimating the dynamics and reward functions’ sensitivity to
states and actions. This can further help us determine which method is probably more advantageous
for a specific HiP-MDP problem. Note that KT̂θ and KπΩ in general can be dependent on the model
class (architecture) of the model (e.g. neural nets) used to parameterized the policy or model.

6    E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
We now corroborate our theoretical results in relatively large scenarios where neural networks are
needed to parameterize models and polices. We evaluate model and policy transfer methods on two
continuous scenarios, ball-goal and ball-wind, where we can quantitatively estimate the influence
of changing environment hyperparameters on different Lipschitz constants. Then by investigating
whether the empirical performance changing is consistent with what we expect from theoretical
results, we can corroborate whether our derived theorems match what happened in practice.
For both scenarios, the goal of the agent is to control a ball to quickly reach a target position. In
ball-goal, the angle of the goal direction is the hidden parameter. That is, the goal direction changes
across tasks, and the agent will obtain maximum cumulative reward if it figures out the right angle
for the current task and keeps moving in that direction until reaching the goal. In ball-wind, the goal
position is fixed across different tasks but there is wind across the plane with different directions. The
angle of the wind direction is the hidden parameter in this scenario. The reward function consists of
a dense reward proportional to how closer the ball moves towards the goal compared to last step, a
control cost, as well as a larger final reward for reaching the goal. Thus for ball-goal, only the reward
function is changing with respect to different hidden parameters, while in ball-wind, both reward and
transition functions are changing. More details about the environments can be found in Appendix B.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For each HiP-MDP, we manually calculate the value of different Lipschitz constants approximately
given the actual reward and transition functions for both scenarios. We further calculate the bounds
derived in Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 5.3 using the results. The Lipschitz constants are given in Table 1.
We mainly investigate the effect of the step size v, goal distance g, and state accelerator m (ball-wind).
The results imply how different Lipschitz constants are changing as we change those environmental
hyper-parameters if our derived bounds are relatively tight and close to what happened in practice.
                                                S                        A                            Ω                                   S                              A                          Ω                                                Ω
               Env                             KT                       KT                           KT                                  KR                             KR                         KR                                               Kπ                                            KJ (Model transfer)                                                                KJ (Policy transfer)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2g                                                                                      γ(1+γ)vg
    ball-goal                                      1                        v                             0                                2                                v                          2g                                               g                                                     1−γ                                                                                       (1−γ)2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2v                                                                        v+γ                                                                   Ω                      γ(1+γ)
   ball-wind                                       m                        1                             v                         m+1                                     1                          v                      √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2v−m(g−1)+g                                                                (1−γ)(1−γm)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kπ · (1−γm)(1−γ)


                                                                                           Table 1: Lipschitz constants for ball-goal and ball-wind

                                                   Ball goal (g)                                                                                         Ball goal (v)                                                                                                Ball wind (g)                                                                                         Ball wind (v)
               7.5                                                                                                                                                                                                              22
                                                                                                                       9                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
               7.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Average Return
               6.5
 Average Return


                                                                                                          Average Return


                                                                                                                       8                                                                                                        20                                                                                                 20
               6.0
               5.5                                                                                                                                                                                                              18                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                       7
               5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
               4.5                                                                                                     6                                                                                                        16
                                              Policy transfer                                                                                                                                                                                                 Policy transfer                                                            5
               4.0
                                              Model transfer                                                           5                                                                                                        14                            Model transfer
               3.5
                          8                   10              12                  14                      16                     0.8           1.0              1.2              1.4         1.6             1.8                            6                     8              10               12                  14                            0.4           0.5              0.6            0.7          0.8              0.9
                                                               g                                                                                                        v                                                                                                        g                                                                                                         v
          40                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8.4
          45
                                    Model transfer             80
                                                                                      Policy transfer                 48
                                                                                                                                                                            50                                                                                                    5                                                     7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7.8
                                                               90                                                                                                           60                                                                                                                                                          8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8.6                                                 6
          50                                                                                                          49
                                                              100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8.5
          55                                                                                                                                                                70                                                                                                    7                                                                                                        8.0
                                                              110                                                                                                                                                             8.8                                                                                                       9.0
  KJ


                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KJ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KJ
          60
                                                                                                              KJ
                                                         KJ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KJ
                                                                                                                                                                  KJ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KJ
                                                              120                                                                                                           80                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9.5                                                8.2
          65
                                                              130                                                     51                                                    90                                                9.0                                                 9
          70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10.0
                                                              140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8.4
          75                                                                                                                                                            100                                                                                                      10                                                    10.5
                                                                                                                      52                                                                                                      9.2
                                                              150
          80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11                                                    11.0                                                8.6
                  8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16          8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15      16                                                         110                                                         6   7       8   9   10   11   12   13   14        6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14
                                                                                                                           0.8     1.0   1.2       1.4    1.6     1.8            0.8   1.0   1.2       1.4   1.6    1.8                                                                                                                       0.4     0.5   0.6       0.7    0.8     0.9         0.4    0.5   0.6       0.7   0.8     0.9
                                    g                                                 g                                                        v                                                   v                                                    g                                             g                                                           v                                                 v



Figure 2: First row: Average return on test tasks v.s. environmental properties (v and g). Second row:
−KJ v.s. v and g: how −KJ is expected to change based on our our theoretical computing results in
Table 1. Each plot in the first row is associated with two plots below with corresponding color. The
performance of the algorithm is expected to decrease if −KJ decreases.

6.1                       E MPIRICAL RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO L EMMA 4.5 AND L EMMA 5.3

As both Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 5.3 can be written in the form |Jπ̂ − Jπ∗ | < KJ · ϵ, we investigate
how KJ is changing as we change different environmental hyperparameters both theoretically:
manually computing the Lipschitz constants given the environment’s dynamics (appendix B) and the
two lemmas (results shown in Table 1), and empirically: investigating how the algorithm’s empirical
performance is changing as we alter the environment’s hyperparameters (KJ is expected to inversely
related to the expected return), and see whether the theoretical and empirical results are consistent.
For empirical training, we use state-of-the-art meta-RL algorithms PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019)
as the policy transfer method to learn the joint policy, as well as CaDM (Lee et al., 2020) to learn
the dynamics model. The context encoder (probabilistic encoder) is updated together with loss from
Q-value prediction like in PEARL, as well as loss from dynamics model prediction like in CaDM.
Given a new task, we let the agent collect transitions by interacting with the environment for only
one episode with randomly initialized hidden-parameter distribution.2 Then the agent will use the
learned context encoder to infer a distribution over the hidden parameter of the current task. This
distribution over the hidden parameter is fixed afterwards for the current task, i.e. ϵ is fixed and the
same for both methods. Then, for policy transfer, we sample from the hidden parameter distribution
and directly feed that inferred latent parameter into the learned joint policy. We evaluate the average
return of this policy on the current task. For model transfer, we feed that inferred latent parameter
into the learned transition model and reward function. We use the models to generate samples and
run SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) to learn the task-specific policy for this “simulated environment”.
The empirical results are shown in Figure 2. We plot −KJ v.s. v/g using the results in Table 1.
Recall that KJ is expected to inversely related to the average return. i.e., increase in −KJ implies
    2
      The hidden parameters here and the inferred hidden parameters mentioned below are all referring to the
mapping of the hidden parameter in the latent representation space through the context encoder. We assume the
true distribution over the hidden parameters is also implicitly mapped into the latent space.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a decrease in the regret of the algorithm, thus the average return is expected to increase if our
theoretical results match what happened in practice. Almost all of the results show that the change
of the expected return is inversely related to the change of the approximated Lipschitz constant KJ .
The environment parameters directly affect KJ and the trend of the performance change in a way
that is highly consistent with our theoretical analysis. In general, we find that a slower increase in
Lipschitz constant with respect to the hidden parameter implies a smaller performance decay.
The empirical results implies that for real-world HiP-MDP tasks, if we can quantitatively estimate
the Lipschitz constant KJ for model and policy transfer methods given the environment parameters,
we can estimate which one is expected to have better final performance. For instance, in ball-wind, if
g is quite large, given the computed KJ , we will expect model transfer to have better performance as
it is less affected by the value of g compared to policy transfer method. Note that in our scenarios,
the performance drop is mainly induced by the estimation error of the hidden parameters, and the
learned dynamics and policies are near optimal. We show the empirical evidence in appendix C.

6.2    E MPIRICAL RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO T HEOREM 4.1

We also show how the bound of the multi-step
prediction error derived in Theorem 4.1 is re-                    Ball wind (v)                   Ball wind (m)
                                                                                        30
lated to the performance of the other planning      30
                                                                                        20
method used in model transfer — Model Pre-


                                                                                      Average Return
                                                    20
                                                          Average Return                10
dictive Control (MPC) (Garcia et al., 1989).        10
                                                     0                                   0
MPC is widely used in recent deep model-based              Plan_horzion=1
                                                           Plan_horzion=3
                                                    10                                  10
RL works (Chua et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al.,             Plan_horzion=5
                                                    20     Plan_horzion=7               20
2019). Different from the previous approaches,         0.4    0.5      0.6      0.7 0.8    1.1 1.2      1.3    1.4 1.5
                                                                        v                               m
MPC does not need to explicitly estimate the
value function and its performance is directly Figure 3: Average return on test tasks v.s. environ-
affected by the multi-step prediction error. With mental properties (m & v) that affect the Lipschitz
the results in Table 1, we can get the multi-step constants for MPC method on ball-wind.
prediction upper bound for ball-wind using The-
                       Pn−1
orem 4.1: ξ(n) ≤ v i=0 mi · ϵ. The bound
implies that if the theorem matches what happens in practice, the n-step prediction error will increase
as we increase v and m, and thus the performance is expected to drop as we increase v and m.
(The performance of MPC and the multi-step prediction error are inversely correlated.) Similar to
the previous subsection, we investigate whether the empirical performance of MPC matches our
predictions from theoretical results.
During empirical evaluation, we first let the agent infer the hidden parameter and feed that into the
learned transition function and reward function. Then at each time step, we let the agent randomly
sample a large number of actions, and use the learned model to predict N steps into the future for
each of them and choose the action with the highest predicted cumulative reward. We investigate how
v and m affect the algorithm’s final performance empirically. The results are shown in Figure 3, the
average return of the algorithm on test tasks decreases as we increase the value of v and m, which is
consistent with our theoretical result. We also find that the variance of the performance (the width of
error bar) is increasing as we use longer planning horizon for MPC.


7     C ONCLUSION

Assuming the learned model/policy is optimal, we investgiated how the hidden parameter estimation
error affects the robustness of model and policy transfer algorithms from a theoretical perspective,
respectively. We show the conditions under which the value functions of HiP-MDPs are Lipschitz
continuous. We further derive regret bounds for model and policy transfer, which are proved to be
tight in linear and deterministic cases. Our empirical results are consistent with the theoretical results
and indicate that a faster increase in Lipschitz constant with respect to the hidden parameter implies a
larger performance decay. We note that in real-world HiP-MDP problems, especially when applying
deep RL algorithms, the suboptimality of the learned model/policy can still play an important role in
the potential performance drop on a new task, independently of the estimation error of the hidden
parameter. And in many cases, policy transfer performs better than model transfer simply because
the downstream model-free deep RL algorithms are consistently better in regular MDPs.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Kavosh Asadi, Saket Tiwari, Michael Littman for discussions
and helpful feedback, and the anonymous reviewers for valuable feedback that improved the paper
substantially. This work was supported in part by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under
grant #2040433, NSF grants #1717569 #1955361 #IIS-2007076 and CAREER award #1844960,
DARPA grant W911NF1820268, and ONR contracts N00014-17-1-2699, and was conducted using
computational resources and services at the Center for Computation and Visualization, Brown
University. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of DARPA, the NSF, the ONR, or the
AFOSR.

R EFERENCES
Kavosh Asadi, Dipendra Misra, and Michael L. Littman. Lipschitz continuity in model-based
  reinforcement learning. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 264–273. PMLR, 2018.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M.
 Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, pp. 4759–4770, 2018.
Finale Doshi-Velez and George Dimitri Konidaris. Hidden parameter markov decision processes:
  A semiparametric regression approach for discovering latent task parametrizations. In Subbarao
  Kambhampati (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, IJCAI 2016, pp. 1432–1440. IJCAI/AAAI Press, 2016.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl$ˆ2$:
  Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1611.02779, 2016.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, Stefano Soatto, and Alexander J. Smola. Meta-q-learning. In 8th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Haotian Fu, Hongyao Tang, Jianye Hao, Chen Chen, Xidong Feng, Dong Li, and Wulong Liu.
  Towards effective context for meta-reinforcement learning: an approach based on contrastive
  learning. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Virtual Event,
 February 2-9, 2021, pp. 7457–7465. AAAI Press, 2021.
Haotian Fu, Shangqun Yu, Michael L. Littman, and George Dimitri Konidaris. Model-based lifelong
  reinforcement learning with bayesian exploration. CoRR, abs/2210.11579, 2022.
Carlos E. Garcia, David M. Prett, and Manfred Morari. Model predictive control: Theory and practice
 - A survey. Autom., 25(3):335–348, 1989.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G. Bellemare. Deepmdp:
  Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri
  and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2019, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2170–2179.
  PMLR, 2019.
Omer Gottesman, Kavosh Asadi, Cameron Allen, Sam Lobel, George Konidaris, and Michael L.
 Littman. Coarse-grained smoothness for RL in metric spaces. CoRR, abs/2110.12276, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Jennifer G. Dy and
  Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1856–1865. PMLR,
  2018.
Karl Hinderer. Lipschitz continuity of value functions in markovian decision processes. Math.
 Methods Oper. Res., 62(1):3–22, 2005.
Taylor W. Killian, Samuel Daulton, Finale Doshi-Velez, and George Dimitri Konidaris. Robust and
  efficient transfer learning with hidden parameter markov decision processes. In Isabelle Guyon,
  Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and
  Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, pp. 6250–6261, 2017.
Kimin Lee, Younggyo Seo, Seunghyun Lee, Honglak Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Context-aware dynamics
  model for generalization in model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event,
  volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5757–5766. PMLR, 2020.
Yuping Luo, Huazhe Xu, Yuanzhi Li, Yuandong Tian, Trevor Darrell, and Tengyu Ma. Algorithmic
  framework for model-based deep reinforcement learning with theoretical guarantees. In 7th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Russell Mendonca, Xinyang Geng, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-reinforcement learn-
  ing robust to distributional shift via model identification and experience relabeling. CoRR,
  abs/2006.07178, 2020.
Anusha Nagabandi, Ignasi Clavera, Simin Liu, Ronald S. Fearing, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and
  Chelsea Finn. Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-reinforcement
  learning. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2019.
Yash Nair and Finale Doshi-Velez. Pac bounds for imitation and model-based batch learning of
  contextual markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06352, 2020.
Matteo Pirotta, Marcello Restelli, and Luca Bascetta. Policy gradient in lipschitz markov decision
 processes. Mach. Learn., 100(2-3):255–283, 2015.
Emmanuel Rachelson and Michail G. Lagoudakis. On the locality of action domination in sequential
  decision making. In International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics, ISAIM
 2010, 2010, 2010.
Roberta Raileanu, Max Goldstein, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Fast adaptation to new environ-
  ments via policy-dynamics value functions. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 7920–7931. PMLR, 2020.
Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Deirdre Quillen. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2019, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5331–5340. PMLR,
  2019.
Zhizhou Ren, Kefan Dong, Yuan Zhou, Qiang Liu, and Jian Peng. Exploration via hindsight goal
  generation. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc,
  Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, pp.
  13464–13474, 2019.
Ziyang Tang, Yihao Feng, Na Zhang, Jian Peng, and Qiang Liu. Off-policy interval estimation
  with lipschitz value iteration. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-
  Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December
  6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: Old and new. 2008.
Jiayu Yao, Taylor W. Killian, George Dimitri Konidaris, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Direct policy
   transfer via hidden parameter markov decision processes. 2018.
Luisa M. Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Maximilian Igl, Sebastian Schulze, Yarin Gal, Katja Hofmann,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep RL via meta-learning.
  In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    M ODEL TRANSFER AND P OLICY TRANSFER

Algorithm 1: Policy transfer
  Input: Test tasks {τi }i=1:K with hidden parameters θi ∼ PΩ
  for each task τi do
    Roll out policy π(a|s, ω̃(θ)) with randomly generated Gaussian ω̃(θ) to collect data
    c = {s1 , a1 , r1 , · · · , sn , an , rn }
    Infer the distribution ω̂(θ) over the hidden parameter of task τi with the learned encoder
    q(ω(θ)|c)
    Roll out policy π(a|s, ω̂(θ)) to interact with environment (evaluation)
  end for


Algorithm 2: Model transfer
  Input: Test tasks {τi }i=1:K with hidden parameters θi ∼ PΩ
  for each task τi do
    Roll out policy π(a|s, ω̃(θ)) with randomly generated Gaussian ω̃(θ) to collect data
    c = {s1 , a1 , r1 , · · · , sn , an , rn }
    Infer the distribution ω̂(θ) over the hidden parameter of task τi with the learned encoder
    q(ω(θ)|c)
    Planning with learned transition function Tg (s′ |s, a, ω̂(θ)) and reward function Rg (s, a, , ω̂(θ))
    (evaluation)
  end for


Empirically, in typical deep meta-RL settings (Finn et al., 2017; Rakelly et al., 2019), the true value
of hidden parameters are not known to the agent both during training phase and evaluation phase.
We follow this setting in out experiments and train a context encoder like the previous approaches to
infer the hidden parameter in latent representation space. Then the true distribution over hidden
parameter is also assumed to be implicitly mapped into the latent representation space. Our empirical
experiments show that our theories can be extended to hidden parameter estimation in the latent
space, and the results show consistent patterns with the theoretical results.

B    E XPERIMENT SETTINGS
Ball-goal: The state space consists of the ball’s x, y coordinates. The action space consists of the
ball’s x, y velocity. v controls the step size in the direction of x axis in the transition function.
The reward is proportional to the how far the agent has moved
towards the goal’s position (g cos ϕg , g sin ϕg ). We fix the value
of v, g and use ϕg as the hidden parameter to create HiP-MDPs.
Details are shown below:

       • State space: {sx , sy }
       • Action space: {ax , ay }
       • Transition function:
                              s′x = sx + ax · v                         Figure 4: The Ball environment
                                                                        used in our experiments.
                              s′y = sy + ax

       • Reward function:
               q                                      q
           R = (sx − g cos ϕg )2 + (sy − g sin ϕg )2 − (s′x − g cos ϕg )2 + (s′y − g sin ϕg )2

Ball-wind:The state space consists of the ball’s x, y coordinates. The action (one dimension) describes
the direction of the agent’s next move. In the transition function, m is describes the value of state
accelerator, v controls the step size of the wind, θ describes the direction of the wind. The reward is


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


proportional to the how far the agent has moved towards the goal’s position (g cos ϕg , g sin ϕg ), plus
a goal reward when succeeds and a control penalty (−0.5). We fix the value of v, g, m, ϕg and use θ
as the hidden parameter to create HiP-MDPs. Details are shown below:

         • State space: {sx , sy }
         • Action space: {a}
         • Transition function:
                                                        s′x = msx + cos a − v cos θ
                                                        s′y = msy + sin a − v sin θ
         • Reward function:
                 q                                        q
             R = (sx − g cos ϕg )2 + (sy − g sin ϕg )2 − (s′x − g cos ϕg )2 + (s′y − g sin ϕg )2
                       q
                 + 1{ (s′x − g cos ϕg )2 + (s′y − g sin ϕg )2 ≤ 0.1} · 20 − 0.5

When computing the Lipschitz constants for Ball-wind, we only consider the difference of distance
towards goal part in the reward function for ease of calculation.


C     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS WHEN THE HIDDEN PARAMETER IS BETTER
      INFERRED

We further show that in these two scenarios, the
performance drop as we change environment                          Ball goal (v)                                   Ball wind (g)
                                                                                                            24
parameters is mainly induced by the estimation
                                                    9                                                       22
                                                                  Average Return


error of the hidden parameters, and the learned
transition/reward functions and policies are near   8                                            Average Return
                                                                                                            20

optimal. As shown in Figure 5, when we let the      7                                                       18
agent interact with the environments for more                                                               16
                                                    6
trajectories and keep using the collected data            Hidden parameter inferred without sufficient data
                                                          Hidden parameter inferred with sufficient data    14
to infer the hidden parameter, changing of the        0.8    1.0      1.2
                                                                             v
                                                                                 1.4       1.6         1.8     6 8       10
                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                                12 14
environment’s Lipschitz constant does not affect
the performance as much as before when the Figure 5: Average return on test tasks v.s. environ-
estimation of the hidden parameter is far less mental properties (v & g) for different estimation
accurate.                                         accuracy of the hidden parameter in ball-goal &
                                                  ball-wind.
D C OMPARISON OF T HEOREM
3.1 WITH P REVIOUS RESULTS

Assumption 1. The policy is optimal.
Assumption 2. S and A share the same Lipschitz constant.

                                Theorems                          Value difference bound   Assumption 1           Assumption 2
                                                                       KRS +K A K S
                              Theorem 3.1                                     R π               %                     %
                                                                     1−γ(K S +K A KπS)
                                                                           T    T
                                                                             S
                                                                            KR
                 (Asadi et al., 2018; Gelada et al., 2019)                                      ✓                     %
                                                                         1−γK S
                                                                               T
                                                                         S (1+K S )
                                                                        KR
           (Rachelson & Lagoudakis, 2010; Pirotta et al., 2015)                 π
                                                                                                %                     ✓
                                                                      1−γK S (1+Kπ S)
                                                                           T



               Table 2: Comparison of Theorem 3.1 with previous results in regular MDPs

                                                              S
Theorem 3.1 and Corollary 3.2 also directly apply to a (KR      , KTS , KR
                                                                         A
                                                                           , KTA )-Lipschitz regular MDP
         S
with a Kπ -Lipschitz policy, as the Lipschitz continuity assumptions with respect to hidden parameters
are not used in both the final results and proofs. In this sense, we show a comparison of Theorem 3.1


                                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with previous results in regular MDPs in Table 2. Note that in Theorem 3.1, we have:
                                                                     S    A S
                                                                   KR  + KR Kπ
                                   KVS π ≤ KQ
                                            S      A   S
                                              π + KQπ Kπ ≤
                                                                1 − γ(KT + KTA KπS )
                                                                       S

                                       S
Specifically, the upper bound for KQ     ∗ in Corollary 3.2 recovers the results in (Asadi et al., 2018;

Gelada et al., 2019). If we assume the Lipschitz constants for state and action are the same, we get
Corollary E.1, which recovers the results in (Rachelson & Lagoudakis, 2010; Pirotta et al., 2015).
For regular MDPs, our results are more general compared to prior works as (1) we do not assume
that the Lipschitz constants for state and action are the same because this is usually not the case in
practice; (2) our theory applies to all Lipschitz policies rather than only the optimal policy.

E    P ROOFS AND MORE THEORY RESULTS
Using the generalized functions defined in Section 2, we can easily extend Bellman update rule to
HiP-MDPs:
                                                   Z
          Qn+1 (s, a, ω(θ)) ← Rg (s, a, ω(θ)) + γ T̂g (s′ |s, a, ω(θ))Vnπ (s′ , ω(θ))ds′ ,    (9)

where Qn+1 converges to Q∗ as n → ∞.
                      S
Theorem 3.1.For a (KR   , KTS , KR
                                 A
                                   , KTA , KR
                                            Ω
                                              , KTΩ )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP with a (KπS , KπΩ )-Lipschitz
                 S     S A
policy π, if γ(KT + Kπ KT ) < 1, the value function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to S&A
with constants bounded by:

         A                                 |Q(s, a1 , ω) − Q(s, a2 , ω)|  K A − γ(KRA S
                                                                                     KT − KRS A
                                                                                             KT )
        KQπ := sup sup sup                                               ≤ R        S    S  A
                       ω       s    a1 ,a2         dA (a1 , a2 )             1 − γ(KT + Kπ KT )

       S                                  |Q(s1 , a, ω) − Q(s2 , a, ω)|  K S − γKπS (KRS A
                                                                                        KT − KRA S
                                                                                                 KT )
      KQ π := sup sup sup                                               ≤ R           S       A
                                                                                            SK )
                   ω       a       s1 ,s2          d  (s ,
                                                     S 1 2 s )               1 − γ(K T  + Kπ T

                                                    |V (s1 , ω) − V (s2 , ω)|
                   KVS π := sup sup sup                                          S
                                                                              ≤ KQ      A   S
                                                                                   π + KQπ Kπ .
                                     ω   a   s1 ,s2        dS (s1 , s2 )

Proof. The proof is mainly based on the Bellman update rule (9), the dual form of Wasserstein Metric
(Equation 2), and fixed point iteration.
Recall that:
                                                                Z
           Qn+1 (s, a, ω(θ)) ← Rg (s, a, ω(θ)) + γ                  T̂g (s′ |s, a, ω(θ))Vnπ (s′ , ω(θ))ds′

Now let:
 A                           |Qn+1 (s, a1 , ω) − Qn+1 (s, a2 , ω)|                           |R(s, a1 , ω) − R(s, a2 , ω)|
KQ π ,n+1 := sup sup sup                                                   ≤ sup sup sup                                   +
                ω   s a1 ,a2                d   (a
                                              A 1 2  , a  )                   ω    s a1 ,a2            dA (a1 , a2 )
                                      (T (s′ |s, a1 , ω) − T (s′ |s, a2 , ω))V π (s′ , ω)ds′
                                 R
                                   s′
               γ sup sup sup
                  ω   s a1 ,a2                             dA (a1 , a2 )
                                                                                                 π   ′
                                              KVS π s′ (T (s′ |s, a1 , ω) − T (s′ |s, a2 , ω)) V K(sS ,ω) ds′
                                                       R
                    A                                                                              Vπ
                = KR  + γ sup sup sup
                              ω   s a1 ,a2                               d  (a ,
                                                                           A 1 2 a )
                                                         KV π s′ (T (s |s, a1 , ω) − T (s′ |s, a2 , ω))f (s′ , ω)ds′
                                                            S            ′
                                                               R
                    A
                ≤ KR + γ sup sup sup sup
                              ω f :K S ≤1 s a1 ,a2
                                      f
                                                                                 dA (a1 , a2 )
                  A
               ≤ KR + γKVS π ,n KTA
                                                                                                             (10)
The last inequality holds according to Equation 2.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly, we can get:

 S                      |Qn+1 (s1 , a, ω) − Qn+1 (s2 , a, ω)|                             |R(s1 , a, ω) − R(s2 , a, ω)|
KQ π := sup sup sup                                                    ≤ sup sup sup                                    +
           ω   a s1 ,s2                d   (s
                                         S 1 2  , s  )                     ω    a s1 ,s2            dA (a1 , a2 )
                                 (T (s′ |s1 , a, ω) − T (s′ |s2 , a, ω))V π (s′ , ω)ds′
                           R
                              s′
          γ sup sup sup
             ω   a s1 ,s2                              dS (s1 , s2 )
                                                                                              π   ′
                                         KVS π s′ (T (s′ |s1 , a, ω) − T (s′ |s2 , a, ω)) V K(sS ,ω) ds′
                                                  R
               S                                                                                 Vπ
           = KR  + γ sup sup sup
                         ω   a s1 ,s2                                d  (s
                                                                       S 1 2, s )
                                                    KV π s′ (T (s |s1 , a, ω) − T (s′ |s2 , a, ω))f (s′ , ω)ds′
                                                       S             ′
                                                           R
               S
           ≤ KR + γ sup sup sup sup
                         ω f :K S ≤1 a s1 ,s2                                 dS (s1 , s2 )
                                  f

             S
          ≤ KR + γKV π ,n KTS
                                                                                                              (11)
We need to further derive the upper bound of KV :
                    |V (s1 , ω) − V (s2 , ω)|                |Q(s1 , π(s1 ), ω) − Q(s2 , π(s2 ), ω)|
KVS π := sup sup                                 = sup sup
           ω s1 ,s2        d  (s ,
                             S 1 2 s )              ω s1 ,s2               dS (s1 , s2 )
                    |Q(s1 , π(s1 ), ω) − Q(s1 , π(s2 ), ω)|                 |Q(s1 , π(s2 ), ω) − Q(s2 , π(s2 ), ω)|
        ≤ sup sup                                             + sup sup
           ω s1 ,s2                dS (s1 , s2 )                 ω s1 ,s2                 dS (s1 , s2 )
                        A S     S
                     ≤ KQ Kπ + KQ
                                                                                                              (12)
Plugging Eqn 12 into Eqn 10& Eqn 11, we get:
                                 A        A
                                KQ,n+1 ≤ KR + γKTA (KQ,n
                                                     S      A
                                                         + KQ,n KπS )                                         (13)
                                 S        S
                                KQ,n+1 ≤ KR + γKTS (KQ,n
                                                     S      A
                                                         + KQ,n KπS )                                         (14)
By computing the fixed point of the recurrence, we get:
                                                        A       A S     S A
                          A          A                 KR − γ(KR KT − KR  KT )
                         KQ π = lim KQ,n+1 ≤                                   ,                              (15)
                                      n→∞                1 − γ(KT + Kπ KTA )
                                                                S    S

                                                      S
                        S          S                 KR − γKπS (KRS A    A S
                                                                   KT − KR KT )
                       KQ π = lim KQ,n+1 ≤                                      .                             (16)
                                 n→∞                             S    S A
                                                        1 − γ(KT + Kπ KT )


                                                                                         A    S
Corollary E.1. If we assume the Lipschitz constants for state and action are the same ( KR = KR =
 S,A    A       S      S,A      S,A
KR , KT = KT = KR = KT ):
                                                             S,A
                    |Rg (s1 , a1 , ω) − Rg (s2 , a2 , ω)| ≤ KR   dS,A ((s1 , a1 ), (s2 , a2 ))

                             W (Tg (·|s1 , a1 , ω), Tg (·|s2 , a2 , ω)) ≤ KTS,A ds,a ,
then:
                                                                      S,A
                               S,A    S     A                        KR
                              KQ π = KQπ = KQπ ≤
                                                             1 − γKTS,A (1 + KπS )

                      S,A                S,A
            A
Proof. Let KR    S
              = KR = KR   , KTA = KTS = KR   = KTS,A in the bounds of Theorem 3.1.

Corollary 3.2. If the policy π is optimal and γKTS < 1 ,then:
                                     S                      A     S A
                       S           KR             A        KR + γKR KT − γKTS KR
                                                                               A
                      KQ ∗ ≤             ,       KQ∗ ≤                           .
                                1 − γKTS                         1 − γKTS

                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. When the policy is optimal, we have (Asadi et al., 2018; Gelada et al., 2019):
                    ∗             ∗                                 ∗                    ∗
                |V π (s1 , ω) − V π (s2 , ω)| = | max Qπ (s1 , a, ω) − max Qπ (s2 , a, ω)|
                                                       a∈A                         a∈A
                                                                π∗                  ∗
                                               ≤ max |Q (s1 , a, ω) − Qπ (s2 , a, ω)|
                                                   a∈A

Thus,
                                                             |Q(s1 , a, ω) − Q(s2 , a, ω)|
                        KVS ≤ KQ
                               S
                                 = sup sup sup                                                      (17)
                                          ω    a   s1 ,s2             dS (s1 , s2 )

Plugging Eqn 17 into Eqn 10 and Eqn 11, we get:
                                        A        A     S
                                       KQ,n+1 ≤ KR + γKQ,n KTA                                      (18)
                                       S          S      S
                                    KQ,n+1   ≤ KR   + γKQ,n  KTS                                    (19)
First compute the fixed point of the recurrence of Eqn 19, we get:
                                                                             S
                                    S          S                           KR
                                   KQ ∗ = lim KQ,n+1 ≤                                              (20)
                                              n→∞                       1 − γKTS
Now plugging Eqn 20 back into Eqn 18:
                                                        S
               A         A        A                   KR                 S A
                                                                 K A + γKR            A
                                                                           KT − γKTS KR
              KQ∗ = lim KQ,n+1 ≤ KR + γ
                                                          S
                                                            KTA = R           S
                                                                                                    (21)
                    n→∞                            1 − γKT              1 − γKT


Definition E.2. Given a metric state space (S, dS ), an action space A, and a metric hidden-parameter
space (Θ, dΘ ), we define Fg as a collection of functions: Fg = {f : S × Θ 7→ S} distributed
according to g(f |a) where a ∈ A. We say that (FgS , FgΘ ) is a Lipschitz model class in HiP-MDPs if

                                              KTS := sup KfS,S ,                                    (22)
                                                           f ∈FgS

and
                                              KTΘ := sup KfΘ,S                                      (23)
                                                           f ∈FgΘ

are finite.

The transition function associated with a Lipschitz model class then can be defined by:
                                               X
                             T (s′ |s, a, θ) =   1(f (s, θ) = s′ )g(f |a),                          (24)
                                                       f

And the generalized transition function associated with a Lipschitz model class would be:
                                         Z X
                            ′
                       Tg (s |s, a, ω) =       1(f (s, θ) = s′ )g(f |a)ω(θ)dθ                       (25)
                                               θ   f


We introduce the following two lemmas regarding Lipschitz model class (Asadi et al., 2018)(We also
include a definition in appendix):
Lemma E.3. (Asadi et al., 2018) A generalized transition function Tg induced by a Lipschitz model
class Fg and fixed (θ, a) is Lipschitz with a constant:
                                                     W (Tg (·|µ1 , a, θ), Tg (·|µ2 , a, θ))
               KTµ = KW,W
                      A,Θ
                          (Tg ) := sup sup sup                                              ≤ KTS   (26)
                                      θ∈Θ a∈A µ1 ,µ2            W (µ1 , µ2 )
Lemma E.4. A generalized transition function Tg induced by a Lipschitz model class Fg and fixed
(s, a) is Lipschitz with a constant:
                      A,S                            W (Tg (·|s, a, ω1 ), Tg (·|s, a, ω2 ))
               KTΩ = KW,W (Tg ) := sup sup sup                                              ≤ KTΘ   (27)
                                      s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2            W (ω1 , ω2 )

                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Intuitively, the above Lemmas give a bound on the differences in distributions an agent transitions to,
as a function of how different the distributions of states it transitions from are, or how different the
distributions of the hidden parameters are. It is theoretically pleasing that these bounds are given as
the Lipschitz constants for the corresponding differences between point distributions of either states
or hidden parameters.
Proof for Lemma E.4



Proof.
                                                            Z
W (Tg (·|s, a, ω1 ), Tg (·|s, a, ω2 )) =        sup                 (Tg (s′ |s, a, ω1 ) − Tg (s′ |s, a, ω2 ))h(s′ )ds′
                                           h:KdS ,R (h)≤1    s′
                                                            Z Z
                                      =         sup                       T (s′ |s0 , a, θ)(ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))h(s′ )ds′ dθ
                                           h:KdS ,R (h)≤1    s′       θ
                                                            Z Z X
                                      =         sup                             g(t|a)1(t(s0 , θ) = s′ )(ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))h(s′ )ds′ dθ
                                           h:KdS ,R (h)≤1    s′       θ    t
                                                            X                   Z Z
                                      =         sup                  g(t|a)                1(t(s0 , θ) = s′ )(ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))h(s′ )ds′ dθ
                                           h:KdS ,R (h)≤1       t                θ    s′
                                                            X                   Z
                                      =         sup                  g(t|a)          (ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))h(t(so , θ))dθ
                                           h:KdS ,R (h)≤1       t                θ
                                           X                                    Z
                                      ≤         g(t|a)          sup                  (ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))h(t(so , θ))dθ
                                            t            h:KdS ,R (h)≤1          θ
                                                                                      Z
                                                X                                                                 h(t(so , θ))
                                      = KTΘ           g(t|a)              sup                 (ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))                dθ
                                                 t              h:KdS ,R (h)≤1            θ                          KTΘ
                                                X                                     Z
                                      ≤ KTΘ           g(t|a)              sup              (ω1 (θ) − ω2 (θ))q(so , θ)dθ
                                                 t              q:KdS ,R (q)≤1         θ
                                                X
                                      = KTΘ           g(t|a)W (ω1 , ω2 ) = KTΘ W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                 t
                                                                                                                               (28)


Using Lemma E.3, we can derive the bound of the compounding error of dynamics prediction given
the estimation error ϵ in hidden parameter at test time (Theorem 4.1).
Theorem 4.1. Assuming the estimation for hidden parameter θ is bounded by ϵ, that is,
W (ω(θ), ω̂(θ)) ≤ ϵ, an learned accurate T̂g induced by a Lipschitz model class Fg with the Lipschitz
constant KT̂Ω and KT̂S , a fixed sequence of actions a0 , · · · , an−1 , and a start state distribution µ. Then
∀n ≥ 1:
                                                                                              n−1
                                                                                              X
                         ξ(n) := W (T̂gn (·|µ, ω), T̂gn (·|µ, ω̂)) ≤ KT̂Ω ϵ                         (KT̂S )i ,                 (29)
                                                                                              i=0


where T̂gn (·|µ, ω)) := T̂g (·|T̂g (·|...T̂g (·|µ, a0 , ω)..., an−2 , ω), an−1 , ω), and T̂gn (·|µ, ω̂)) is defined
similarly.



Proof. We first derive the bound for one-step prediction error given Lemma E.3.


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   ξ(1) := W (T̂g (·|µ, ω), T̂g (·|µ, ω̂))
                               Z Z
                        := sup        (T̂ (s′ |s, a0 , ω) − T̂ (s′ |s, a0 , ω̂))f (s′ )µ(s)dsds′
                            f
                          Z       Z
                        ≤ sup (T̂ (s′ |s, a0 , ω) − T̂ (s′ |s, a0 , ω̂))f (s′ )ds′ µ(s)ds                        (30)
                              f
                          Z
                        = W (T̂ (·|s, a0 , ω), T̂ (·|s, a0 , ω̂))µ(s)ds
                          Z
                        ≤ KT̂Ω ϵµ(s)ds = KT̂Ω ϵ


Then, we can prove the bound for ξ(n):

ξ(n) := W (T̂gn (·|µ, ω), T̂gn (·|µ, ω̂))
      ≤ W (T̂gn (·|µ, ω), T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂), ω)) + W (T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂), ω), T̂gn (·|µ, ω̂))
      = W (T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω), ω), T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂), ω)) + W (T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂), ω), T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂), ω̂))
      ≤ KT̂S W (T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω), T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂)) + KT̂Ω ϵ
                                            n−1
                                            X
      = KT̂S ξ(n − 1) + KT̂Ω ϵ ≤ KT̂Ω ϵ           (KT̂S )i
                                            i=0
                                                                                                           (31)
We can get the same results if we replace T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω̂), ω) with T̂gn (·|T̂gn−1 (·|µ, ω), ω̂) in the
triangle inequality.



                                                Ω
Lemma 4.2.Given a HiP-MDP with learned (KR̂       , KT̂Ω )-Lipschitz transition model T̂ , R̂, in Model
Transfer, the generalized value function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to Ω with a constant
bounded by:

                                     KVΩπ ≤ KR̂
                                             Ω      Ω
                                                + γKQ      S   Ω
                                                     π + γKQπ K .
                                                               T̂


Proof. Recall that:
                                                     Z
                Vgπ (s) = Rg (s, a, ω(θ)) + γ              T̂g (s′ |s, a, ω(θ))Qπg (s, π(s), ω(θ))ds′
                                                      s′


Then we have:

                    |V π (s, ω1 (θ)) − V π (s, ω2 (θ))|
KVΩπ = sup sup
         s∈S ω1 ,ω2             dΩ (ω1 , ω2 )
                 |R̂g (s, π(s), ω1 (θ)) − R̂g (s, π(s), ω2 (θ))|
      ≤ sup sup
      s∈S ω1 ,ω2                    dΩ (ω1 , ω2 )
              | s′ T̂g (s1 |s, π(s), ω1 (θ))Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω1 (θ))ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 (θ))Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 (θ))ds′2 |
                         ′
               R                                                               R
                 1                                                               2
+γ sup sup
   s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                          dΩ (ω1 , ω2 )
                              | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω1 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 )Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )ds′2 |
                               R                                                      R
        Ω                        1                                                      2
   = KR̂   + γ sup sup
                 s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                   dΩ (ω1 , ω2 )

                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall that we quantify the distance between ω1 (θ) and ω2 (θ) using Wasserstein Metric W (ω1 , ω2 ),
then

                                   | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω1 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 )Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )ds′2 |
                                     R                                                          R
   KVΩπ = KR̂ Ω
                + γ sup sup              1                                                         2

                       s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                      W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                   | s′ [T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω1 ) − T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω2 )]ds′1 |
                                     R
              Ω
         ≤ KR̂ + γ sup sup               1

                       s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                   W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                       ′                  π ′                     ′
                           | s′ T̂g (s1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qg (s1 , π(s), ω2 )ds1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 )Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )ds′2 |
                            R                                                          R
                              1                                                          2
         + γ sup sup
               s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                    W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                   | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )[Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω1 ) − Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω2 )]ds′1 |
                                     R
              Ω
         ≤ KR̂  + γ sup sup              1

                       s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                      W (ω1 , ω2 )
                           | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω2 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 )Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )ds′2 |
                            R                                                          R
                              1                                                          2
         + γ sup sup
               s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                    W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                   | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )KQ   Ω                    ′
                                     R
                                                                      π W (ω1 , ω2 )ds1 |
              Ω
         ≤ KR̂ + γ sup sup               1

                       s∈S ω1 ,ω2                       W (ω1 , ω2 )
                           | s′ T̂g (s1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω2 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 )Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )ds′2 |
                                       ′
                            R                                                          R
                              1                                                          2
         + γ sup sup
               s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                    W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                  | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, π(s), ω1 )Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω2 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, π(s), ω2 )Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )ds′2 |
                                    R                                                          R
     Ω      Ω                          1                                                          2
= KR̂ +γKQπ + γ sup sup
                      s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                                       W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                |Es′ ∼T̂g (s′ |s,π(s),ω1 ) Qπg (s′1 , π(s), ω2 ) − Es′ ∼T̂g (s′ |s,π(s),ω2 ) Qπg (s′2 , π(s), ω2 )|
              Ω         Ω                           1       1                                        2        2
         = KR̂  + γKQ     π + γ sup sup
                                   s∈S ω1 ,ω2                                              W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                 S
              Ω      Ω
                                                KQ π W (T̂g (·|s, π(s), ω1 ), T̂g (·|s, π(s), ω2 ))
           ≤ KR̂ + γKQπ + γ sup sup
                                     s∈S ω1 ,ω2                   W (ω1 , ω2 )
              Ω      Ω      S    Ω
           ≤ KR̂ + γKQπ + γKQπ K
                                T̂


                                           S
Theorem 4.3.Given a HiP-MDP with learned (KR̂ , KT̂S , KR̂
                                                        A
                                                           , KT̂A , KR̂
                                                                     Ω
                                                                        , KT̂Ω )-Lipschitz transition
model T̂ , R̂, in Model Transfer, if γ(KTS + KπS KTA ) < 1, the generalized value function corre-
sponding to the KπS -Lipschitz policy π(a|s) is Lipschitz continuous with respect to Ω with a constant
bounded by:
                                                       Ω     S    Ω
                                                      KR + γKQ π KT
                                           KVΩπ ≤                   .                                             (32)
                                                          1−γ


Proof. By further assuming the Lipschitz continuity of dynamics & policy in Lemma 4.2, we can get
the result bound leveraging the dual form of Wasserstein Metric (Equation 2), triangle inequality, and
computing the fixed point of recurrence.
Recall that:
                                                               Z
             Qn+1 (s, a, ω(θ)) ← Rg (s, a, ω(θ)) + γ               T̂g (s′ |s, a, ω(θ))Vnπ (s′ , ω(θ))ds′



                              Vnπ (s′ , ω(θ)) = Qπn (s′ , a, ω(θ)), where a ∼ π(s)


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


It is well known that as n → ∞, Qn+1 converges to Q∗ , now let:
                             |Qn+1 (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − Qn+1 (s, a, ω2 (θ))|
KQ,n+1 = sup sup sup
              s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                 dω (ω1 , ω2 )
                               |R̂g (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − R̂g (s, a, ω2 (θ))|
          ≤ sup sup sup
              s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                  dω (ω1 , ω2 )
                           | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 (θ))Qπn (s′1 , a, ω1 (θ))ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 (θ))Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 (θ))ds′2 |
                            R                                                     R
                               1                                                        2
    +γ sup sup sup
          s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                                    dω (ω1 , ω2 )
                                           | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )Qπn (s′1 , a, ω1 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 )Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )ds′2 |
                                            R                                               R
             Ω                                  1                                               2
          = KR̂ +γ        sup sup sup
                          s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                            dω (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                                                                                    (33)
Recall that we quantify the distance between ω1 (θ) and ω2 (θ) using Wasserstein Metric W (ω1 , ω2 ),
then
                                     | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )Qπn (s′1 , a, ω1 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 )Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )ds′2 |
                                       R                                                    R
              Ω                            1                                                   2
KQ,n+1 = KR̂    + γ sup sup sup
                      s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                               W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                     | s′ [T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )Qπn (s′1 , a, ω1 ) − T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )Qπn (s′1 , a, ω2 )]ds′1 |
                                       R
              Ω
         ≤ KR̂ + γ sup sup sup             1

                      s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                          W (ω1 , ω2 )
                             | s′ T̂g (s1 |s, a, ω1 )Qn (s1 , a, ω2 )ds1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 )Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )ds′2 |
                                         ′               π ′                ′
                              R                                                    R
                                 1                                                    2
         + γ sup sup sup
                       ω
              s∈S a∈A 1 2 ,ω                                            W   (ω 1 , ω 2)
                                                  ′                 π ′
                                     | s′ T̂g (s1 |s, a, ω1 )[Qn (s1 , a, ω1 ) − Qπn (s′1 , a, ω2 )]ds′1 |
                                       R
              Ω
         ≤ KR̂ + γ sup sup sup             1

                      s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                W (ω1 , ω2 )
                             | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )Qπn (s′1 , a, ω2 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 )Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )ds′2 |
                              R                                                    R
                                 1                                                    2
         + γ sup sup sup
              s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                            W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                     | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )KQ,n W (ω1 , ω2 )ds′1 |
                                       R
              Ω
         ≤ KR̂ + γ sup sup sup             1

                      s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                     W (ω1 , ω2 )
                             | s′ T̂g (s1 |s, a, ω1 )Qn (s1 , a, ω2 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 )Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )ds′2 |
                                         ′               π ′
                              R                                                    R
                                 1                                                    2
         + γ sup sup sup
              s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                            W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                    | s′ T̂g (s′1 |s, a, ω1 )Qπn (s′1 , a, ω2 )ds′1 − s′ T̂g (s′2 |s, a, ω2 )Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )ds′2 |
                                                     R                                                  R
              Ω                                        1                                                  2
         = KR̂ + γKQ,n + γ sup sup sup
                                 s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                                 W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                    |Es′ ∼T̂g (s′ |s,a,ω1 ) Qπn (s′1 , a, ω2 ) − Es′ ∼T̂g (s′ |s,a,ω2 ) Qπn (s′2 , a, ω2 )|
              Ω                                        1        1                                  2        2
         = KR̂  + γKQ,n + γ sup sup sup
                                 s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2                                          W (ω1 , ω2 )
                                                      S
             Ω
                                                     KQ π W (T̂g (·|s, a, ω1 ), T̂g (·|s, a, ω2 ))
          ≤ KR̂ + γKQ,n + γ sup sup sup
                                      s∈S a∈A ω1 ,ω2               W (ω1 , ω2 )
             Ω              S    Ω
          ≤ KR̂ + γKQ,n + γKQ πK
                                T̂


                                                                                                                     (34)
                       S
Recall the bound for (KR̂ , KT̂S )-lipschitz MDP:

      S                        |Q(s1 , a, ω(θ)) − Q(s2 , a, ω(θ))|  K S − γ(KR̂
                                                                              S A      A S
                                                                                KT̂ − KR̂ KT̂ )
     KQ π := sup sup sup                                           ≤ R̂        A     S  S
                                                                                                .
                  ω a∈A s1 ,s2              ds (s1 , s2 )              1 − γ(K + Kπ K )        T̂           T̂


Equivalently:
                                          n
                                          X                 n+1
                                                            X
                            KQ,n+1 ≤            γ i KR̂
                                                     Ω
                                                        +         γ i KQ
                                                                       S
                                                                         π · K
                                                                               Ω
                                                                              T̂
                                                                                 + γ n KQ,0                          (35)
                                          i=0               i=1


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By computing the limit of both sides:
                                                    n
                                                    X                               n+1
                                                                                    X
          Ω
         KQπ = lim KQ,n+1 ≤ lim                             γ i KR̂
                                                                 Ω
                                                                    + lim                 γ i KQ
                                                                                               S
                                                                                                 π · K
                                                                                                       Ω
                                                                                                      T̂
                                                                                                         + lim γ n KQ,0
                  n→∞                   n→∞                                n→∞                              n→∞
                                                    i=0                             i=1
                                               Ω              S       Ω
                                              KR̂           γKQ π · K
                                                                     T̂
                                    =                   +                       +0
                                          1−γ                    1−γ
From Lemma 4.2 we have:
                                      KVΩπ ≤ KR̂
                                              Ω      Ω
                                                 + γKQ      S
                                                      π + γKQπ K
                                                                 Ω
                                                                T̂
Thus,
                                                                 Ω     S    Ω
                                                                KR + γKQ π KT
                                               KVΩπ ≤
                                                                    1−γ



Lemma 4.4. Given a (KR     S
                             , KTS , KR
                                      Ω
                                        , KTΩ )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP, for the optimal policy π ∗ ,
  π∗              π∗                              ∗               ∗
|V (s, ω1 (θ)) − V (s, ω2 (θ))| ≤ maxa∈A |Qπ (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − Qπ (s, a, ω2 (θ))|.

Proof.
            ∗                   ∗                                           ∗                               ∗
         |V π (s, ω1 (θ)) − V π (s, ω2 (θ))| = | max Qπ (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − max Qπ (s, a, ω2 (θ))|
                                                                a∈A                               a∈A
                                                                           π∗                        ∗
                                                        ≤ max |Q (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − Qπ (s, a, ω2 (θ))|
                                                                a∈A


                                         S
Lemma 4.5.Given a HiP-MDP with learned (KR̂ , KT̂S , KR̂
                                                      Ω
                                                         , KT̂Ω )-Lipschitz transition model T̂ , R̂,
and the optimal policy π̂ ∗ (a|s) for T̂ and R̂, starting from state distribution µ, the expected discounted
reward difference induced by hidden parameter estimation error ϵ is bounded by:
                                                         Ω                            S Ω
                                                        KR̂                         γKR̂ KT̂
                           |Jπµ∗ − Jπ̂µ∗ | ≤                      ·ϵ+                                · ϵ,                 (36)
                                                        1−γ                (1 − γ)(1 − γKT̂S )

if γKT̂S < 1.

Proof. Recall that:                                     Z
                                              Jπµ :=            Vgπ (s, ω(θ))µ(s)ds.
                                                            s
We have:                                            ∗                           ∗
                                    |V π (s, ω1 (θ)) − V π (s, ω2 (θ))|µ(s)ds
                                      R
                 KJΩ = sup sup            s
                        s ω1 ,ω2               d(ω1 (θ), ω2 (θ))
                                           π∗                    ∗
                                        |Q (s, a, ω1 (θ)) − Qπ (s, a, ω2 (θ))|µ(s)ds
                                      R
                      ≤ sup sup sup s
                         s   a ω1 ,ω2                 d(ω1 (θ), ω2 (θ))
                         Ω
                      ≤ KQ π ∗ = lim KQ,n+1
                                      n→∞
                                n
                                X                                 n+1
                                                                  X
                      ≤ lim           γ i KR̂
                                           Ω
                                              + lim                     γ i KQ
                                                                             S
                                                                               ∗ · K
                                                                                     Ω
                                                                                    T̂
                                                                                       + lim γ n KQ,0
                          n→∞                           n→∞                                    n→∞
                                i=0                               i=1
                           Ω            S       Ω
                          KR̂         γKQ ∗ · K
                                                T̂
                      =         +                               +0
                     1−γ                      1−γ
From Corollary 3.2, we have:
                                                                           S
                                                         S               KR
                                                        KQ ∗ ≤
                                                                      1 − γKTS

                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus,
                                            Ω
                                           KR̂ (1 − γKT̂S ) + γKR̂
                                                                S Ω
                                                                   KT̂
                                  KJΩ ≤
                                               (1 − γ)(1 − γKT̂S )



Claim 4.6. Given a linear and deterministic transition function and reward function, the bound
derived in Theorem 4.1 & Lemma 4.5 are tight.

Proof. Assume a linear transition function T for a new task with hidden parameter θ defined as:
                                        T (s, a) = As + Ba + Cθ,                                (37)
And a reward function defined as:
                                        R(s, a) = Ds + Ea + F θ.                                (38)
Assume there’s an estimation error ϵ for θ, then the transition function and reward function becomes:
                                     T̂ (s, a) = As + Ba + C(θ + ϵ),                            (39)

                                     R̂(s, a) = Ds + Ea + F (θ + ϵ),                            (40)
First observe that:
                                     ∀s, a |T (s, a) − T̂ (s, a)| = Cϵ,                         (41)
And that for n = 2:
 ∀s |T (T (s, a0 ), a1 ) − T̂ (T̂ (s, a0 ), a1 )| = |A(C(ϵ + θ) − Cθ) + Ba1 − Ba1 + C(ϵ + θ) − Cθ|
                                                                         1
                                                                         X
                                             = |ACϵ + Cϵ| = Cϵ                 Ai
                                                                         i=0
                                                                                            (42)
More generally, for n step compounding error of dynamics prediction T n and T̂ n , given a fixed
sequence of actions a0 , a1 , · · · , an :
                                                                         n
                                                                         X
                               ∀s |T n (s, an ) − T̂ n (s, an )| = Cϵ          Ai               (43)
                                                                         i=0

Thus, the bound in Theorem 4.1 is tight.
Now consider the state s = 0 and the action space only consists of one action a = 0 (thus the policy
is optimal), we can calculate the value of s predicted with T̂ and R̂:

       V̂ (s = 0) = R̂(0) + γ R̂(0 + C(θ + ϵ)) + γ R̂(AC(θ + ϵ) + C(θ + ϵ)) + · · ·
                               ∞
                               X                       ∞
                                                       X          n−1
                                                                  X
                 = F (θ + ϵ)         γ j + DC(θ + ϵ)         γn         Ai
                               j=0                     n=1        i=0
                                                                                                (44)
                   F (θ + ϵ)     DCγ(θ + ϵ)
                 =           +
                    1−γ        (1 − γ)(1 − γA)
                   (F (1 − γA) + DCγ)(θ + ϵ)
                 =
                         (1 − γ)(1 − γA)
Thus:
                                                         F (1 − γA) + DCγ
                        |V (s = 0) − V̂ (s = 0)| =                        ·ϵ                    (45)
                                                          (1 − γ)(1 − γA)
The result matches the bound derived in Lemma 4.5. (In deterministic cases, we assume we directly
estimate the value of θ, so KTΩ & KR
                                   Ω
                                     becomes KTΘ & KR  Θ
                                                         in this case and the Wasserstein distance
becomes the L1 distance |θ̂ − θ|.)


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 5.1. Given a HiP-MDP with learned KπΩ -Lipschitz joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)), in Policy
Transfer, the generalized value function with respect to Ω with a constant bounded by:

                                          KVΩπ ≤ KQ
                                                  Ω      A   Ω
                                                    π + KQπ Kπ .


Proof. Given a new test task, recall that:

                                 Vgπ(·|ω) (s, ϕ) = Qπ(·|ω)
                                                    g      (s, π(s, ω), ϕ)

where we use ϕ to denote the true distribution ϕ(θ) over hidden parameter for the current task (which
should be a Dirac δ-function in practice) of the environment. Then we have:

                                      π(·|ω1 )                π(·|ω2 )
                                    |Vg          (s, ϕ) − Vg             (s, ϕ)|
         KVΩπ = sup sup sup
                   s   ϕ ω1 ,ω2                    d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                      π(·|ω1 )                                 π(·|ω2 )
                                    |Qg          (s, π(s′ , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qg                 (s, π(s′ , ω2 ), ϕ)|
               ≤ sup sup sup
                   s   ϕ ω1 ,ω2                                 d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                      π(·|ω1 )                                    π(·|ω2 )
                                    |Qg          (s, π(s, ω1 ), ϕ(θ)) − Qg                   (s, π(s, ω1 ), ϕ(θ))|
               ≤ sup sup sup
                   s   ϕ ω1 ,ω2                                   d(ω1 , ω2 )
                         π(·|ω2 )                                    π(·|ω )
                       |Qg     (s, π(s, ω1 ), ϕ(θ)) − Qg 2 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ(θ))|
                   +
                                                d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                  Ω                    A                     ′
                                KQπ d(ω1 , ω2 ) KQ      π d(π(ω1 ), π(ω2 ))ds
               ≤ sup sup sup                     +
                  s   ϕ ω1 ,ω2     d(ω1 , ω2 )              d(ω1 , ω2 )
                              A   Ω
                  Ω
                             KQπ Kπ d(ω1 , ω2 )
               ≤ KQ π +
                                d(ω1 , ω2 )
                  Ω      A   Ω
               ≤ KQ π + KQπ Kπ


                          A
Theorem 5.2. Given a (KR    , KTA , KR
                                     S
                                       , KTS )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP, in Policy Transfer, the generalized
value function corresponding to the pretrained (KπS , KπΩ )-Lipschitz joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)), if
γ(KTS + KπS KTA ) < 1, is Lipschitz continuous with respect to Ω with a constant bounded by

                                                          KπΩ KQ
                                                               A
                                                                π
                                             KVΩπ ≤               .                                                  (46)
                                                           1−γ


Proof. Similar to model transfer, if we further assume the Lipschitz continuity of dynamics &
policy in Lemma 5.1, we can get the result bound leveraging the dual form of Wasserstein Metric
(Equation 2), triangle inequality, and computing the fixed point of recurrence.
Recall that:
                                                                 Z
           Q(s, π(s, ω), ϕ) ← Rg (s, π(s, ω), ϕ) + γ                  T̂g (s′ |s, π(s, ω), ϕ)V π (s′ , ϕ)ds′


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   π(·|ω )                           π(·|ω )
   Ω                             |Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn+1 2 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ)|
  KQπ = sup sup sup
                 s      ϕ ω1 ,ω2                      d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                π(·|ω )                           π(·|ω )
                     |Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ)|
     ≤ sup sup sup                                                         +
        s   ϕ ω1 ,ω2                      d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                π(·|ω )                           π(·|ω )
                              |Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ) − Qn+1 2 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ)|
       sup sup sup
           s         ϕ ω1 ,ω2                      d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                π(·|ω )                           π(·|ω )
                              |Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ)| d(π(·|ω1 ), π(·|ω2 ))
     ≤ sup sup sup                                                                 ·                      +
           s         ϕ ω1 ,ω2                d(π(·|ω1 ), π(·|ω2 ))                      d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                π(·|ω )                           π(·|ω )
                              |Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ) − Qn+1 2 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ)|
       sup sup sup
           s         ϕ ω1 ,ω2                      d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                               π(·|ω )                         π(·|ω )
       A   Ω                             |Qn+1 1 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ) − Qn+1 2 (s, π(s, ω2 ), ϕ)|
     ≤KQπ Kπ + sup sup sup
                            s   ϕ ω1 ,ω2                      d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                                                                                  (47)
Now let:
                                             π(·|ω )                π(·|ω )
 ∗                                    |Qn+1 1 (s, a, ϕ) − Qn+1 2 (s, a, ϕ)|
KQ π ,n+1 = sup sup sup sup
                  s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                    d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                           ′                  π(·|ω1 ) ′                         π(·|ω )
                                                                                      (s , π(s′ , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn 2 (s′ , π(s′ , ω2 ), ϕ)|ds′
                                                R
                                                  ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ(θ))|Qn
               ≤ 0 + γ · sup sup sup sup s
                           s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                                                d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                     ′              π(·|ω1 ) ′                          π(·|ω )
                                                                            (s , π(s , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn 2 (s′ , π(s′ , ω1 ), ϕ)|ds′
                                                                                      ′
                                          R
                                             ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)|Qn
               ≤ γ · sup sup sup sup s
                      s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                                             d(ω1 , ω2 )
                               ′             π(·|ω2 ) ′        ′                  π(·|ω2 ) ′
                                                                                           (s , π(s′ , ω2 ), ϕ)|ds′
                      R
                        ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)|Qn          (s , π(s , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn
                   + s
                                                              d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                     ′             ∗                     ′
                                          R
                                             ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)KQπ ,n d(ω1 , ω2 )ds
               ≤ γ · sup sup sup sup s
                      s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                     d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                  ′             A                           ′
                         R
                           ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)KQπ d(π(ω1 ), π(ω2 ))ds
                      + s
                                            d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                               T (s′ |s, a, ϕ)KQ   ∗                     ′               ′            A    Ω           ′
                                          R                                                    R
                                           s′ g                      π ,n d(ω1 , ω2 )ds          ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)KQπ Kπ d(ω1 , ω2 )ds
               ≤ γ · sup sup sup sup                                                        + s
                      s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                     d(ω1 , ω2 )                                        d(ω1 , ω2 )
                    ∗         A   Ω
               ≤ γ(KQ π ,n + KQπ Kπ )


Equivalently:
                                                                      n+1
                                                                      X
                                      ∗           n ∗
                                     KQ π ,n+1 ≤ γ KQπ ,0 +                 γ i KQ
                                                                                 A   Ω
                                                                                  π Kπ

                                                                      i=1
Computing the limit of both sides:
                                                                                     n+1
                                                                                     X
                         ∗          ∗              n ∗
                        KQ π = lim KQπ ,n+1 ≤ lim γ KQπ ,0 + lim                           γ i KQ
                                                                                                A   Ω
                                                                                                 π Kπ
                                 n→∞                     n→∞                   n→∞
                                                                                     i=1
                                                               A   Ω
                                                             γKQπ Kπ
                                                       =0+
                                                               1−γ
Plugging the results back in to Equation 47, we have:
                                                                      A   Ω
                                                                     KQπ Kπ
                                                KVΩπ = KQ
                                                        Ω
                                                         π ≤
                                                                      1−γ


                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          A
Lemma 5.3. Given a (KR      , KTA , KRS
                                        , KTS )-Lipschitz HiP-MDP, a pretrained KπΩ -Lipschitz optimal
joint policy π(a|s, ω(θ)), starting from state distribution µ, the expected discounted reward difference
induced by hidden parameter estimation error ϵ is bounded by:
                                          γKπΩ (KR
                                                 A
                                                    + γKRS A
                                                           KT − γKTS KR
                                                                      A
                                                                        )
                        |Jπµ∗ − Jπµ | ≤                        S
                                                                          · ϵ,                                 (48)
                                                 (1 − γ)(1 − γKT )

if γKTS ≤ 1.

Proof. When the policy is optimal, we have:
                                      π(·|ω )                 π(·|ω )
 Ω                               |Qn+1 1 (s, a, ϕ) − Qn+1 2 (s, a, ϕ)|
KQ π ,n+1 = sup sup sup sup
             s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                     d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                        ′                  π(·|ω1 ) ′                        π(·|ω )
                                                                                   (s , π(s′ , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn 2 (s′ , π(s′ , ω2 ), ϕ)|ds′
                                           R
                                             ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ(θ))|Qn
          ≤ 0 + γ · sup sup sup sup s
                      s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                                                 d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                 ′               π(·|ω1 ) ′                          π(·|ω )
                                                                         (s , π(s , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn 2 (s′ , π(s′ , ω1 ), ϕ)|ds′
                                                                                   ′
                                     R
                                        ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)|Qn
          ≤ γ · sup sup sup sup s
                 s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                                               d(ω1 , ω2 )
                          ′             π(·|ω   )                              π(·|ω )
                                                  (s′ , π(s′ , ω1 ), ϕ) − Qn 2 (s′ , π(s′ , ω2 ), ϕ)|ds′
                 R                            2
                   ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)|Qn
              + s
                                                           d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                 ′                                    ′
                                     R
                                        ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)KQπ ,n d(ω1 , ω2 )ds
          ≤ γ · sup sup sup sup s
                 s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                       d(ω1 , ω2 )
                             ′             A                             ′
                    R
                      ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)KQπ d(π(ω1 ), π(ω2 ))ds
                 + s
                                       d(ω1 , ω2 )
                                                                                                      ′           A     Ω           ′
                                                                                           R
                                          T (s′ |s, a, ϕ)KQπ ,n d(ω1 , ω2 )ds′
                                     R
                                                                                              ′ Tg (s |s, a, ϕ)KQπ Kπ d(ω1 , ω2 )ds
                                      s′ g
          ≤ γ · sup sup sup sup                                                         + s
                 s    a    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                       d(ω1 , ω2 )                                        d(ω1 , ω2 )
               Ω         A   Ω
          ≤ γ(KQ π ,n + KQπ Kπ )


Equivalently:
                                                               n+1
                                                               X
                                  Ω           n Ω
                                 KQ π ,n+1 ≤ γ KQπ ,0 +              γ i KQ
                                                                          A   Ω
                                                                           π Kπ

                                                               i=1
Computing the limit of both sides:
                                                                              n+1
                                                                              X
                  Ω                        n Ω
                 KQπ = lim KQπ ,n+1 ≤ lim γ KQπ ,0 + lim                            γ i KQ
                                                                                         A   Ω
                                                                                          π Kπ
                           n→∞                    n→∞                   n→∞
                                                                              i=1
                                                      A   θ
                                                    γKQπ Kπ
                                                =0+
                                                     1−γ
If the policy is optimal, we have:

    |V π(ω1 ) (s, ϕ(θ)) − V π(ω2 ) (s, ϕ(θ))| ≤| max Qπ(ω1 ) (s, a, ϕ(θ)) − max Qπ(ω2 ) (s, a, ϕ(θ))|
                                                     a                               a

                                                ≤ max |Qπ(ω1 ) (s, a, ϕ(θ)) − Qπ(ω2 ) (s, a, ϕ(θ))|
                                                    a

Then for the Lipschitz constant of the expected return function, we have:
                                    |V π(ω1 ) (s, ϕ(θ)) − V π(ω2 ) (s, ϕ(θ))|µ(s)ds
                                 R
             Ω
           KJ = sup sup sup s
                   s    ϕ ω1 ,ω2                   d(ω1 (θ), ω2 (θ))
                                        |Qπ(ω1 ) (s, a, ϕ(θ)) − Qπ(ω2 ) (s, a, ϕ(θ))|µ(s)ds
                                      R
                ≤ sup sup sup sup s
                   s    a   ϕ ω1 ,ω2                      d(ω1 (θ), ω2 (θ))
                   Ω
                = KQπ


                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using the results from Corollary 3.2, we get:
                                     γKπΩ (KR
                                            A
                                               + γKRS A
                                                      KT − γKTS KR
                                                                 A
                                                                   )
                             KJΩ ≤
                                            (1 − γ)(1 − γKTS )



Claim 5.4. Given a linear and deterministic transition function, reward function and policy, the
bounds derived in Lemma 5.3 are tight.

Proof. Assume a linear transition function T for a new task defined as:
                                        T (s, a) = As + Ba,                                  (49)
a reward function defined as:
                                      R(s, a) = Ds + Ea,                                     (50)
And the optimal policy corresponding to hidden parameter θ defined as:
                                              π(·) = Hθ                                      (51)
Assume there’s an estimation error ϵ for θ, then the policy becomes:
                                          π(·) = H(θ + ϵ),                                   (52)
Now consider the state s = 0, we can calculate the value of s predicted with T , R and π̂:

V̂ (s = 0) = R(0) + γ DBH(θ + ϵ) + EH(θ + ϵ) + γ DABH(θ + ϵ) + DBH(θ + ϵ) + EH(θ + ϵ) + · · ·
                          ∞
                          X                     ∞
                                                X          n−1
                                                           X
          = EH(θ + ϵ)           +DBH(θ + ϵ)           γn         Ai + R(0)
                          j=1                   n=1        i=0
               γEH    DBHγ
          =     +                   (θ + ϵ) + R(0)
            1−γ   (1 − γ)(1 − γA)
                                                                                             (53)
Thus:                                               γEH        DBHγ
                     |V̂ (s = 0) − V (s = 0)| =                  +           ϵ
                                                 1−γ      (1 − γ)(1 − γA)
                                                                                             (54)
                                               γH(E − γAE + γBD)
                                           =                            ·ϵ
                                                   (1 − γ)(1 − γA)
The result matches the bound derived in Lemma 5.3. (In deterministic cases, we assume we directly
estimate the value of θ, so KπΩ becomes KπΘ in this case and the Wasserstein distance becomes the
L1 distance |θ̂ − θ|.)

                                           Y
F    F URTHER CLAIM ABOUT THE ASSUMPTION γKX <1
Similar assumptions have been made in most of previous papers discussing Lipschitz continuity in
RL (Rachelson & Lagoudakis, 2010; Pirotta et al., 2015; Asadi et al., 2018; Gelada et al., 2019).
Here, we make the following claim:
Claim F.1. When a HiP-MDP has a fixed horizon N , the assumption that γ(KTS + KπS KTA ) < 1 and
the assumption (when the policy is optimal) γKTS < 1 are both unnecessary.

Proof.
                                                                       PN     i
                             |V (s1 , ω) − V (s2 , ω)|             |     i=0 γ (R1 − R2 )|
            KVS = sup sup                              = sup sup
                    ω s1 ,s2        dS (s1 , s2 )         ω s1 ,s2           dS (s1 , s2 )
Firstly, if the agent is at the last step N of one episode:
                                                 P0
                                S               | i=0 γ i (R1 − R2 )|    S
                              KV = sup sup                            ≤ KR
                                       ω s1 ,s2     dS (s1 , s2 )

                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If the agent is at step N − 1:
                    P1
   S               | i=0 γ i (R1 − R2 )|
KV = sup sup
         ω s1 ,s2        dS (s1 , s2 )
                   |R(s1 , π(s1 ), ω) − R(s2 , π(s2 ), ω)| + γ|R(s′1 , π(s′1 ), ω) − R(s′2 , π(s′2 ), ω)|
     ≤ sup sup
         ω s1 ,s2                                           dS (s1 , s2 )
                   |R(s1 , π(s1 ), ω) − R(s2 , π(s1 ), ω)| + |R(s2 , π(s1 ), ω) − R(s2 , π(s2 ), ω)|
     ≤ sup sup
         ω s1 ,s2                                          dS (s1 , s2 )
               |R(s′1 , π(s′1 ), ω) − R(s′2 , π(s′2 ), ω)|
 +γ sup sup
      ω s1 ,s2                 dS (s1 , s2 )
          S       A S                      |R(s′1 , π(s′1 ), ω) − R(s′2 , π(s′2 ), ω)|
     ≤ KR    + KR   Kπ + γ sup sup
                                 ω s1 ,s2                  dS (s1 , s2 )
          S       A S                      |R(s1 , π(s1 ), ω) − R(s′2 , π(s′1 ), ω)| + |R(s′2 , π(s′1 ), ω) − R(s′2 , π(s′2 ), ω)|
                                                ′       ′
     ≤ KR    + KR   Kπ + γ sup sup
                                 ω s1 ,s2                                         dS (s1 , s2 )
          S       A S             S        A S                 |T (s1 , π(s1 ), ω) − T (s2 , π(s2 ), ω)|
     ≤ KR    + KR   Kπ + γ(KR        + KR    Kπ ) sup sup
                                                     ω s1 ,s2                 dS (s1 , s2 )
        S    A S       S    A S
     ≤ KR + KR Kπ + γ(KR + KR Kπ )(KTS + KTA KπS )
If the agent is at step N − 2, similarly, we have:
KVS ≤ KR
       S    A S
         + KR         S
              Kπ + γ(KR    A S
                        + KR Kπ )(KTS + KTA KπS ) + γ 2 (KR
                                                          S    A S
                                                            + KR Kπ )(KTS + KTA KπS )2
By induction, if the agent is at step N − n, we have:
                                                          1 − γ n (KTS + KTA KπS )n
                            KVS ≤ (KR
                                    S    A S
                                      + KR Kπ ) ·
                                                           1 − γ(KTS + KTA KπS )
Thus, the assumption that γ(KTS + KπS KTA ) < 1 is unnecessary.
Similarly, when the policy is optimal, at step N − 1:
                            P1
                           | i=0 γ i (R1 − R2 )|
          KVS = sup sup
                  ω s1 ,s2        dS (s1 , s2 )
                                |R(s1 , a, ω) − R(s2 , a, ω)| + γ|R(s′1 , a, ω) − R(s′2 , a, ω)|
              ≤ sup sup sup
                  ω   a s1 ,s2                                dS (s1 , s2 )
                   S                       |R(s1 , a, ω) − R(s′2 , a, ω)|
                                                 ′
              ≤ KR   + γ sup sup sup
                            ω    a s1 ,s2            dS (s1 , s2 )
                   S         S                  |T (s1 , a, ω) − T (s2 , a, ω)|
              ≤ KR   + γKR     sup sup sup
                                ω    a s1 ,s2             dS (s1 , s2 )
                   S     S S
                ≤ KR + γKR KT
At step N − n, we have:
                                                         1 − γ n (KTS )n
                                          KVS ≤ KR
                                                 S
                                                   ·
                                                           1 − γKTS
Thus, the assumption that γKTS < 1 is unnecessary.
Intuitively, for tasks with infinite horizons, the assumption requires that the future states generated by
close states are not too divergent. The threshold of “divergent” depends on how farsighted the agent
is.

G     A PPLICATIONS OF H I P-MDP S
HiP-MDP is an important setting widely used in recent meta RL papers. It provides a natural
testbed for meta/lifelong RL algorithms as the difference between tasks can be controlled by a low-
dimensional latent vector. A commonly-used meta-RL benchmark (almost in every recent meta-RL


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


papers) creates a set of tasks by changing the environmental parameters (e.g. mass, damping) (Lee
et al., 2020; Raileanu et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2022) or reward functions (e.g. target position, target
velocity) (Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020) of mujoco-simulated robots. Moreover, in
real-world robotic applications, we want the robot to learn a policy that is robust to small dynamics
changes like unexpected perturbations. Then one of the solutions is to let the agent pretrain over a set
of HiP-MDPs considering the possible dynamics changes (Nagabandi et al., 2019).


                                                  29
