Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O NLINE C ONTINUAL L EARNING FOR
P ROGRESSIVE D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT (OCL-PDS):
A P RACTITIONER ’ S P ERSPECTIVE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         We introduce the novel OCL-PDS problem - Online Continual Learning for Pro-
         gressive Distribution Shift. PDS refers to the subtle, gradual, and continuous dis-
         tribution shift that widely exists in modern deep learning applications. It is widely
         observed in industry that PDS can cause significant performance drop. While
         previous work in continual learning and domain adaptation addresses this prob-
         lem to some extent, our investigations from the practitioner’s perspective reveal
         flawed assumptions that limit their applicability on daily challenges faced in real-
         world scenarios, and this work aims to close the gap between academic research
         and industry. For this new problem, we build 4 new benchmarks from the Wilds
         dataset (Koh et al., 2021), and implement 12 algorithms and baselines including
         both supervised and semi-supervised methods, which we test extensively on the
         new benchmarks. We hope that this work can provide practitioners with tools to
         better handle realistic PDS, and help scientists design better OCL algorithms.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In most modern deep learning applications, the input data undergoes a continual distribution shift
over time. For example, consider a satellite image classification task as illustrated in Figure 1a.
In this task, the input data distribution changes with time due to the changes in landscape, and
camera updates which can lead to higher image resolutions and wider color bands. Similarly, in a
toxic language detection task on social media illustrated in Figure 1b, the distribution shift can be
caused by a shift in trends and hot topics (many people post about hot topics like BLM (Wikipedia
contributors, 2022a) and Roe v. Wade (Wikipedia contributors, 2022b) on social media), or a shift
in language use (Röttger & Pierrehumbert, 2021; Luu et al., 2022). Such distribution shift can cause
significant performance drop in deep models, a widely observed phenomenon known as model drift.
A critical problem for practitioners, therefore, is how to deal with what we term progressive distri-
bution shift (PDS), defined as the subtle, gradual, and continuous distribution shift that widely
exists in modern deep learning applications. In this work, we explore handling PDS with online
continual learning (OCL), where the learner collects, learns, and is evaluated on online samples
from a continually changing data distribution. In Section 2, we formulate the OCL-PDS problem.
The OCL-PDS problem is closely related to two research areas: domain adaptation (DA) and con-
tinual learning (CL), in which there is a rich body of academic work. However, through a literature
review and our conversations with practitioners, we find that there still remains a gap between the
settings widely used in academic work and in real industrial applications. To close this gap, we
commit ourselves to thinking from a practitioner’s perspective, which is the core spirit of this
work. Our primary goal is to build tools for investigating the real issues practitioners are facing in
their day-to-day work. To achieve this goal, we challenge the prevailing assumptions in previous
work, and propose three important modifications to the conventional DA and CL problem settings:
      1. Task-free: One point conventional DA and CL settings have in common is assuming clear
         boundaries between distinct domains (or tasks), but practitioners rarely apply the same
         model to very different domains in industry. In contrast, OCL studies the task-free CL
         setting (Aljundi et al., 2019b) where there is no clear boundary, and the distribution shift
         is continuous. Moreover, in OCL both training and evaluation are online, unlike previous
         task-free CL settings with offline evaluation, which is not as realistic in a “lifelong” setting.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a) FMoW-WPDS benchmark.                           (b) CivilComments-WPDS benchmark.
    Figure 1: FMoW-WPDS and CivilComments-WPDS benchmarks which we build in this work.
       2. Forgetting is allowed: Avoiding catastrophic forgetting is a huge topic in CL, which usu-
          ally requires no forgetting on all tasks. However, remembering everything is actually im-
          practical, infeasible and potentially harmful, so OCL-PDS only requires remembering re-
          cent knowledge and important knowledge which is described by a regression set (Sec. 2.2).
       3. Infinite storage: Previous work in CL usually assumes a limited storage (buffer) size.
          However, storage is not the most pressing bottleneck in most industrial applications. Thus,
          in OCL-PDS, we assume an infinitely large storage where all historical samples can be
          stored. However, the learner cannot replay all samples because it would be too inefficient.

To demonstrate the novelty and practicality of the OCL-PDS problem, in Section 2.3 we will discuss
related work, compare OCL-PDS with common and similar settings used in previous work, and
elaborate on the reasons why we believe these three key modifications align OCL-PDS more closely
with industrial applications and practitioners’ pain points. A more thorough literature review can be
found in Appendix A. Then, in Section 3, we will build 4 new benchmarks for OCL-PDS, including
both vision and language tasks. When building these benchmarks, we make every effort to make
sure that they can reflect real PDS scenarios that practitioners need to deal with.
In Section 4, we will explore OCL algorithms and how to combine them with semi-supervised
learning (SSL) as unlabeled data is very common in practice. In total, we implement 12 supervised
and semi-supervised OCL algorithms and baselines adapted to OCL-PDS, which we test extensively
on our benchmarks in Section 5. Our key observations in these experiments include: (i) A task-
dependent relationship between learning and remembering; (ii) Some existing methods have low
performances on regression tasks; (iii) SSL helps improve online performance, but it requires a
critical virtual update step. Finally, in Section 6 we discuss remaining problems and limitations.
Contributions. Our contributions in this work include: (i) Introducing the novel OCL-PDS prob-
lem which more closely aligns with practitioners’ needs; (ii) Releasing 4 new benchmarks for this
novel setting; (iii) Adapting and implementing 12 OCL algorithms and baselines, including both
supervised and semi-supervised, for OCL-PDS; (iv) Comparing these algorithms and baselines with
extensive experiments, which leads to a number of key observations. Overall, we believe that this
work is an important step in closing the gap between academic research and industry, and we hope
that this work can inspire more practitioners and researchers to investigate and dive deep into real-
world PDS. To this end, we release our benchmarks and algorithms, which are easy to use and we
hope can help boost the development of OCL algorithms for handling PDS.

2     T HE OCL-PDS P ROBLEM
2.1 P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We have a stream of online data S0 , S1 , · · · , where each St is a batch of i.i.d. samples from distri-
bution Dt that changes with time t continuously, for which we assume that Div(Dt ∥ Dt+1 ) < ρ
for all t for some divergence function Div. Online Continual Learning (OCL) goes as follows:
         • At t = 0, receive a labeled training set S0 , on which train the initial model f0
        • For t = 1, 2, · · · , T, · · · do
                                                                                  (i)   (i)     i.i.d.
            1. Data collection: Receive a new unlabeled data batch St = {(xt , yt )}ni=1t
                                                                                           ∼ Dt .
            2. Evaluation: Predict on St with the current model ft−1 , and get some feedback
            3. Fine-tuning: Update the model ft−1 → ft with all previous information
Evaluation metrics. An OCL algorithm is used for fine-tuning and is evaluated by three metrics:
1. Online performance: Denote the performance of fs on St by Ats . The online performance at
time t (as computed in Step 2 - Evaluation) is Att−1 , and the average online performance before
horizon T is defined as (A10 + · · · + ATT −1 )/T .


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2. Knowledge retention: Unlike conventional CL that requires no forgetting on all tasks, in OCL-
PDS the model only needs to remember two types of knowledge: recent knowledge and important
knowledge. For a certain recent time window w, the recent performance is defined as (At−wt−1 + · · · +
At−1
  t−1 )/w. The  important data is described by a regression set, and the regression set performance
is the model’s performance on this set.
3. Training efficiency: This is measured by the average runtime of the fine-tuning step, which is
very important for this online setting where the OCL algorithm is run for many times.
2.2   D ETAILS

Divergence function. For distributions P and Q, Div(P ∥ Q) is the divergence from P to Q, and
can be different from Div(Q ∥ P ). According to our reasoning in Appendix B, an ideal divergence
function for OCL-PDS should be asymmetric and bounded, so we cannot use popular functions such
as total variation, Wasserstein distance, MMD, KL-divergence and JS-divergence. In this work, we
use the ϵ-KL-divergence (Eqn. (2)), whose definition and properties can be found in Appendix B.
Data batch. If |St | = 1, then this is the conventional online learning setting where samples arrive
one by one. However, industry practitioners seldom update the model over a single sample, and
always collect a batch of samples before fine-tuning the model, so we consider data batches instead.
Feedback. Without any feedback from the evaluation process, the problem is fully unsupervised
because we only have the unlabeled batches to fine-tune the model. This setting, however, is too hard
and unrealistic. Indeed, for most deployed industrial systems, there are tools for evaluating online
performance, either through some automated metrics or feedback provided by end-users. Here, we
consider the user error report model, where a fraction of the users provide feedback on incorrect
model outputs. This model leads to Random Label Feedback (RLF), where the labels of α fraction
of the samples in St are provided as feedback. In this scenario, α = 0, α = 1 and α ∈ (0, 1)
correspond to the unsupervised, supervised and semi-supervised learning settings, respectively.
All previous information. We allow the learner to store all previously seen samples and feedback
(though the learner cannot really replay all samples as it would be too inefficient), which is starkly
different from most previous papers in CL that assume a limited storage size.
Recent knowledge. OCL requires no forgetting on recent knowledge, because (i) in general, practi-
tioners expect the model not to forget too quickly, and (ii) in many applications the same distribution
repeats periodically, which makes recent knowledge useful. For example, satellite images in sum-
mer and winter look very different (e.g. due to snow), but the images in two consecutive summers
look similar, so in this case it is useful to remember the knowledge for at least one year.
Regression set. In the software industry, regression refers to the deterioration of performance after
an update (Yan et al., 2021). The regression set contains the regression data on which making a
mistake is more expensive. Moreover, the labeling function P (Y |X) of the regression data changes
very little over time if any (no concept shift). The two most common types of regression data in
industry are: (i) Frequent data, which appears more often than other data; (ii) Critical data, which
weighs more in the model evaluation and whose definition depends on the specific application.
2.3   R ELATED W ORK AND C OMPARISON WITH P REVIOUS S ETTINGS

This work is related to three areas: Domain adaptation (DA), continual learning (CL), and semi-
supervised learning (SSL). DA provides a learner with labeled samples from a source distribution P
and (partially labeled, unlabeled, or no) samples from a target distribution Q, and requires it to learn
a good model on Q. Surveys on DA include Lu et al. (2018); Wang & Deng (2018); Ramponi &
Plank (2020); Wang et al. (2022b). In CL, the learner needs to continually learn new knowledge from
an online stream of data, and settings include task-incremental CL (including domain-incremental
and class-incremental CL), task-aware CL, task-agnostic CL, task-free CL and OCL. Surveys on
CL include De Lange et al. (2021); Masana et al. (2020); Biesialska et al. (2020). SSL requires the
model to learn from a training set consisting of few labeled samples and many unlabeled samples.
Surveys on SSL include Van Engelen & Hoos (2020); Ouali et al. (2020); Yang et al. (2021). A
more thorough literature review can be found in Appendix A.
There are several differences between the OCL-PDS problem and conventional DA and CL settings.
We now explain why our formulation is more relevant and thus useful for industry practitioners.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


PDS vs DA/DG. Domain adaptation (DA) and its sibling domain generalization (DG) mostly study
big, one-shot distribution shifts, i.e. training and testing on two very different domains. This has
two problems: (i) Practitioners seldom directly apply a model to a very different domain in industry.
Instead, they usually train one model for each domain, and train a domain classifier to distinguish
among different domains; (ii) Even if a model needs to be applied to a different domain, practitioners
would usually first collect some labeled data from the new domain and then fine-tune the model. It
is very rare to have no labels or samples at all from the target domain in industry.
On the contrary, OCL-PDS is a very common scenario in industry. First, PDS has been widely
reported to cause performance drop in industrial applications (Martinel et al., 2016; Jaidka et al.,
2018; Huang & Paul, 2019), and practitioners do not often train new models for PDS. Second, OCL-
PDS studies the semi-supervised setting where the practitioners can collect a few labeled samples
and many unlabeled samples, which is more realistic than having no labels or samples at all.
OCL vs CL. OCL falls under the task-free continual learning setting where there is a fixed task
and no clear task boundary. It is different from conventional task-incremental CL in three ways:

      1. Task-incremental CL has N distinct tasks and requires a single model to learn them all, but
         what practitioners would usually do in this case is to train N models, one for each task. In
         contrast, in OCL-PDS the task is fixed but the data distribution is gradually and constantly
         changing, so it is more reasonable to use and continually fine-tune a single model.
      2. Conventional CL requires the model to remember all N tasks with a storage of size M . For
         studying PDS, this requirement has three problems:
           (i) It is not so practical as not all old knowledge is important - A satellite image classifier
               in 2022 does not need to do very well on images in 2002 with different landscapes.
          (ii) In the “lifelong” setting with N continually growing, we need M to also grow with
               N (like M = O(N )). With a fixed M , it is infeasible to remember everything.
         (iii) Many applications have concept shift where P (Y |X) could change, so remembering
               old knowledge can be harmful to the performance on the current data distribution.
               For instance, languages that were not considered offensive 20 years ago are widely
               recognized as offensive today thanks to the recent civil rights movements.
         Thus, OCL-PDS only requires remembering recent knowledge and important knowledge.
      3. Our setting assumes infinite storage unlike previous settings. This is an over-optimistic
         assumption as there are real applications where the amount of data is so huge that it is
         impossible to store all data even for big companies. Real applications also have other con-
         siderations such as privacy restrictions so that the data cannot be stored forever. However,
         storage size is rarely the bottleneck of industrial applications. The point of making this
         assumption is to not put too much effort into utilizing every bit of storage. Instead, we
         want to focus on more practically relevant questions, such as how to leverage unlabeled
         data and how to improve training efficiency.

Other similar settings. First, OCL is different from the task-free CL formulated in some previous
work (Aljundi et al., 2019b; de Masson d'Autume et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022d) where the training
is online but the evaluation is offline. Previous work typically splits the data domain into different
sections which the learner sees sequentially online, and in the end the learner is evaluated on the
entire domain offline. On the contrary, both training and evaluation in OCL are online: For
each new batch, the model is first tested and then trained on it. Thus, it is possible to have the real
“lifelong” learning setting in OCL where the time horizon T = ∞ but not in the previous setting.
Second, OCL-PDS is closely related to reinforcement learning (RL) and time series analysis. The
difference from RL is that in RL, the agent can learn from a number of episodes, while in OCL-PDS
the evaluation is online and one-pass. The difference from time series analysis is that time series
focuses on predicting on future data and does not care about forgetting. Moreover, though PDS
naturally resides in time series data, in our literature review (Appendix A) we find little work about
handling PDS with time series analysis. One such line of work is temporal covariate shift (TCS)
(Du et al., 2021) that assumes that P (Y | X) is always fixed, which is not assumed in OCL-PDS.
Third, there are two related settings, gradual domain adaptation (GDA) (Kumar et al., 2020) and
gradual concept drift (Liu et al., 2017; Xu & Wang, 2017), that also study gradual shift from one


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


domain to another with a series of distributions P0 , P1 , · · · , PT , where P0 is the source domain, PT
is the target domain, and Pt and Pt+1 is close for each t. Both settings only require good adaptation
performance and do not consider forgetting. However, the concept of regression set widely exists
in modern deep learning applications, and no forgetting on the regression set is a critical issue.
Finally, Cai et al. (2021) proposed a similar OCL setting, where the model is also first evaluated
on the new batch and then fine-tuned on it. However, OCL-PDS has three important distinctions:
(i) Cai et al. (2021) considered a fully supervised setting while OCL-PDS mainly uses a semi-
supervised setting that is more common in practice; (ii) OCL-PDS uses different evaluation metrics,
and in particular measures the critical regression set performance; (iii) Cai et al. (2021) evaluates
knowledge retention only at three time steps whereas OCL-PDS is purely online and evaluates all
metrics at all time steps. A more detailed comparison can be found in Appendix A.2.1.

3     B ENCHMARKS
In search of benchmarks for this novel OCL-PDS problem setup, we first investigate the benchmarks
used in previous work on continual learning and find that most of them are one of the following: (i)
Multiple datasets, e.g. Task 1 is MNIST (LeCun & Cortes, 2010), Task 2 is SVHN (Netzer et al.,
2011) and so on; (ii) Perturbed image classification, where different tasks are constructed by rotating
the images with different angles, shifting the colors with different scales or permuting the pixels
with different random seeds; (iii) Split-class classification, e.g. split the 100 classes in CIFAR-100
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009) into 20 groups with 5 classes per group, and make each group a 5-way
classification task. None of them is realistic enough to represent the real PDS in practice.
There are two existing PDS benchmarks: CLOC (Cai et al., 2021) and CLEAR (Lin et al., 2021).
Both are image classification tasks and do not have regression sets. Thus, we build a new, more
comprehensive suite of benchmarks that covers both language and vision tasks, and both classifi-
cation and regression tasks, with intuitively defined regression sets. Since it is impossible for us to
cover all existing tasks, we also provide our 3-step procedure to build our benchmarks, which can
be used to construct PDS benchmarks on other existing datasets.

3.1   T HE 3- STEP P ROCEDURE TO B ENCHMARK OCL-PDS
Here we provide the 3-step procedure we use to benchmark OCL-PDS on an existing dataset:

      1. Separate the data into groups (domains). For example, group the data by year. Then, do an
         OOD check which verifies that there is a significant distribution shift across the groups.
      2. Assign shifting group weights to the batches to create a distribution shift across the groups.1
         Then, do a shift continuity check which verifies that the shift is continuous (not abrupt).
      3. Design a separate regression set which does not intersect with any online batch. Then, do
         a regression check which verifies that naı̈ve methods have regression on this set.

Moreover, for each batch (including the regression set), we randomly divide the batch into a training
batch and a test batch. The initial training set contains both the first batch and the training regression
set. The learner sees the training batches during OCL, and the separate test batches are used to eval-
uate the recent and regression set performances. The model is never evaluated on training samples
it has already seen because it is not useful as the learner can store all these samples in its buffer.
Example: CivilComments-WPDS. Here we briefly demonstrate this procedure and a detailed
description can be found in Appendix C.1. The CivilComments dataset contains online comments
with topic labels, and we want to model PDS with shifting hot topics on it. In Step 1, we divide the
comments into four groups according to their topics, and verify that a model trained on any three
groups does poorly on the fourth group; In Step 2, we construct a weight shift among the groups to
simulate PDS, and verify that a model trained on labeled samples from previous distributions can do
well on the new distribution, so that the shift is continuous; In Step 3, we define the regression set,
and verify that catastrophic forgetting will happen if we only train on the new data.
    1
      This is not equivalent to group shift or subpopulation shift as studied in fair machine learning and long-
tailed learning (learning with imbalanced classes). The group weights here are used to control the scale of the
divergence from being too big. We simulate a gradual shift by continuously shifting the group weights.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

      Table 1: Benchmarks we build. T + 1 = total number of batches. w = recent time window.
    Benchmark               Description                                     Regression Set   T +1     w
    CivilComments-WPDS      Toxic language detection on social media        Critical data    16       5
    FMoW-WPDS               Satellite image classification for facilities   Frequent data    25       6
    Amazon-WPDS             Review sentiment analysis on Amazon.com         Frequent data    18       6
    Poverty-WPDS            Satellite image regression for wealth index     Critical data    14       5


3.2     O UR B ENCHMARKS
We build 4 new benchmarks following the guidelines in Appendix C. See Table 1 for a summary.
All 4 benchmarks are based on the Wilds datasets (Koh et al., 2021). Please refer to this paper for
the potential leverage, broader context and ethic considerations of these datasets. Here we briefly
describe the 4 benchmarks we release in this work, and details can be found in Appendix C.
CivilComments-WPDS. This benchmark is based on the CivilComments-Wilds dataset (Borkan
et al., 2019), which is a toxic language detection task on social media (Figure 1b). WPDS stands for
Wilds-PDS. This benchmark models the shift in hot topics. The regression set contains critical data
- Comments with severe harassment, including identity attack and explicit sexual comments.
FMoW-WPDS. This benchmark is based on the FMoW-Wilds dataset (Christie et al., 2018), which
is a satellite image facility classification task (Figure 1a). It models the shift in time. The regression
set contains frequent data - Data from two highly populated regions: Americas and Asia.
Amazon-WPDS. This benchmark is based on the Amazon-Wilds dataset (Ni et al., 2019), which is
a review sentiment analysis task on shopping websites. This benchmark models the shift in language
use. The regression set contains frequent data - Data from 10 popular product categories.
Poverty-WPDS. This benchmark is based on the PovertyMap-Wilds dataset (Yeh et al., 2020),
which is a satellite image wealth index regression task. This benchmark models the shift in time.
The regression set contains critical data - Images from urban areas. Following Koh et al. (2021),
performances here are measured by the Pearson correlation between outputs and ground truths.

4     OCL A LGORITHMS
An OCL algorithm consists of the following three components:

        • Continual fine-tuning: How to fine-tune the model on the new data?
        • Knowledge retention: How to prevent forgetting?
        • Semi-supervised learning: How to leverage the unlabeled data?

In particular, an OCL algorithm is called supervised if it does not have the semi-supervised learning
component, and called semi-supervised if it does. In the rest of this section we will provide an
overview of the OCL algorithms we implement: first baselines, then supervised, and finally semi-
supervised. Implementation details of these algorithms can be found in Appendix D.

4.1     NA ÏVE BASELINES
The naı̈ve baselines are used to measure the difficulty of an OCL-PDS task for interpreting the
performances of OCL algorithms. First we have First Batch Only (FBO), where we only train
an initial model on the first batch S0 (including the training regression set) with empirical risk
minimization (ERM) and use that model till the end, which serves as a lower bound of the online
performance as well as an upper bound of the regression set performance (because it directly trains
the model on regression data without any forgetting). Then we have i.i.d. offline, where for each t
we train a model on a separate training set i.i.d. sampled from Dt and test it on St , which serves
an approximate upper bound of the online performance that reflects the generalization gap. Finally,
we have New Batch Only (NBO), where we train the model on the new data alone and never care
about forgetting, which serves as a lower bound of the knowledge retention performance.

4.2     S UPERVISED OCL A LGORITHMS

Rehearsal based methods. Rehearsal was first introduced in Ratcliff (1990); Robins (1995) to
prevent catastrophic forgetting in CL, where historical data is stored in a memory buffer and replayed
to the learner. The simplest method is ER-FIFO (also called ring buffer (Chaudhry et al., 2019b)),


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ER stands for experience replay. There are three sources of data the model needs to learn or
remember: new data, recent data and regression data. Thus, ER-FIFO simply fine-tunes the model
over the union of these three sets of data. The buffer looks like a first-in-first-out (FIFO) queue as
the new batch replaces the oldest one (while the regression set is never removed).
There are some variants of ER-FIFO with different strategies of selecting replay samples. In ER-
FIFO-RW where RW stands for reweighting, the three data sources are balanced so that they have
the same probability of being sampled in stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which is useful when
different batches have different sizes (the weights can also be customized to adjust between learning
and remembering). In Maximally Interfered Retrieval (MIR) (Aljundi et al., 2019a), the model is
first “virtually” updated on the new data only, and those previous samples on which the loss increases
the most before and after the virtual update are selected. The model is then recovered and fine-tuned
with a real update on the selected samples together with the new samples. Similarly, in MaxLoss
(Lin et al., 2022) there is also a virtual update step, and previous samples with the highest loss after
virtual update are selected to be replayed during real update.
GEM-PDS. This method is a combination of Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM) (Lopez-Paz &
Ranzato, 2017) and Average GEM (A-GEM) (Chaudhry et al., 2019a), and we design it specially
for OCL-PDS. Denote the gradients of the loss function on the new data, recent data and regression
data by g0 , g1 and g2 , respectively. Gradient descent along g0 might cause the model to forget recent
and important knowledge, so instead we find a “pseudo gradient” g that is close to g0 , and gradient
descent along g won’t lead to forgetting. We solve the following convex optimization problem:
                      minimize ∥g − g0 ∥22       s.t.    ⟨g, g1 ⟩ ≥ 0, ⟨g, g2 ⟩ ≥ 0                  (1)
                          g

This problem is always feasible, and the optimal g ∗ can be found with a simple procedure described
in Appendix D Eqn. (3). The constraints ensure that descent along g ∗ won’t increase the loss on the
recent and regression data, which can be shown with the Taylor expansion of the loss function.
Regularization based methods. The high-level idea of regularization is to keep the model weights
close to the initial model which has a good regression set performance, so as to reduce forgetting.
Denote the vectorized model weights at time t by θt . In Online L2 Regularization (L2Reg), we add
a penalty term λ2 ∥θt − θ0 ∥22 to the loss function. In a variant called Elastic Weight Consolidation
(EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), the penalty term is λ2 ∥diag(Ft )(θt − θ0 )∥22 , where Ft is the Fisher
information matrix (FIM) and diag(Ft ) only contains the elements on the diagonal of Ft . The FIM
ensures that weights that are more influential to the model output change less.
4.3   S EMI - SUPERVISED OCL A LGORITHMS
Pseudo Labeling (PL). PL was proposed in Lee (2013) and is also known as self-training. Since
Dt is close to Dt−1 , if ft−1 can do well on Dt−1 , then it is very likely that it can also do well
on Dt . Based on this observation, for an unlabeled sample x in St , define its pseudo label simply
as ft−1 (x). Then, we fine-tune the model ft−1 → ft on the union of the labeled and the pseudo-
labeled sets with any supervised OCL algorithm. We denote a PL method by adding suffix “PL” after
this supervised algorithm, such as ER-FIFO-PL. Note that in classification, ft−1 (x) is the “hard”
label, so training ft−1 on this label minimizes its entropy on x. Kumar et al. (2020); Wang et al.
(2022a) proved the effectiveness of PL in the GDA context. Moreover, pseudo-labeled samples are
not replayed for knowledge retention as they could have large label noise.
Furthermore, in our implementation of PL we introduce an innovative virtual update step which we
find very important in our experiments. The whole algorithm goes as follows:
                                                      ′
      1. Virtual update: Fine-tune the model ft−1 → ft−1  with ERM on the labeled samples only.
                                                                             ′
      2. Pseudo label the unlabeled samples with the updated model: x → (x, ft−1 (x)).
                                           ′
      3. Revert the model weights from ft−1 back to ft−1 , and fine-tune ft−1 → ft with any
         supervised OCL algorithm on the union of labeled and pseudo-labeled samples.
FixMatch (FM). FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020) is a variant of PL. In FM, there are two types of
data augmentation: a strong one and a weak one, and the pseudo labels are generated on the weakly
augmented samples while the model is fine-tuned on the strongly augmented samples, which leads
to a consistency regularization effect that makes the model have consistent outputs on the weakly
and strongly augmented samples. Currently FixMatch is only implemented for vision tasks. We
denote FixMatch by adding suffix “FM” after a supervised algorithm, such as ER-FIFO-FM.

                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                     86                                                                                              80                                                        84
                                                                   74


 Worst Recent Perf


                                               Worst Recent Perf


                                                                                                    Worst Reg Perf


                                                                                                                                                              Worst Reg Perf
                     84                                            72                                                                                                          82
                     82                                            70                                                60                                                        80

                                                                   68                                                                                                          78
                     80
                                                                                                                     40                                                        76
                     78                                            66
                                                                                                                                                                               74
                                                                   64
                     76                                                                                              20
                       82    84    86     88                            68      70     72      74                      82    84    86       88                                      68      70         72         74
                            Avg Online Perf                                  Avg Online Perf                                Avg Online Perf                                              Avg Online Perf

                      (a) CivilComments.                                     (b) FMoW.                                (c) CivilComments.                                                 (d) FMoW.
Figure 2: Results of supervised OCL algorithms on CivilComments-WPDS (α = 0.5%) and FMoW-
WPDS (α = 50%). Each point corresponds to one pair of algorithm and hyperparameters.

5                         E XPERIMENTS
We compare the algorithms on the 4 benchmarks we constructed for OCL-PDS. Each experiment
is run 5 times with different random seeds. For the recent performance and the regression set per-
formance (reg performance), we report both the average and the worst performances, which are the
mean and minimum of the performance over t = 1, · · · , T , respectively. The reason why we also
report the worst performance is that knowledge retention is required for all t. For saving space, we
put detailed settings and results in Appendix E. In this section we summarize five remarkable obser-
vations we make from our experiments, first supervised and then semi-supervised OCL algorithms.
5.1                       R ESULTS OF S UPERVISED OCL A LGORITHMS
Observation #1: Strong positive correlation between online and recent performances. On
all benchmarks, methods that achieve higher online performances also achieve higher recent perfor-
mances. In Figures 2a and 2b, we plot the average online and worst recent performances achieved by
different supervised OCL algorithms on the CivilComments-WPDS (α = 0.5%) and FMoW-WPDS
(α = 50%) benchmarks (α is the fraction of labeled samples), where we can see a strong positive
correlation between these two. The reason is that Dt is very close to Dt−1 , · · · , Dt−w by formula-
tion, so a model that performs well on Dt naturally performs well on the w recent distributions too.
This is also known as the accuracy-on-the-line phenomenon (Miller et al., 2021).
Observation #2: Correlation between online and reg performances differs among benchmarks.
In Figure 2c and 2d, we plot the average online and worst reg performances on CivilComments-
WPDS and FMoW-WPDS. We can see that the trends on these two benchmarks are quite different.
On CivilComments-WPDS, methods with higher online performances have lower reg performances,
while there is no such trend on FMoW-WPDS. One possible reason is that it depends on how the
regression set is defined, and how close it is between the regression set distribution and the overall
distribution. For CivilComments-WPDS, the regression set samples (severely offensive comments)
are very different from the other samples (mostly normal comments), while for FMoW-WPDS the
regression set samples from Americas and Asia are closer to the samples from other regions.
Observation #3: Some existing methods do not work well on                                                                                                  0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                FBO
regression tasks. On the right, we plot the average online and
                                                                                                                                          Worst Reg Perf


                                                                                                                                                                                                      L2Reg
                                                                                                                                                                               EWC
                                                                                                                                                                                         GEM-PDS
worst reg performances of different supervised OCL algorithms                                                                                               0.6                                       ER-FIFO-RW
on the Poverty-WPDS benchmark (α = 50%), which is a regres-
                                                                                                                                                                           MaxLoss
sion task. We observe that while some methods like ER-FIFO
                                                                                                                                                           0.55                           MIR
and L2Reg do better than the FBO baseline, some others including                                                                                                                                      ER-FIFO
MIR and EWC achieve lower online performance than FBO which                                                                                                                                                     NBO
should be a lower bound. Most existing methods have only been                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                    0.74 0.76 0.78                          0.8
tested on classification tasks before, and this experiment shows                                                                                                                    Avg Online Perf
that they might not work so well on regression tasks.
                                                                                                                                                      Figure 3: Poverty-WPDS.
5.2                       R ESULTS OF S EMI - SUPERVISED OCL A LGORITHMS
Observation #4: Unlabeled data improves OCL performance. In Figure 4, we plot the perfor-
mances of ER-FIFO-PL/FM and ER-FIFO-RW-PL/FM (in red) along with the performances of all
supervised OCL algorithms (in blue) on CivilComments-WPDS and FMoW-WPDS. We can see that
with the same worst reg performance, SSL methods achieve higher average online performances,
and vice versa. SSL improves the online performance by learning more new data, but it does not
help knowledge retention. Thus, supervised OCL algorithms with high online performances (such
as MIR) do not improve much with SSL. We also observe that FixMatch is slightly better than PL.
Observation #5: Virtual update in PL is important. In Figure 5 we plot the performances of ER-
FIFO-PL and ER-FIFO-RW-PL on CivilComments-WPDS with different epochs of virtual update


                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 80                                         85                                                 85
                                                                                                                     00            ER-FIFO-PL


Worst Reg Perf


                                           Worst Reg Perf


                                                                                              Worst Reg Perf
                                                                                                                            FBO    ER-FIFO-RW-PL
                                                            80                                                 80
                 60

                                                                                                               75                   1
                 40                                         75                                                                       1   2
                                                                                                               70                        2
                                                                                                                                          3 3
                 20                                         70                                                                             5 10
                   82    84    86     88                         68     70       72     74                                                  5 10
                                                                                                               65
                        Avg Online Perf                               Avg Online Perf
                                                                                                                75         80       85             90
                  (a) CivilComments.                                  (b) FMoW.                                           Avg Online Perf
Figure 4: Performances of ER-FIFO-PL/FM and ER-                                              Figure 5: PL with different epochs
FIFO-RW-PL/FM (in red). FM is only used for FMoW.                                            of virtual update (CivilComments).

as labeled near the points. We can see that without virtual update (0 epoch), the online performance
of PL is even lower than the FBO baseline. However, with just 1 epoch of virtual update, the online
performance rises above FBO, and with more epochs of virtual update the online performance is
higher (but with a lower reg performance). This shows the importance of virtual update though it
was not included in previous methods like gradual self-training (Kumar et al., 2020).
One explanation is that the virtual update step distills the knowledge of P (Y | X) from the new
                                            ′
distribution into the current model, so P (ft−1 (X) | X) is closer to P (Y | X, Dt ). Without virtual
update, ft−1 only has knowledge from old distributions, so when the model is trained on the pseudo-
labeled samples, it reinforces its old knowledge but learns little new knowledge, resulting in a low
online performance but high reg performance. This also implies that unsupervised OCL is difficult
and perhaps infeasible, because without new labels the learner cannot know how P (Y | X) changes.


6                     D ISCUSSION

The application of deep learning has become so wide nowadays that it is very difficult to cover all the
tasks with a single general problem formulation. Here we briefly discuss two additional problems
that stem from OCL-PDS which practitioners in certain areas in industry might find useful.
Fine-grained PDS. In our problem formulation in Section 2.1, the learner can fine-tune the model
at every t. However, in applications where new data comes in very fast and the distribution changes
very quickly, this could be impractical. One typical example is time series analysis such as stock
price prediction. We term this setting fine-grained PDS as the data batches are much smaller and
are received much more frequently. In our benchmarks, the time horizon T is around 20, while in a
fine-grained PDS benchmark T shoud typically be 2,000 or 20,000.
One way to handle fine-grained PDS is to have two fine-tune procedures: A fast one that can be done
at every t, and a slow one that is run simultaneously with the fast one. For instance, in an ensemble
method like Mixture-of-Experts (Masoudnia & Ebrahimpour, 2014), the fast procedure only adjusts
the weights of the base models, while the slow procedure trains a new base model with the new data.
Abrupt shift detection. We assumed that Div(Dt ∥ Dt+1 ) < ρ for all t. However, this might not
always be true, and abrupt shifts could happen in practice. For example, for toxic language detection
on social media (Figure 1b), when the US Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, posts related to
gender, religion, politics and civil rights flooded on social media, causing a sharp spike in the data
distribution and probably a significant drop in the model’s performance. Thus, practitioners need a
mechanism to detect such abrupt shifts so that prompt human intervention could take place.
Some applications in industry have online metrics that keep track of the online performance, and a
significant performance drop triggers human intervention. However, in applications without online
metrics or where feedback can be delayed, we need to detect distribution shift with unlabeled data
alone, a problem known as OOD detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Lee et al., 2018). A more
difficult recently proposed problem is OOD performance prediction (Chen et al., 2021; Jiang et al.,
2022; Garg et al., 2022; Baek et al., 2022), i.e. predicting the model’s performance on the new
distribution with unlabeled data alone, as distribution shift does not necessarily hurt the performance.
Limitation. While we commit ourselves to studying the real PDS that exists in industrial applica-
tions, in this paper for privacy reasons we are limited to working on public datasets, which (despite
our effort of making them realistic) are still different from real applications. We hope that in the
future there could be more datasets containing real PDS in industry applications released for the
better development of this field.


                                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Eugene Belilovsky, Tinne Tuytelaars, Laurent Charlin, Massimo Caccia, Min
  Lin, and Lucas Page-Caccia.      Online continual learning with maximal interfered re-
  trieval. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 11849–
  11860. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019a.     URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
  9357-online-continual-learning-with-maximal-interfered-retrieval.
  pdf.
Rahaf Aljundi, Klaas Kelchtermans, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Task-free continual learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11254–
  11263, 2019b.
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection
  for online continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019c.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximizing
  mutual information across views. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Christina Baek, Yiding Jiang, Aditi Raghunathan, and Zico Kolter. Agreement-on-the-line: Predict-
  ing the performance of neural networks under distribution shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13089,
  2022.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin A
  Raffel. Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 32, 2019.
Magdalena Biesialska, Katarzyna Biesialska, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. Continual lifelong learning
 in natural language processing: A survey. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
 Computational Linguistics, pp. 6523–6541, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 2020. Interna-
 tional Committee on Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.574. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.574.
Gilles Blanchard, Aniket Anand Deshmukh, Urun Dogan, Gyemin Lee, and Clayton Scott. Domain
  generalization by marginal transfer learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(2):1–55,
  2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/17-679.html.
Daniel Borkan, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Nuanced
  metrics for measuring unintended bias with real data for text classification. In Companion Pro-
  ceedings of The 2019 World Wide Web Conference, 2019.
Stephen Boyd, Stephen P Boyd, and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge uni-
  versity press, 2004.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning?
  In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  872–881. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
Zhipeng Cai, Ozan Sener, and Vladlen Koltun. Online continual learning with natural distribu-
  tion shifts: An empirical study with visual data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8281–8290, 2021.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient
  lifelong learning with a-GEM. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019a.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hkf2_sC5FX.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Puneet K
  Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. On tiny episodic memories in continual
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10486, 2019b.
Jiefeng Chen, Frederick Liu, Besim Avci, Xi Wu, Yingyu Liang, and Somesh Jha. Detecting errors
   and estimating accuracy on unlabeled data with self-training ensembles. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:14980–14992, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Gordon Christie, Neil Fendley, James Wilson, and Ryan Mukherjee. Functional map of the world.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Aristotelis Chrysakis and Marie-Francine Moens. Online continual learning from imbalanced data.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1952–1961. PMLR, 2020.
Matthias De Lange and Tinne Tuytelaars. Continual prototype evolution: Learning online from non-
 stationary data streams. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision (ICCV), pp. 8250–8259, October 2021.
Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Aleš Leonardis, Gregory
 Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification
 tasks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(7):3366–3385, 2021.
Cyprien de Masson d'Autume, Sebastian Ruder, Lingpeng Kong, and Dani Yogatama. Episodic
  memory in lifelong language learning. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-
  Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2019/file/f8d2e80c1458ea2501f98a2cafadb397-Paper.pdf.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A. Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning
  by context prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), December 2015.
Yuntao Du, Jindong Wang, Wenjie Feng, Sinno Pan, Tao Qin, Renjun Xu, and Chongjun Wang.
  Adarnn: Adaptive learning and forecasting of time series. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Inter-
  national Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 402–411, 2021.
Wenying Duan, Xiaoxi He, Lu Zhou, Zimu Zhou, Lothar Thiele, and Hong Rao. Hyper attention
 recurrent neural network: Tackling temporal covariate shift in time series analysis. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2202.10808, 2022.
John Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distribution-
  ally robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08750, 2018.
Enrico Fini, Victor G Turrisi da Costa, Xavier Alameda-Pineda, Elisa Ricci, Karteek Alahari, and
  Julien Mairal. Self-supervised models are continual learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9621–9630, 2022.
Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet, Kartik Ahuja, Mohammad Javad Darvishi Bayazi, G. Dumas, and
  Irina Rish. Woods: Benchmarks for out-of-distribution generalization in time series tasks. ArXiv,
  abs/2203.09978, 2022.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(59):1–35, 2016. URL http://jmlr.
  org/papers/v17/15-239.html.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Saurabh Garg, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Zachary Chase Lipton, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie
  Sedghi. Leveraging unlabeled data to predict out-of-distribution performance. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=o_HsiMPYh_x.
Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
  predicting image rotations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1v4N2l0-.
Arthur Gretton, Dougal Sutherland, and Wittawat Jitkrittum.    Interpretable com-
  parison of distributions and models.   Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems [Tutorial], 2019.      URL https://slideslive.com/38923184/
  interpretable-comparison-of-distributions-and-models.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:21271–21284, 2020.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
   id=lQdXeXDoWtI.
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness with-
  out demographics in repeated loss minimization. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.),
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1929–1938, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A baseline for detecting misclassified and out-of-distribution
  examples in neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hkg4TI9xl.
Weihua Hu, Gang Niu, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. Does distributionally robust supervised
 learning give robust classifiers? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2029–
 2037. PMLR, 2018.
Xiaolei Huang and Michael J. Paul. Neural temporality adaptation for document classification:
  Diachronic word embeddings and domain adaptation models. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4113–4123, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1403. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1403.
David Isele and Akansel Cosgun. Selective experience replay for lifelong learning. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
  Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Kokil Jaidka, Niyati Chhaya, and Lyle Ungar. Diachronic degradation of language models: In-
  sights from social media. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 195–200, Melbourne, Australia, July
  2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-2032. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P18-2032.
Yiding Jiang, Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Christina Baek, and J Zico Kolter. Assessing generalization of
  SGD via disagreement. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=WvOGCEAQhxl.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xisen Jin, Arka Sadhu, Junyi Du, and Xiang Ren. Gradient-based editing of memory examples
  for online task-free continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  29193–29205, 2021.
Ronald Kemker and Christopher Kanan. Fearnet: Brain-inspired model for incremental learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=SJ1Xmf-Rb.
Chris Dongjoo Kim, Jinseo Jeong, and Gunhee Kim. Imbalanced continual learning with parti-
  tioning reservoir sampling. CoRR, abs/2009.03632, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2009.03632.
Taesung Kim, Jinhee Kim, Yunwon Tae, Cheonbok Park, Jang-Ho Choi, and Jaegul Choo. Re-
  versible instance normalization for accurate time-series forecasting against distribution shift. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=cGDAkQo1C0p.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Ananya Kumar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Understanding self-training for gradual domain
  adaptation. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  5468–5479. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  kumar20c.html.
Preethi Lahoti, Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Kang Lee, Flavien Prost, Nithum Thain, Xuezhi Wang,
  and Ed Chi. Fairness without demographics through adversarially reweighted learning. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 728–740. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Samuli Laine and Timo Aila. Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=BJ6oOfqge.
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.
  lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
Dong-Hyun Lee. Pseudo-label : The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for deep
  neural networks. 2013.
Kimin Lee, Honglak Lee, Kibok Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Training confidence-calibrated classifiers for
  detecting out-of-distribution samples. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryiAv2xAZ.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2017.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Sida Wang, Xi Lin, Robin Jia, Lin Xiao, Xiang Ren, and Scott Yih. On continual
  model refinement in out-of-distribution data streams. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3128–3139,
  Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  acl-long.223. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.223.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhiqiu Lin, Jia Shi, Deepak Pathak, and Deva Ramanan. The clear benchmark: Continual learning
  on real-world imagery. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.

Anjin Liu, Guangquan Zhang, and Jie Lu. Fuzzy time windowing for gradual concept drift adap-
  tation. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), pp. 1–6. IEEE,
  2017.

Bing Liu. Learning on the job: Online lifelong and continual learning. Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34(09):13544–13549, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i09.
  7079. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/7079.

Vincenzo Lomonaco, Lorenzo Pellegrini, Andrea Cossu, Antonio Carta, Gabriele Graffieti, Tyler L.
  Hayes, Matthias De Lange, Marc Masana, Jary Pomponi, Gido van de Ven, Martin Mundt, Qi She,
  Keiland Cooper, Jeremy Forest, Eden Belouadah, Simone Calderara, German I. Parisi, Fabio
  Cuzzolin, Andreas Tolias, Simone Scardapane, Luca Antiga, Subutai Amhad, Adrian Popescu,
  Christopher Kanan, Joost van de Weijer, Tinne Tuytelaars, Davide Bacciu, and Davide Maltoni.
  Avalanche: an end-to-end library for continual learning. In Proceedings of IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2nd Continual Learning in Computer Vision Work-
  shop, 2021.

Mingsheng Long, Han Zhu, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Unsupervised domain adaptation
 with residual transfer networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.

David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jie Lu, Anjin Liu, Fan Dong, Feng Gu, Joao Gama, and Guangquan Zhang. Learning under concept
   drift: A review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31(12):2346–2363,
   2018.

Kelvin Luu, Daniel Khashabi, Suchin Gururangan, Karishma Mandyam, and Noah Smith. Time
  waits for no one! analysis and challenges of temporal misalignment. In Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 5944–5958, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.
  435.

Divyam Madaan, Jaehong Yoon, Yuanchun Li, Yunxin Liu, and Sung Ju Hwang. Representational
  continuity for unsupervised continual learning. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Hrka5PA7LW.

Arun Mallya, Dillon Davis, and Svetlana Lazebnik. Piggyback: Adapting a single network to multi-
  ple tasks by learning to mask weights. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), September 2018.

Niki Martinel, Abir Das, Christian Micheloni, and Amit K Roy-Chowdhury. Temporal model adap-
  tation for person re-identification. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 858–877.
  Springer, 2016.

Marc Masana, Xialei Liu, Bartlomiej Twardowski, Mikel Menta, Andrew D Bagdanov, and Joost
 van de Weijer. Class-incremental learning: survey and performance evaluation on image classifi-
 cation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15277, 2020.

Saeed Masoudnia and Reza Ebrahimpour. Mixture of experts: a literature survey. Artificial Intelli-
  gence Review, 42(2):275–293, 2014.

Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
  Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correla-
  tion between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7721–7735. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/miller21b.html.
Takeru Miyato, Shin-ichi Maeda, Masanori Koyama, and Shin Ishii. Virtual adversarial training: a
  regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 41(8):1979–1993, 2018.
Saeid Motiian, Marco Piccirilli, Donald A Adjeroh, and Gianfranco Doretto. Unified deep super-
  vised domain adaptation and generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 5715–5725, 2017.
Hyeonseob Nam, HyunJae Lee, Jongchan Park, Wonjun Yoon, and Donggeun Yoo. Reducing do-
  main gap by reducing style bias. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8690–8699, June 2021.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. Justifying recommendations using distantly-labeled
   reviews and fine-grained aspects. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
   in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
   Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Yassine Ouali, Céline Hudelot, and Myriam Tami. An overview of deep semi-supervised learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05278, 2020.
Alan Ramponi and Barbara Plank. Neural unsupervised domain adaptation in NLP—A survey.
  In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 6838–
  6855, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 2020. International Committee on Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.603. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.coling-main.603.
Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
  forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97(2):285, 1990.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2001–2010, 2017.
Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, , and Ger-
 ald Tesauro. Learning to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing in-
 terference. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=B1gTShAct7.
Mark B Ring. Child: A first step towards continual learning. In Learning to learn, pp. 261–292.
 Springer, 1998.
Anthony V. Robins. Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and pseudorehearsal. Connect. Sci., 7:123–
  146, 1995.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. The risks of invariant risk mini-
  mization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Paul Röttger and Janet Pierrehumbert. Temporal adaptation of BERT and performance on down-
  stream document classification: Insights from social media. In Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2400–2412, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
  public, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  findings-emnlp.206. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.
  206.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why over-
  parameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020b.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tony Lee, Irena Gao, Sang Michael Xie, Kendrick Shen, Ananya
  Kumar, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Henrik Marklund, Sara Beery, Etienne David, Ian
  Stavness, Wei Guo, Jure Leskovec, Kate Saenko, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
  Finn, and Percy Liang. Extending the WILDS benchmark for unsupervised adaptation. In In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=z7p2V6KROOV.
Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting with hard attention to the task. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4548–4557. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/serra18a.html.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  0efbe98067c6c73dba1250d2beaa81f9-Paper.pdf.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Zizhao Zhang, Han Zhang, Colin A Raffel,
  Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Alexey Kurakin, and Chun-Liang Li. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised
  learning with consistency and confidence. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Bal-
  can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 596–
  608. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
  2020/file/06964dce9addb1c5cb5d6e3d9838f733-Paper.pdf.
Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep domain adaptation. In
  ECCV 2016 Workshops, 2016.
Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged con-
  sistency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Simultaneous deep transfer across
  domains and tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  4068–4076, 2015.
Gido M Van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.07734, 2019.
Jesper E Van Engelen and Holger H Hoos. A survey on semi-supervised learning. Machine Learn-
  ing, 109(2):373–440, 2020.
Haoxiang Wang, Bo Li, and Han Zhao. Understanding gradual domain adaptation: Improved analy-
  sis, optimal path and beyond. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepes-
  vari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22784–22801.


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wang22n.
  html.
Jindong Wang, Cuiling Lan, Chang Liu, Yidong Ouyang, Tao Qin, Wang Lu, Yiqiang Chen, Wenjun
   Zeng, and Philip Yu. Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on domain generalization. IEEE
   Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022b.
Ke Alexander Wang, Niladri Shekhar Chatterji, Saminul Haque, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Is im-
  portance weighting incompatible with interpolating classifiers? In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022c.
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomputing, 312:
 135–153, 2018.
Zhenyi Wang, Li Shen, Le Fang, Qiuling Suo, Tiehang Duan, and Mingchen Gao. Improv-
  ing task-free continual learning by distributionally robust memory evolution. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22985–22998. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022d. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wang22v.html.
Wikipedia contributors. George floyd protests — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia,
 2022a. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Floyd_
 protests&oldid=1099532980. [Online; accessed 27-July-2022].
Wikipedia contributors. Dobbs v. jackson women’s health organization — Wikipedia, the free ency-
 clopedia, 2022b. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dobbs_
 v._Jackson_Women%27s_Health_Organization&oldid=1100806014. [Online;
 accessed 27-July-2022].
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V. Le. Self-training with noisy student
  improves imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
Da Xu, Yuting Ye, and Chuanwei Ruan. Understanding the role of importance weighting for deep
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Shuliang Xu and Junhong Wang. Dynamic extreme learning machine for data stream classification.
  Neurocomputing, 238:433–449, 2017.
Sijie Yan, Yuanjun Xiong, Kaustav Kundu, Shuo Yang, Siqi Deng, Meng Wang, Wei Xia, and Ste-
   fano Soatto. Positive-congruent training: Towards regression-free model updates. In Proceedings
   of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14299–14308,
   2021.
Xiangli Yang, Zixing Song, Irwin King, and Zenglin Xu. A survey on deep semi-supervised learning.
  CoRR, abs/2103.00550, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00550.
Christopher Yeh, Anthony Perez, Anne Driscoll, George Azzari, Zhongyi Tang, David Lobell, Ste-
  fano Ermon, and Marshall Burke. Using publicly available satellite imagery and deep learning to
  understand economic well-being in africa. Nature Communications, 2020.
Haiyan Yin, Ping Li, et al. Mitigating forgetting in online continual learning with neuron calibration.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:10260–10272, 2021a.
Haiyan Yin, peng yang, and Ping Li. Mitigating forgetting in online continual learning with neuron
  calibration. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 10260–10272. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  file/54ee290e80589a2a1225c338a71839f5-Paper.pdf.
Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sk7KsfW0-.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jaehong Yoon, Divyam Madaan, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Online coreset selection for
  rehearsal-based continual learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=f9D-5WNG4Nv.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3987–3995. PMLR, 2017.
Chen Zeno, Itay Golan, Elad Hoffer, and Daniel Soudry. Task agnostic continual learning using
  online variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10123, 2018.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Doro: Distributional and outlier ro-
  bust optimization. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 12345–12355. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021a.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Arun Suggala, J. Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Boosted cvar clas-
  sification. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 21860–21871. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  file/b691334ccf10d4ab144d672f7783c8a3-Paper.pdf.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Understanding why generalized
  reweighting does not improve over erm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12293, 2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Avital Oliver, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. S4l: Self-supervised semi-
  supervised learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 1476–1485, 2019.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N. Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond em-
  pirical risk minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1Ddp1-Rb.
Marvin Zhang, Henrik Marklund, Nikita Dhawan, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
 Finn.     Adaptive risk minimization: Learning to adapt to domain shift.    In M. Ran-
 zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 23664–23678. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
 c705112d1ec18b97acac7e2d63973424-Paper.pdf.


                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Literature Review                                                                           19
        A.1 Distribution Shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19
        A.2 Continual Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
        A.3 Domain Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
        A.4 Semi-supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23

      B The Divergence Function                                                                     24
        B.1 Existing Divergence Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
        B.2 Divergence Function for OCL-PDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25
        B.3 ϵ-KL-Divergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25

      C Benchmark Details                                                                           26
        C.1 CivilComments-WPDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26
        C.2 FMoW-WPDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         28
        C.3 Amazon-WPDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30
        C.4 Poverty-WPDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30

      D Algorithm Details                                                                           30

      E Experiment Details                                                                          33
        E.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
        E.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33



A     L ITERATURE R EVIEW
A.1   D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT

Distribution shift in machine learning refers to the scenario where the model is tested on a dis-
tribution Q different from the distribution P on which it was trained, which is different from the
conventional machine learning setting where the training and testing sets are i.i.d. sampled from the
same distribution. Distribution shift is studied in a number of areas in machine learning, including
domain adaptation, continual learning, transfer learning, fair machine learning, long-tailed learn-
ing, etc. See Table 2 of Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021) and Table 2 of Wang et al. (2022b) for a
comparison among these areas.
In general, there are two types of distribution shift problem: Domain shift and subpopulation shift
(Koh et al., 2021; Sagawa et al., 2022). In domain shift, the training and testing distributions contain
different domains, and the goal is to generalize to new domains. This problem is also called Out-
of-distribution (OOD) generalization, such that the training set is ID (in-distribution) and the test
set is OOD. Related areas include domain adaptation, domain generalization, transfer learning, etc.
In subpopulation shift, the training and testing distributions consist of the same domains, but the
relative proportions are different. Related areas include fair machine learning, long-tailed learning
(learning with imbalanced classes), etc. The difference between these two is that in subpopulation
shift, the supports of the training and testing data distributions are the same, while it is not for
domain shift.
A lot of methods have been proposed to train models that are robust to distribution shift. Here
we introduce two general methods, and in the subsequent sections we will talk about methods for
specific areas. The most classic method is importance weighting (Shimodaira, 2000), which multi-
plies the loss on sample x with an importance weight Q(x)               f (x)dQ = Q(x)
                                                                      R          R
                                                      P (x) , because              P (x) dP . This


                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


method requires that P (x) > 0 for all x such that Q(x) > 0, i.e. only works for subpopulation shift.
Another general method that is widely used today is Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO)
(Duchi & Namkoong, 2018), which assumes that Q ∈ U (P ) where U (P ) is the uncertainty set
that contains a family of distributions that are close to P . Then, DRO trains the model on the worst
distribution in U (P ) (with the highest empirical risk), so as to ensure that the model can do well
on any distribution in U (P ) which includes Q. A lot of variants of DRO have been proposed and
being used today (Hashimoto et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020a; Lahoti et al., 2020;
Zhai et al., 2021a;b). However, there is also a recent line of work that points out some problems
with these methods both empirically and theoretically (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020b;
Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021; Xu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022c). Remarkably, a recent paper
Zhai et al. (2022) proved the surprising result that generalized reweighting (GRW) methods, a broad
family of methods including importance weighting, DRO and a lot more, cannot do better than ERM
for linear models and NTK neural networks (Jacot et al., 2018). Thus, there is still a huge room of
improvement for methods for distribution shift.

A.2     C ONTINUAL L EARNING

Continual learning (CL), also known as lifelong learning, comes from the philosophy that a learning
agent should be able to continually learn new knowledge and improve itself with new data on its own.
As detailed in Ring (1998), a continual learner should be able to learn context-dependent knowledge
autonomously, incrementally and hierarchically. A more recent paper Liu (2020) introduced the
concept of on-the-job learning, where the learner is required to detect new tasks on its own, collect
data for the new tasks and then learn with the data. Given these general philosophical ideals, the
goal of CL is to mathematically formulate a problem setting that reflects these ideals. Here we point
our readers to the Avalanche library (Lomonaco et al., 2021), a recently released Python library that
contains many benchmarks and algorithms of continual learning.

A.2.1    S ETTINGS
There are a bunch of continual learning settings, and here we discuss the most widely studied ones.

Task-incremental CL. In this setting, N tasks T1 , · · · , TN are sequentially given to the learner,
who is required to learn these tasks one by one without forgetting the previous tasks. The learner
cannot see the old tasks while learning a new one, but it has a memory buffer in which it can store
data from previous tasks. The goal is to perform well on all N tasks, and the performance is usually
evaluated with the average or the minimum of the performances on all tasks. A related setting is
class-incremental CL where new classes sequentially appear. Task-incremental CL is the oldest
setting that dates back to McCloskey & Cohen (1989), which trained a feed-forward network to first
learn addition with one and then learn addition with two, and found that when learning the second
task the network forgot the first one. This work pinpointed the catastrophic forgetting problem,
and as a result many researchers today believe that “the central problem of continual learning is to
overcome the catastrophic forgetting problem” (Aljundi et al., 2019c).
Two related problems are domain-incremental CL and class-incremental CL. In domain-incremental
CL, the data of each task comes from a different domain. In class-incremental CL, samples from
new classes appear one by one.

Task-aware CL. In this setting, the tasks are not sequentially given. Rather, each sample has
a “task descriptor” indicating which task it belongs to. This setting dates back to the early paper
Ratcliff (1990) which trained a multi-layer encoder model to learn four vectors A, B, C and D,
which were provided in a cyclic fashion: ABCDABCDABCD... Then, Lopez-Paz & Ranzato (2017)
studied task-aware CL in the online learning setting where samples come in an online stream. The
goal of task-aware CL is the same as task-incremental CL: To perform well on all N tasks.

Task-agnostic CL. In task-agnostic CL, each sample still belongs to a certain task, but the “task
descriptor” is not provided. The model is still required to do well on all N tasks, and it is still
evaluated by the average or the minimum of the performances on all tasks. Algorithms for this
setting usually do task inference, i.e. inferring the task from the input (Van de Ven & Tolias, 2019),
where they assume that samples from the same task are closer to each other. Note that our definition


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is different from some previous work, and some previous work on task-agnostic CL like Zeno et al.
(2018) is in fact under the task-free setting.

Task-free CL. In task-free CL, there is no task at all. The data comes in an online stream and
each sample only appears once. This setting was first introduced in Aljundi et al. (2019b), where
they split a data domain into several partitions, and sequentially present each partition to the model.
At the end of training, the model is evaluated on the entire data domain, i.e. the union of all the
partitions. Thus, if the learner is allowed to store all samples and train the model on them, then the
problem becomes equivalent to supervised learning. However, the model cannot store all samples
because the storage size is assumed to be limited. This problem is also called the data incremental
learning problem in De Lange et al. (2021). We can see that in this problem, the training is online
(partitions are sequentially given), but the evaluation is offline (test once on the entire domain).

Online Continual Learning (OCL). We study OCL in this work. It is a variant of task-free CL
as there is no task in OCL. The key characteristic of OCL is that both training and evaluation are
online, which is different from the previous task-free CL problem. In OCL, for each new data batch,
the model is first evaluated on it and then trained on it. Thanks to the online evaluation, we can study
the real “lifelong” learning setting in OCL where the time horizon is infinite, which is not possible
in the previous task-free CL problem. Note that the term “online continual learning” was used in
quite a few previous papers, but most of them refer to “continual learning with online data” (such as
Yin et al. (2021a)) which is not the OCL setting we define in this work.

Time series analysis. A related area is time series analysis, where the data comes from a non-
stationary online distribution, and the task is to predict future data with the current and past obser-
vations. We can see that distribution shift naturally exists in the formulation of time series analysis,
but we fail to find much work about dealing with distribution shift with time series analysis.
One setting in time series analysis that is similar to OCL is temporal covariate shift (TCS), which
was first introduced in Du et al. (2021). TCS makes the covariate shift assumption: P (Y |X) is fixed
while P (X) shifts with time. The goal of TCS is r-step ahead prediction, i.e. predicting the labels
for inputs whose ground truth labels will be revealed r steps later. Other recent papers that study
distribution shift with time series analysis include Duan et al. (2022); Gagnon-Audet et al. (2022);
Kim et al. (2022).

Comparison with a previous work. One previous work Cai et al. (2021) proposed an OCL frame-
work similar to ours. In both settings, the model is evaluated on new online batches before fine-tuned
on them. The differences between our work and Cai et al. (2021) are the following:

      1. Cai et al. (2021) considered a fully supervised setting: The environment reveals all true
         labels to the learner after evaluation. In contrast, in OCL-PDS, we use the random label
         feedback which randomly selects α fraction of the new samples and provides their labels. In
         particular, we mainly study a semi-supervised learning setting where the environment only
         reveals a fraction of the labels, which is a more common scenario in industrial applications.
      2. The evaluation metrics used in Cai et al. (2021) were: Average online accuracy, backward
         transfer and forward transfer. The first two metrics correspond to the average online per-
         formance and the average recent knowledge retention in OCL-PDS. In addition to these
         metrics, OCL-PDS also considers the regression set performance which is a very important
         metric in real applications, the worst (recent/important) knowledge retention performances
         since knowledge retention is required for all t, and the training efficiency which is very
         important in an online setting where the algorithm is run for many times.
      3. Cai et al. (2021) only evaluates knowledge retention performances at three fixed time steps:
         H/3, 2H/3 and H, where H is the total number of time steps. In contrast, OCL-PDS is
         purely online: all metrics including knowledge retention are evaluated at each step.
      4. Cai et al. (2021) proposed the CLOC benchmark which is indeed a PDS benchmark. How-
         ever, CLOC only covers vision classification, while our benchmarks cover both language
         and vision tasks, and both classification and regression tasks.
      5. Cai et al. (2021) only run experience replay (ER) on their benchmark, while our work
         also compares regularization based methods such as EWC, variants of ER such as GEM,


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         MIR and MaxLoss, as well as semi-supervised learning methods like pseudo-labeling and
         FixMatch.

A.2.2   M ETHODS
Rehearsal based methods. The concept of “rehearsal” was first introduced in Ratcliff (1990);
Robins (1995). Rehearsal-based methods store samples in an operational memory (a memory
buffer). When the learner learns a new task, it also reviews the old samples in this buffer in order
to prevent catastrophic forgetting, known as experience replay. Almost all previous work assumed
that the buffer has a fixed size, so two key questions for these methods are: (i) Which samples to be
store in the buffer, and (ii) Which samples to be replayed to the learner.
For problem (i), the most widely used strategy is Reservoir sampling (Isele & Cosgun, 2018) which
maintains the buffer distribution to be the average of all task distributions. Other variants include
Chrysakis & Moens (2020); Kim et al. (2020). For problem (ii), MIR (Aljundi et al., 2019a) selects
the samples with the highest loss increase after a “virtual update” step to be replayed, MaxLoss (Lin
et al., 2022) selects the samples with the highest loss after virtual update, and OCS (Yoon et al.,
2022) selects an online coreset that is diverse and has a high affinity to previous tasks. Moreover,
experience replay (ER) can be combined with other methods. For example, MER (Riemer et al.,
2019) combines ER with meta learning, GMED (Jin et al., 2021) combines ER with adversarial
attack, and Wang et al. (2022d) combines ER with DRO.
There are alternative ways to use this buffer. For example, iCaRL (Rebuffi et al., 2017) stores
“exemplars” in the buffer and uses a nearest neighbor classifier with these exemplars. In other
words, samples in the buffer are not used for training, but used for inference. Similarly, Continual
Prototype Evolution (De Lange & Tuytelaars, 2021) maintains and continually updates a prototype
for each class, and uses a nearest neighbor classifier for inference. Another way is introduced
in GEM (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017), where the buffered samples are not directly replayed for
training, but instead used to find a “pseudo gradient” with a convex optimization problem so that the
loss on previous tasks won’t increase. Variants of GEM include A-GEM (Chaudhry et al., 2019a)
and GSS (Aljundi et al., 2019c).
Since the buffer size is assumed to be limited, a bunch of previous papers studied how to utilize the
buffer space more efficiently. One line of work proposes to learn the distributions of previous tasks
with a generative model, which includes DGR (Shin et al., 2017), FearNet (Kemker & Kanan, 2018)
and so on.

Regularization based methods. The high-level idea of these methods is to not change the model
weights too much so that the model’s performance on previous tasks won’t drop too much. One
type of methods directly add to the objective a penalty term which keeps the model weights close
to the old weights, such as EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Another type of methods use synaptic
regularization (Zenke et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2019b) which controls the learning rate of each
weight, so that more influential weights change more slowly.

Architecture based methods. These methods continually update the model architecture in order
to learn the new tasks. One type of method changes the architecture by adding a “mask” to some
weights, such as Piggyback (Mallya et al., 2018) which learns a mask for each task, learning a
hard attention mask with gradient descent (Serra et al., 2018), and NCCL that adds weight calibra-
tion modules and feature calibration modules to balance between stability and plasticity (Yin et al.,
2021b). Another type of method uses the isolation approach where the model has two parts - A
shared part and a task specific part. When a new task arrives, the shared part is updated very little,
and a new task specific part is learned on the new task. Examples of isolation methods include
progressive neural network (PNN) (Rusu et al., 2016), Learning without Forgetting (LwF) (Li &
Hoiem, 2017), dynamically expandable network (DEN) (Yoon et al., 2018), etc.

Semi-supervised/Unsupervised continual learning. There are also some existing continual
learning methods that work under a semi-supervised or unsupervised setting. For instance, Lump
(Madaan et al., 2022) uses Mixup to interpolate between the current task and previous tasks’ in-
stances to alleviate catastrophic forgetting, and Fini et al. (2022) combines continual learning with
self-supervised learning.


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3   D OMAIN A DAPTATION

Domain adaptation (DA) is a type of distribution shift where “the tasks are the same, and the differ-
ences are only caused by domain divergence” (Wang & Deng, 2018). There is a source distribution
P and a target distribution Q with distribution shift from P to Q. During training, the learner is pro-
vided with samples from both the source and the target distributions, and conditioning on whether
the samples from the target distribution is labeled, partially labeled or unlabeled, DA is classified
as supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised DA. Particularly, in supervised DA, the number
of target samples is usually very small so that training on these target samples alone cannot lead to
a good model. A related area is domain generalization (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021; Blanchard
et al., 2021) where the learner does not have any samples from the target domain, even unlabeled
ones.
In general, a DA algorithm consists of two parts: Feature alignment and class alignment. The goal
of feature alignment is to train a feature encoder Φ that can encode invariant features, i.e. the images
of the source and target domains in the feature space are close to each other, or Φ(P ) ≈ Φ(Q). As
summarized in Wang & Deng (2018), there are two common ways to achieve feature alignment.
The first one is adversarial-based, i.e. training a domain discriminator to distinguish features from
the source and target domains, and the features are aligned if this discriminator cannot achieve a
high performance. Methods of this type include DANN (Ganin et al., 2016), SagNet (Nam et al.,
2021), etc. The second one is discrepancy-based, i.e. minimizing a divergence function between
Φ(P ) and Φ(Q), also called the “confusion alignment loss” in Motiian et al. (2017). Methods of
this type include CORAL (Sun & Saenko, 2016), IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019), ARM (Zhang et al.,
2021), etc. However, there are also some papers that point out the problems within these methods
(Rosenfeld et al., 2021; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021).
Moreover, even if we have learned a feature encoder Φ such that Φ(P ) ≈ Φ(Q), we cannot be sure
that the same classifier works for both domains, because samples of different classes in P and Q
might be mapped to the same latent feature. Thus, the goal of class alignment is either to make sure
that samples of the same class are mapped together, or to train a new classifier w′ which works for
Φ(Q). Note that class alignment requires labels from the target domain which are unavailable in
unsupervised domain adaptation or domain generalization. For instance, Tzeng et al. (2015) used
soft labels for class alignment, Long et al. (2016) minimized the cross entropy on the target data
while using a residual block to keep the source and target classifiers close, and Motiian et al. (2017)
used a similarity penalty between samples from different classes.

A.4   S EMI - SUPERVISED L EARNING

In many applications, the number of labeled samples are limited, but there are also a large number of
unlabeled samples. For example, for image classification tasks, while the labels are hard to obtain,
free images can be very easily retrieved from the internet. Semi-supervised learning studies how
to train a model on a small set of labeled samples and a large set of unlabeled samples. This is an
old area of research and there is a very rich body of work, on which we do not intend to make an
exhaustive survey here. Here we briefly discuss several types of methods that are widely being used
today, and more methods can be found in surveys such as Van Engelen & Hoos (2020).

Generating labels for unlabeled samples. Perhaps the most direct and intuitive way of leveraging
the unlabeled samples is to try to generate labels for them, and then train the model over all samples
as if they were all labeled. The simplest of such methods is pseudo-labeling (Lee, 2013), which
first trains a model over the labeled samples alone and then uses this model to pseudo-label the
unlabeled samples. This method assumes that the labeled and unlabeled samples come from the
same underlying distribution, so if a model can do well on the labeled samples, it should be able
to generate good pseudo labels for the unlabeled samples. However, the quality of pseudo labels
depends on the generalization ability of the model, and if the number of labeled samples is too small,
then the pseudo labels could contain large systematic label noise. Thus, a number of techniques have
been proposed to improve pseudo-labeling.
One such technique is consistency regularization, which is based on the following observation:
Given two transformations x′ and x′′ of the same sample x, their labels should be the same. For
instance, FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020) uses two augmentation methods: a weak one and a strong


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


one. It generates pseudo labels on the weakly augmented sample x′ , and trains the model on the
strongly augmented one x′′ . Similarly, Noisy Student (Xie et al., 2020) also uses a weak and a
strong augmentation, but it alternates between teacher phases which generate pseudo labels and
student phases which learn these labels, until convergence. Some other work defines x′ and x′′ as
the outputs of the model at different epochs, such as Temporal Ensembling (Laine & Aila, 2017) and
Mean Teachers (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017). There is also a line of work that leverages adversarial
attack, such as Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT) (Miyato et al., 2018).

Interpolation based methods. These methods train the model on the interpolation between la-
beled and unlabeled samples. This type of methods was initially introduced in MixUp (Zhang et al.,
2018), which interpolates between two labeled samples to combat label noise and adversarial attack
as it makes the model have linear behavior in between samples. This method is then applied to
semi-supervised learning in MixMatch (Berthelot et al., 2019), which combines MixUp with a lot
of other techniques including pseudo labeling.

Self-supervised learning. The high-level idea of self-supervised learning (also known as repre-
sentation learning) is to train a good feature extractor on the unlabeled data set with an auxiliary
task (upstream task), and then train a classifier on top of it on the labeled data set (downstream task).
The most famous and widely-used self-supervised learning technique is masked language modeling
(MLM) in NLP (Devlin et al., 2018), where the auxiliary task is predicting a masked word within a
sentence. MLM has achieved great success in NLP as the feature extractor it learns can be applied
to almost any language task and lead to good performance.
Inspired by the success of MLM, people also try to apply self-supervised learning to vision tasks.
For example, Doersch et al. (2015) extracts random pairs of patches from each image where the
auxiliary task is to learn the relative position between each pair of patches, and Gidaris et al. (2018)
rotates each image with different angles where the auxiliary task is to learn this rotation angle,
which is applied to semi-supervised learning in S 4 L (Zhai et al., 2019). Today, the most widely
used technique is contrastive learning, which extracts different views from each image, and the
auxiliary task is to learn which views come from the same image. The feature extractor is trained
to learn the similarity between two views: similar if they come from the same image, and different
if they do not. This idea was first introduced in Bachman et al. (2019). Currently the most popular
contrastive learning methods include SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020), MoCo (He et al., 2020), BYOL
(Grill et al., 2020), SwAV (Caron et al., 2020), etc.

B     T HE D IVERGENCE F UNCTION

In this section, we dive deep into one important problem in the formulation of the OCL-PDS prob-
lem: How to choose the divergence function Div(P ∥ Q) that guarantees the continuity of the
distribution shift? As mentioned in Section 2.2, Div(P ∥ Q) refers to the divergence from P to Q,
and ideally we want it to reflect the performance of a model which is trained on P and tested on Q.
To study this problem, first we will review existing divergence functions, and then we will show
that an ideal divergence function for OCL-PDS should be asymmetric and bounded, which is un-
fortunately not satisfied by any popular divergence function. Finally, we will introduce the ϵ-KL-
divergence which is used in this work.

B.1   E XISTING D IVERGENCE F UNCTIONS

This part is based on the NeurIPS tutorial by Gretton et al. (2019). Generally speaking, there are
two types of existing divergence functions: Integral probability metrics (IPMs) and ϕ-divergences.
To quickly understand these two types of divergence, think about how to determine whether two
distributions P and Q are equal. There are two ways in general: (a) Compute P − Q and see if
it is zero almost everywhere, and (b) Compute P/Q and see if it is one almost everywhere. IPMs
correspond to method (a) and ϕ-divergences correspond to method (b).

IPMs. An IPM is defined as Div(P ∥ Q) = supf ∈F [EX∼P f (X) − EY ∼Q f (Y )] for some func-
tion family F. Examples include total variation (TV) defined as Div(P ∥ Q) = 12 |P (x) −
                                                                                R


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q(x)|dx, MMD defined as Div(P ∥ Q) = ∥EX∼P [π(X)] − EY ∼Q [π(Y )]∥H for some fea-
ture mapping π and reproducing
                         R     kernel Hilbert space H, and the Wasserstein distance defined as
Div(P ∥ Q) = inf γ∈Γ(P,Q) D(x, y)dγ(x, y) for some distance function D(·, ·).

                                                                    R   dP
ϕ-divergences. A ϕ-divergence is defined as Divϕ (P ∥ Q) = ϕ dQ               dQ. For example, when
ϕ = − log, then the ϕ-divergence becomes the reverse        KL-divergence,
                                                                              where the popular KL-
                                             R              Q(x)
divergence is defined as DKL (Q ∥ P ) = x Q(x) log P (x) dx (note that P and Q are reversed).
Total variation is the only non-trivial function that is both an IPM and a ϕ-divergence.

B.2   D IVERGENCE F UNCTION FOR OCL-PDS

In this part, we show that an ideal divergence function for the OCL-PDS problem should be asym-
metric and bounded.

Asymmetric. Suppose we have two very different data domains A and B. Let P = A and Q =
0.5A + 0.5B. A model trained on P would have a very poor performance on Q, because it has
never seen any samples from domain B. On the other hand, a model trained on Q could have a
good performance on P , because it has seen samples from both A and B. Thus, in this example, we
would like to have Div(P ∥ Q) > Div(Q ∥ P ), so Div should be asymmetric.

Bounded. The KL-divergence is widely used in machine learning literature, but one problem is
that it is unbounded. Recall that in the OCL-PDS problem formulation, we assume that Div(Dt ∥
Dt+1 ) < ρ for all t. Now consider what would happen if the function Div is unbounded, and we
want to introduce data from new domains into the problem. Specifically, Q contains samples from
new domains that are not in P , i.e. there exists x such that Q(x) > 0 and P (x) = 0. In this
situation, we must have Div(P ∥ Q) = ∞, no matter how small Q(x) is. Therefore, if Div is
unbounded like the reverse KL-divergence, then we could never introduce new domains into
the problem, which is not desirable. There is a variant of the KL-divergence called JS-divergence,
which is defined as Div(P ∥ Q) = 12 [DKL (P ∥ M ) + DKL (Q ∥ M )] where M = 21 P + 12 Q.
Although it is bounded, it is also symmetric, so it is not ideal for OCL-PDS.

B.3   ϵ-KL-D IVERGENCE

In this work, we use the ϵ-KL-divergence defined as follows:
                          Div(P ∥ Q) = EX∼P [g(X)] + EY ∼Q [log(−g(Y ))] + 1
                                      Q(x)                                                      (2)
               where      g(x) = −
                                   max{P (x), ϵ}

This divergence functions has the following properties:

 (i) This function is a lower bound of the reverse KL-divergence, and it is bounded.
 (ii) If g(x) = − Q(x)
                    P (x) , then this function is equivalent to the reverse KL-divergence (which is
      its dual formulation). Thus, if for any x such that Q(x) > 0, we have P (x) ≥ ϵ, then the
      ϵ-KL-divergence is equivalent to the reverse KL-divergence.
(iii) In the case where Q contains new domains that are not in P , for example Q = (1 − β)P + β P̃
      for some P̃ ⊥ P , then Div(P ∥ Q) = β + β log βϵ + (1 − β) log(1 − β) ≈ β + DKL (Q ∥
      (1 − ϵ)P + ϵP̃ ).

From the properties, we can see that what we are doing in the ϵ-KL-divergence is essentially adding
an ϵ lower bound to the denominator of g(x) so that the function becomes bounded.

Example. Given two groups A and B, let ρ = 0.17 and ϵ = 0.02. Then, we have the following
group weight allocation schedule which is widely used in our benchmarks:


                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Table 2: Sample group weight allocation schedule.

                                  t   A       B        Div(Dt ∥ Dt+1 )
                                  0   1.00    0.00     0.1661
                                  1   0.90    0.10     0.1674
                                  2   0.69    0.31     0.1663
                                  3   0.41    0.59     0.1595
                                  4   0.15    0.85     0.1625
                                  5   0.00    1.00


Limitations. The major limitation of the ϵ-KL-divergence is that it cannot measure how similar
two domains are. For example, suppose we have three domains: A, B and C, and they do not
overlap with one another. Samples in A and B are very similar, but they are vastly different from
samples in C. In this case, a model trained on A can have a good performance on 0.5A + 0.5B,
but a poor performance on 0.5A + 0.5C. However, for the ϵ-KL-divergence, we have Div(A ∥
0.5A + 0.5B) = Div(A ∥ 0.5A + 0.5C). We can see that the ϵ-KL-divergence cannot measure the
similarity between A and B or A and C. Another limitation is that the choice of ϵ is arbitrary and
can affect the function value. Nevertheless, even with these two limitations, we still believe that the
ϵ-KL-divergence is suitable for the OCL-PDS problem. Finally, keep in mind that no divergence
function can cover every facet of real problems in practice, and that’s why we have three important
checking steps in our benchmarking procedure described in Section 3.1.

C     B ENCHMARK D ETAILS
We build 4 new benchmarks for OCL-PDS following the guidelines listed below:
       • We only use public datasets in this work.
       • The benchmarks should cover a wide variety of tasks.
       • The benchmarks should be realistic and can reflect the real PDS in industry.
       • Naı̈ve methods should be poor on these benchmarks, so special methods are necessary.
In this section, we will first demonstrate in detail how to use the 3-step procedure described in
Section 3.1 with the CivilComments-WPDS benchmark as an example. Then, we will present the
details for all other datasets, but without the detailed benchmarking procedure.

C.1   C IVIL C OMMENTS -WPDS

Here we present how we construct CivilComments-WPDS from the CivilComments-Wilds dataset
with the 3-step procedure including the 3 important checking steps.

Step 1: Separate the data into groups. First, we investigate the metadata we have in this dataset.
In CivilComments-Wilds, apart from the target label, each sample also has the following annota-
tions: whether it contains a certain topic (male, female, LGBTQ, christian, muslim, other religions,
black, white), and whether it contains a certain type of toxicity (identity attack, explicit sexual, etc.).
Based on this metadata, we can model the distribution shift with the shift in hot topics. We separate
the samples into four groups according to their topics, as shown in the following table.
       Table 3: Samples in CivilComments-Wilds are separated into 4 groups by their topics.
                      Group     Topic        # Samples      # Toxic    # Non-toxic
                      0         Normal       269,422        21,297     248,125
                      1         Race         37,459         10,820     26,639
                      2         Religion     65,816         8,106      57,710
                      3         Gender       75,303         10,571     64,732

We can observe that: (i) There are less toxicity in normal comments than comments about a specific
topic; (ii) The portion of toxic comments about race is much higher than that of other topics.


                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, we do the OOD check, where we verify that there is a distribution shift across the groups.
We perform this check in the following way: For each Group k, we train a model on a training set
sampled from all groups except Group k, and then test this model on a validation set sampled from
all groups except Group k, and a test sampled from Group k. The results are the following:
                   Table 4: OOD check results of CivilComments-WPDS (%).
     Group k     Topic       Validation Accuracy     Test Accuracy      OOD Gap: Val - Test
     0           Normal      87.14                   94.52              -7.38
     1           Race        92.90                   78.86              14.04
     2           Religion    92.11                   89.88              2.23
     3           Gender      92.20                   89.80              2.40

From this table, we can see that Group 1 (race) has the largest OOD performance gap, much larger
than other groups. Thus, when allocating the groups in Step 2, we will make sure that the shift to
Group 1 is slower. Moreover, we observe that on Group 0, the gap is negative, which means that
the OOD performance is better than the ID performance (i.e. A model trained on Groups 1-3 has a
higher accuracy on Group 0 than Groups 1-3). This is a counter-intuitive phenomenon as it is usually
taken for granted that OOD performance should be lower than ID performance. The cause of this
phenomenon might be that Group 0 is much easier to learn than the other groups (for example, the
data is more concentrated and depends on fewer features).

Step 2: Assign shifting group weights to the batches. We want to model the distribution shift
with the shift in hot topics on social media. At each time t, Dt contains normal comments as well as
comments about the current hot topic, i.e. samples from Group 0 exists in every batch. We design
the schedule listed in the following table:
 Table 5: Group weight schedule for CivilComments-WPDS. For each t, the weights add up to 1.
                         t   Group 0     Group 1     Group 2     Group 3
                         0   1.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
                         1   0.90        0.10        0.00        0.00
                         2   0.75        0.25        0.00        0.00
                         3   0.60        0.40        0.00        0.00
                         4   0.40        0.60        0.00        0.00
                         5   0.40        0.30        0.30        0.00
                         6   0.40        0.00        0.60        0.00
                         7   0.40        0.00        0.30        0.30
                         8   0.40        0.00        0.00        0.60


                                                27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, we do the shift continuity check, whose point is to make sure that the distribution shift in this
schedule is continuous. This check goes as follows: For each t, we sample a set from Dt and split it
into a training set and a validation set, and then sample a test set from Dt+1 . We want to make sure
that the gap between the validation and the test performances is not too large for each t. The results
are the following:

               Table 6: Shift continuity check results of CivilComments-WPDS (%).
               t    Validation Accuracy      Test Accuracy       OOD Gap: Val - Test
               0    94.87                    92.99               1.88
               1    93.49                    91.31               2.18
               2    90.67                    88.10               2.57
               3    87.56                    83.59               3.97
               4    85.60                    89.18               -3.58
               5    89.08                    91.59               -2.51
               6    91.63                    91.69               -0.06
               7    92.05                    91.47               0.58

We can see that the OOD gaps are kept under 4%, as opposed to the 14.04% gap we got in the OOD
check. And we can observe the same phenomenon again: For some t, the OOD accuracy is higher
than the ID occuracy.
Then, based on these results, we design the following sample allocation schedule listed in Table 8.
The first batch contains 50000 samples, while all the other batches contain 10000 samples each.

                                                                                            100
Step 3: Design a separate regression set. We notice that each

                                                                          Reg Performance
toxic comment is annotate which types of toxicity the comment                                80
contains in the CivilComments-Wilds dataset. Thus, we design the
                                                                                             60
regression set as the set of comments with two types of severe toxi-
city: identity attack and explicit sexual. Such comments are critical                        40
toxic comments that a good detector should be able to detect with
high success rate.                                                                           20
                                                                                                  0   5       10   15
                                                                                                          t
Then, we do the regression check, where we verify that naı̈ve meth-
ods have regression on the regression set we constructed. Here Figure 6: Regression check.
we use the NBO baseline described in Section 4.1 as the “naı̈ve
method”. As shown in Figure 6, the regression set performance of NBO quickly declines to under
50% - The performance of random guessing. Thus, the benchmarks passes this check.

Train/test split. For each t, we split St into a training set and a test set, and the regression set
is also split into a training set and a test set. These test sets are used to evaluate the recent and
regression set performances. We never evaluate the learner on data it has seen, because the learner
has an infinitely large buffer where it can store the data. Instead, we evaluate the learner on separate
i.i.d. test sets. Note that the numbers listed in Table 8 are all sizes of the training sets.

C.2   FM OW-WPDS

This benchmark is built from FMoW-Wilds. First, we separate the data into 5 groups by the year:

            Table 7: Samples in FMoW-WPDS are clustered into 5 groups by their year.

                                 Group      Year          # Samples
                                 0          2002-2013     132,948
                                 1          2014          54,575
                                 2          2015          87,358
                                 3          2016          140,459
                                 4          2017          54,746



                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Table 8: Sample allocation schedule for CivilComments-WPDS.

                         t       Group 0   Group 1     Group 2     Group 3
                         0       50000     0           0           0
                         1       9000      1000        0           0
                         2       9000      1000        0           0
                         3       7500      2500        0           0
                         4       7500      2500        0           0
                         5       6000      4000        0           0
                         6       6000      4000        0           0
                         7       4000      6000        0           0
                         8       4000      3000        3000        0
                         9       4000      3000        3000        0
                         10      4000      0           6000        0
                         11      4000      0           6000        0
                         12      4000      0           3000        3000
                         13      4000      0           3000        3000
                         14      4000      0           0           6000
                         15      4000      0           0           6000
                         Total   131000    27000       24000       18000


                      Table 9: Sample allocation schedule for FMoW-WPDS.

                 t           Group 0   Group 1    Group 2     Group 3     Group 4
                 0           120000    0          0           0           0
                 1           0         10000      0           0           0
                 2           0         9000       1000        0           0
                 3           0         6900       3100        0           0
                 4           0         6900       3100        0           0
                 5           0         4100       5900        0           0
                 6           0         4100       5900        0           0
                 7           0         1500       8500        0           0
                 8           0         0          10000       0           0
                 9           0         0          9000        1000        0
                 10          0         0          6900        3100        0
                 11          0         0          6900        3100        0
                 12          0         0          4100        5900        0
                 13          0         0          4100        5900        0
                 14          0         0          1500        8500        0
                 15          0         0          1500        8500        0
                 16          0         0          0           10000       0
                 17          0         0          0           9000        1000
                 18          0         0          0           6900        3100
                 19          0         0          0           6900        3100
                 20          0         0          0           4100        5900
                 21          0         0          0           4100        5900
                 22          0         0          0           1500        8500
                 23          0         0          0           1500        8500
                 24          0         0          0           0           10000
                 Total       120000    42500      71500       80000       46000



Then, we allocate the groups with the schedule listed in Table 9. We put 120000 samples from Group
0 into batch 0 for pretraining, and all other batches contain 10000 samples each. The regression set
is defined as the set of samples in two highly populated regions: Americas and Asia.


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.3   A MAZON -WPDS

This benchmark is built from the Amazon-Wilds dataset. In the original paper (Koh et al., 2021),
the ID/OOD sets are divided by the reviewers, and the dataset also contains some other metadata
such as year and product categories. However, we find in our experiments that these groups cannot
create a sufficiently large distribution shift. Thus, we use the following class split method, which
has been widely used in the continual learning literature: We divide the 5 classes of this datasets
(corresponding to the 5 stars rating) into 2 groups and 2 classes - positive and negative reviews, as
shown in the following table:

      Table 10: In Amazon-WPDS, the 5 stars rating are divided into 2 groups and 2 classes.

                       Group 0          Group 1          # Samples     Group 0     Group 1
               y=0     1, 2 stars       3 stars          y=0           193,900     377,039
               y=1     4 stars          5 stars          y=1           1,087,385   2,343,846


Then, we allocate the groups to the batches with the schedule listed in Table 12. This schedule is
based on the weight schedule we obtained in Table 2. The first batch has 50000 samples from Group
1, and then we model a group shift from Group 1 to Group 0. Each subsequent batch has 5000
samples.
Finally, the regression set is defined as the set of reviews from 10 popular product categories, in-
cluding books, fashion, etc.

C.4   P OVERTY-WPDS

This benchmark is build from the PovertyMap-Wilds dataset, which is a image regression task. First,
we cluster the data into 4 group by the year:

          Table 11: Samples in Poverty-WPDS are clustered into 4 groups by their year.

                                    Group         Year          # Samples
                                    0             2009-2011     7129
                                    1             2012-2013     5005
                                    2             2014          3494
                                    3             2015-2016     4041


Then we allocate the groups with the schedule listed in Table 13. We put all samples from Group
0 (except test samples) into the first batch for pretraining, and each subsequent batch contains 800
samples. Finally, the regression set is defined as the samples from urban areas, which can better
reflect the overall wealth index of each country. Note that this is a regression task, and we evaluate
the model performance with the Pearson correlation following Koh et al. (2021).

D     A LGORITHM D ETAILS

First of all, at t = 0, all OCL algorithms train the initial model on the first labeled batch and
the training regression set with empirical risk minimization (ERM). In particular, following Koh
et al. (2021), we use the cross entropy loss for classification tasks and the mean squared error for
regression tasks. The differences among the methods only appear after t > 0.

Baselines. First, note that the upper bound baseline i.i.d. offline is not an OCL algorithm because
it assumes access to Dt at time t. For each t, it trains a model on a set sampled from Dt with
a sufficiently large size and no overlapping with St . The size of the training set is different for
different benchmarks, but we always make sure that it is at least as large as the union of all batches
before time t. i.i.d. offline is only an approximate upper bound of the online performance because


                                                         30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Table 12: Sample allocation schedule for Amazon-WPDS.

                                    t       Group 0      Group 1
                                    0       0            50000
                                    1       500          4500
                                    2       500          4500
                                    3       1550         3450
                                    4       1550         3450
                                    5       1550         3450
                                    6       2950         2050
                                    7       2950         2050
                                    8       2950         2050
                                    9       2950         2050
                                    10      4250         750
                                    11      4250         750
                                    12      4250         750
                                    13      4250         750
                                    14      5000         0
                                    15      5000         0
                                    16      5000         0
                                    17      5000         0
                                    Total   54450        80550

                     Table 13: Sample allocation schedule for Poverty-WPDS.

                        t       Group 0     Group 1      Group 2     Group 3
                        0       6359        0            0           0
                        1       0           800          0           0
                        2       0           720          80          0
                        3       0           720          80          0
                        4       0           552          248         0
                        5       0           552          248         0
                        6       0           328          400         72
                        7       0           328          400         72
                        8       0           120          400         280
                        9       0           120          400         280
                        10      0           0            400         400
                        11      0           0            200         600
                        12      0           0            0           800
                        13      0           0            0           800
                        Total   6359        4240         2856        3304


for a distribution P , training on multiple distributions other than P might even achieve a better
performance on P than training on P directly, as we saw in benchmarking CivilComments-WPDS.
However, this baseline gives us a sense of the generalization error, and thus help us interpret the
performances of other OCL algorithms.
Then, for FBO, the algorithm does not do anything after t > 0, and the initial model is used till the
end. For NBO, for each new batch St , the model is trained on the labeled portion of St only with a
fixed number of epochs of ERM, and no previous sample is replayed.

ER-FIFO and ER-FIFO-RW. In ER-FIFO, for each t > 0, the model is fine-tuned on the union
of the new labeled batch, the recent labeled batches, and the training regression set, for a fixed num-
ber of epochs (named epochs) of ERM. Specifically, the recent labeled batches and the training
regression set are stored in the memory buffer. One issue of this approach is that it does not take


                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


into account the sizes of the batches and the regression set. For example, if the regression set is
much larger than the batches, then it will be hard for the model to learn the new knowledge. Thus,
ER-FIFO-RW alters the weights of the three data sets: the new data, the recent data and the regres-
sion data. Specifically, it uses uniform sampling over these three sets, so that each set has the same
probability of being selected.

MIR and MaxLoss. When there are too many previous samples in the buffer, we cannot replay all
of them for efficiency. ER-FIFO-RW solves this problem by randomly sampling previous samples
to replay. However, this might not be the most efficient method, as some previous samples might
be more useful than the others for preventing catastrophic forgetting. MIR and MaxLoss are two
strategies of selecting replay samples, which operate as follows: For each iteration,

      1. Sample n new samples and nkr previous samples that require knowledge retention (KR).
                                           ′
      2. Virtual update: Fine-tune ft−1 → ft−1 with ERM on the n new samples.
      3. Select n samples from the nkr previous samples for replay. Specifically, MIR selects the
         samples whose loss increase the most before and after virtual update, while MaxLoss se-
         lects the samples with the highest loss after virtual update.
      4. Recover the model to ft−1 , and fine-tune ft−1 → ft with ERM on the n new samples and
         the n selected previous samples.

The ratio nkr /n is named as kr size in our code, which should be greater than 1. The larger nkr
is, the more likely we can select “useful” replay samples, but the slower the algorithm.

GEM-PDS. In this method, for each iteration, we first sample n new data, nkr recent data and
nkr regression data, on which we estimate the three gradients of the loss function g0 , g1 and g2 ,
respectively. A larger nkr allows the learner to estimate g1 and g2 more accurately. The ratio nkr /n
is still named as kr size. Then, the pseudo gradient g ∗ is the optimal solution of the convex
optimization problem Eqn. (1), which can be solved with the following procedure:
              1. a = ⟨g0 , g1 ⟩, b = ⟨g1 , g1 ⟩, c = ⟨g1 , g2 ⟩, d = ⟨g0 , g2 ⟩, e = ⟨g2 , g2 ⟩.
              2. If a ≥ 0, d ≥ 0 then return g0 .
              3. p = cd − ae, q = ac − bd, r = be − c2 .
                            a
              4. ĝ1 = g0 − g1 . If a ≤ 0 and q ≤ 0 then return ĝ1 .                              (3)
                             b
                            d
              5. ĝ2 = g0 − g2 . If d ≤ 0 and p ≤ 0 then return ĝ2 .
                            e
                                    p      q
              6. Return ĝ3 = g0 + g1 + g2 .
                                    r      r

We can verify with the KKT conditions that this procedure returns the correct solution of Eqn. (1)
(e.g. see Section 5.5.3 of Boyd et al. (2004)). The model is then updated with gradient descent along
g∗ .

Online L2 Regularization and EWC. Let the loss of model ft parameterized by θt (which is
the vectorized model weight) on the labeled batch of St be ℓt (θt ). In online L2 regularization, we
minimize the following objective function with a fixed number of epochs of ERM:
                                                          λ
                                      min ℓt (θt ) +        ∥θt − θ0 ∥22                           (4)
                                       θt                 2
where we add a L2 penalty between the new model weight θt and the initial model weight θ0 . The
reasons why we use ∥θt − θ0 ∥22 instead of ∥θt − θt−1 ∥22 are:

      1. θ0 has a very good regression set performance, which is not guaranteed for θt−1 . So using
         ∥θt − θ0 ∥22 ensures a higher regression set performance.
      2. If T is very large, then the model weight can still change a lot if we use ∥θt − θt−1 ∥22 (as
         the change accumulates with t), so knowledge retention cannot be guaranteed.


                                                     32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In EWC, the objective function is the following:
                                                λ
                               min ℓt (θt ) +     ∥diag(Ft )(θt − θ0 )∥22                            (5)
                                θt              2
where Ft is the Fisher information matrix (FIM), and diag(Ft ) only contains the elements on the
diagonal of Ft . Following Kirkpatrick et al. (2017), we estimate diag(Ft ) from the first-order deriva-
tives of the loss function on nkr samples for knowledge retention. The ratio nkr /n is still named as
kr size. With a larger nkr , we can estimate Ft more accurately. λ is named as lbd.

Pseudo Labeling (PL) and FixMatch (FM). In PL and FM, there are two hyperparameters: the
number of epochs of the virtual update step epochs v, and the number of epochs of the real fine-
tuning step epochs r. Virtual update is done with ERM on the labeled samples only, while real
fine-tuning is done with a supervised OCL algorithm on the union of labeled and pseudo-labeled
samples. Thus, PL and FM can be combined with any supervised OCL algorithm, which we denote
by adding the suffix “PL” or “FM” to the algorithm, such as ER-FIFO-PL and ER-FIFO-FM.

E     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
E.1   S ETUP

Following Koh et al. (2021), we use a DistilBert-base-uncased for CivilComments-WPDS and
Amazon-WPDS, a DenseNet-121 for FMoW-WPDS, and a ResNet-18 for Poverty-WPDS. For the
training hyperparameters, we generally use the same ones as in Koh et al. (2021), with one exception
that we use a multi learning rate decay scheduler for the two vision benchmarks as we find that it
can produce better performances than the old scheduler.
For each experiment we report the following 6 metrics:

       • For online performance, we report the average online performance (avg online) within a
         finite T .
       • For knowledge retention, we report the average recent performance (avg recent) and
         the worst recent performance (worst recent), which is the average and the minimum
         of the recent performance over t = w, · · · , T . We also report the worst performance
         because knowledge retention is required for every t. Likewise, we also report the average
         reg performance (avg reg) (regression set performance) and the worst reg performance
         (worst reg). As mentioned in Section 3.1, we use separate test batches to evaluate the
         recent and reg performances.
       • For training efficiency, we report the average runtime (avg time) of the method over
         t = 1, · · · , T . Note that the time used to train the initial model (t = 0) is not computed in
         the average runtime.

Each experiment is run on a single NVIDIA V100 GPU. Each experiment is run 5 times with differ-
ent random seeds, and the mean and the standard deviation of the results are reported. In particular,
for each benchmark we use 5 fixed initial models: We train 5 initial models on the first batch and the
training regression set with ERM for a fixed number of epochs with different random seeds, and then
use these 5 models as initial models for all methods. This both alleviates the effect of randomness
in the initial models and saves time. Under this setting, FBO can also serve as an upper bound of
the worst regression set performance, which is the regression set performance at t = 1 for every
method.

E.2   R ESULTS

In Table 14 we list the notations we use in the results. The results are reported in Tables 15-18.


                                                   33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Table 14: Notations of algorithms.

 Algorithm              Hyperparameters           Notation                                   Example
 NBO                    epochs                    NBO-epochs                                 NBO-5
 ER-FIFO                epochs                    ER-FIFO-epochs                             ER-FIFO-5
 ER-FIFO-RW             epochs                    ER-FIFO-RW-epochs                          ER-FIFO-RW-5
 MIR                    epochs, kr size           MIR-epochs-kr size                         MIR-5-4
 MaxLoss                epochs, kr size           MaxLoss-epochs-kr size                     MaxLoss-5-4
 GEM-PDS                epochs, kr size           GEM-PDS-epochs-kr size                     GEM-PDS-5-4
 L2Reg                  epochs, lbd               L2Reg-epochs-lbd                           L2Reg-5-0.1
 EWC                    epochs, lbd, kr size      L2Reg-epochs-lbd-kr size                   EWC-5-0.1-4
 ER-FIFO-PL             epochs v, epochs r        ER-FIFO-PL-epochs v-epochs r               ER-FIFO-PL-10-5
 ER-FIFO-RW-PL          epochs v, epochs r        ER-FIFO-RW-PL-epochs v-epochs r            ER-FIFO-RW-PL-10-5
 ER-FIFO-FM             epochs v, epochs r        ER-FIFO-FM-epochs v-epochs r               ER-FIFO-FM-10-5
 ER-FIFO-RW-FM          epochs v, epochs r        ER-FIFO-RW-FM-epochs v-epochs r            ER-FIFO-RW-FM-10-5


                  Table 15: Results on CivilComments-WPDS (α = 0.5%). Accuracies in %.

 Algorithm                 Avg Online     Avg Recent     Worst Recent   Avg Reg        Worst Reg       Avg Time
 FBO                       81.45 (0.37)                                                84.79 (0.96)
 i.i.d. offline            90.03 (0.19)
 NBO-100                   89.19 (0.39)   89.08 (0.23)   85.12 (1.28)   55.20 (7.54)   30.07 (11.67)   95.61 (0.85)
 ER-FIFO-1                 82.62 (0.34)   82.92 (0.30)   77.42 (0.97)   83.81 (0.41)   81.46 (1.00)    309.04 (1.12)
 ER-FIFO-RW-3              85.27 (0.70)   85.87 (0.54)   81.42 (1.44)   80.93 (0.57)   75.90 (1.71)    7.75 (0.04)
 ER-FIFO-RW-10             83.94 (0.31)   84.09 (0.47)   79.48 (0.64)   83.32 (0.43)   80.63 (1.09)    24.48 (0.04)
 ER-FIFO-RW-100            81.84 (0.59)   81.95 (0.78)   76.42 (1.54)   84.48 (0.68)   82.64 (1.10)    248.83 (3.52)
 MIR-10-4                  87.33 (0.30)   86.70 (0.51)   80.99 (1.30)   75.94 (1.98)   57.57 (3.95)    40.99 (0.12)
 MIR-100-4                 84.16 (0.15)   83.36 (0.38)   77.36 (1.11)   82.29 (0.97)   74.65 (0.95)    419.84 (2.08)
 MIR-10-10                 86.85 (0.29)   86.06 (0.58)   79.57 (1.42)   77.71 (1.43)   60.21 (4.29)    75.31 (0.37)
 MIR-100-10                83.72 (0.18)   83.09 (0.28)   77.21 (0.48)   83.00 (0.65)   78.96 (1.60)    757.66 (5.90)
 MaxLoss-10-4              87.32 (0.31)   86.76 (0.51)   81.04 (0.80)   76.25 (1.90)   57.15 (2.91)    31.27 (0.09)
 MaxLoss-100-4             84.18 (0.44)   83.36 (0.40)   77.22 (0.79)   82.39 (1.32)   74.31 (1.74)    317.14 (1.47)
 MaxLoss-10-10             86.81 (0.34)   86.05 (0.46)   79.96 (1.11)   77.63 (1.31)   60.35 (2.31)    52.46 (0.41)
 MaxLoss-100-10            83.71 (0.18)   83.12 (0.35)   77.66 (0.58)   82.73 (0.95)   77.99 (1.03)    502.09 (6.19)
 GEM-PDS-10-4              87.59 (0.39)   87.64 (0.28)   82.96 (1.01)   76.13 (1.38)   66.78 (4.01)    68.15 (0.07)
 GEM-PDS-30-4              87.61 (0.55)   87.58 (0.45)   82.83 (1.01)   74.92 (2.53)   61.88 (8.54)    195.42 (0.29)
 GEM-PDS-10-10             86.95 (0.43)   86.86 (0.46)   82.22 (0.59)   78.33 (1.37)   71.28 (2.31)    149.77 (0.14)
 GEM-PDS-30-10             86.72 (0.43)   86.60 (0.62)   80.60 (1.61)   77.52 (1.71)   64.50 (6.38)    456.54 (0.72)
 L2Reg-10-1.0              88.35 (0.38)   88.51 (0.42)   84.87 (0.81)   70.51 (3.19)   59.10 (3.88)    10.33 (0.13)
 L2Reg-10-10.0             87.13 (0.48)   87.20 (0.61)   82.09 (0.62)   75.63 (2.90)   67.15 (4.56)    9.82 (0.12)
 L2Reg-10-100.0            86.11 (0.35)   86.03 (0.51)   80.18 (0.97)   78.07 (2.07)   69.46 (5.63)    9.76 (0.12)
 L2Reg-100-1.0             87.54 (0.39)   87.35 (0.42)   82.04 (0.71)   74.56 (2.21)   65.30 (3.71)    94.03 (0.67)
 L2Reg-100-10.0            86.91 (0.37)   86.65 (0.49)   80.94 (0.91)   76.30 (2.21)   68.32 (2.54)    91.92 (0.71)
 L2Reg-100-100.0           86.18 (0.35)   85.93 (0.46)   79.98 (1.04)   78.05 (1.87)   69.80 (3.40)    93.58 (0.39)
 EWC-10-1.0-4              88.50 (0.45)   88.54 (0.55)   84.49 (1.28)   68.74 (3.76)   54.83 (5.17)    38.86 (0.37)
 EWC-10-10.0-4             87.51 (0.25)   87.39 (0.45)   82.06 (1.16)   74.67 (2.09)   65.57 (2.81)    39.00 (0.44)
 EWC-10-100.0-4            85.62 (0.18)   85.38 (0.38)   79.34 (0.79)   79.75 (1.46)   74.30 (3.14)    38.81 (0.08)
 EWC-100-1.0-4             86.56 (0.32)   86.36 (0.45)   80.70 (0.98)   77.53 (2.04)   71.48 (3.50)    371.97 (1.27)
 EWC-100-10.0-4            86.24 (0.31)   86.01 (0.48)   80.24 (1.01)   78.21 (1.80)   72.01 (3.56)    371.44 (0.86)
 EWC-100-100.0-4           85.20 (0.21)   84.79 (0.43)   78.73 (0.82)   80.44 (1.44)   75.44 (3.06)    368.17 (3.44)
 ER-FIFO-PL-0-1            77.22 (1.83)   76.54 (2.06)   69.66 (2.17)   85.66 (1.31)   83.76 (0.87)    510.40 (8.05)
 ER-FIFO-PL-1-1            85.21 (0.57)   86.46 (0.48)   82.81 (0.79)   79.54 (0.72)   73.69 (2.45)    526.34 (4.13)
 ER-FIFO-PL-3-1            87.28 (0.33)   88.22 (0.38)   84.59 (1.02)   76.26 (1.49)   68.86 (2.63)    514.51 (4.14)
 ER-FIFO-PL-10-1           87.94 (0.35)   88.76 (0.32)   85.72 (0.44)   73.82 (2.14)   64.97 (4.44)    501.86 (1.50)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-0-1         76.55 (1.05)   75.92 (1.97)   69.13 (2.96)   86.39 (0.76)   84.36 (1.08)    499.08 (1.22)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-1-1         84.94 (0.85)   85.97 (0.91)   82.32 (1.44)   80.26 (1.40)   75.84 (1.36)    531.59 (7.74)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-3-1         87.08 (0.30)   88.29 (0.28)   84.79 (0.97)   76.60 (0.94)   68.59 (0.56)    522.92 (8.41)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-10-1        87.65 (0.46)   88.64 (0.37)   85.57 (0.63)   75.28 (2.13)   67.58 (3.41)    512.99 (2.48)


                                                          34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 16: Results on FMoW-WPDS (α = 50%). Accuracies in %.

 Algorithm            Avg Online     Avg Recent     Worst Recent   Avg Reg        Worst Reg      Avg Time
 FBO                  68.00 (0.24)                                                84.54 (0.21)
 i.i.d. offline       83.04 (0.25)
 NBO-5                71.78 (0.08)   73.03 (0.06)   71.27 (0.26)   76.84 (0.23)   72.71 (0.47)   161.90 (2.11)
 ER-FIFO-2            74.01 (0.10)   76.04 (0.12)   74.38 (0.34)   83.91 (0.09)   80.82 (0.49)   1458.19 (239.67)
 ER-FIFO-RW-2         72.77 (0.04)   74.56 (0.16)   73.07 (0.15)   81.84 (0.17)   80.34 (0.30)   226.31 (10.83)
 ER-FIFO-RW-5         73.33 (0.11)   75.21 (0.06)   73.72 (0.28)   82.33 (0.12)   80.27 (0.34)   480.61 (20.08)
 ER-FIFO-RW-10        73.56 (0.09)   75.80 (0.08)   74.31 (0.29)   82.63 (0.08)   80.21 (0.19)   953.56 (96.59)
 MIR-2-2              69.75 (0.09)   70.74 (0.25)   68.68 (0.57)   79.25 (0.25)   76.48 (0.66)   357.74 (3.26)
 MIR-2-4              71.29 (0.06)   72.36 (0.10)   70.44 (0.20)   80.81 (0.16)   79.19 (0.52)   460.35 (9.11)
 MIR-2-10             72.59 (0.08)   73.95 (0.08)   72.27 (0.15)   81.90 (0.25)   80.92 (0.20)   710.30 (54.07)
 MaxLoss-2-2          69.66 (0.21)   70.53 (0.30)   68.15 (0.81)   79.23 (0.13)   76.40 (0.56)   318.70 (3.33)
 MaxLoss-2-4          71.34 (0.07)   72.46 (0.05)   70.52 (0.32)   80.86 (0.12)   79.40 (0.35)   361.38 (25.58)
 MaxLoss-2-10         72.64 (0.08)   74.00 (0.10)   72.37 (0.21)   81.90 (0.30)   80.90 (0.32)   553.68 (18.74)
 GEM-PDS-2-2          72.07 (0.08)   73.21 (0.19)   71.49 (0.33)   79.10 (0.15)   75.19 (0.45)   240.80 (3.06)
 GEM-PDS-2-4          72.04 (0.11)   73.14 (0.09)   71.54 (0.34)   79.16 (0.23)   75.54 (0.75)   502.77 (41.03)
 GEM-PDS-2-10         72.05 (0.07)   73.21 (0.13)   71.45 (0.37)   79.17 (0.21)   75.86 (0.38)   969.29 (5.54)
 L2Reg-2-0.1          69.61 (0.11)   70.14 (0.19)   66.43 (0.28)   81.59 (0.17)   78.84 (0.95)   76.42 (1.15)
 L2Reg-2-1.0          67.90 (0.14)   68.32 (0.20)   63.78 (0.61)   82.30 (0.21)   80.30 (1.00)   79.84 (1.27)
 L2Reg-2-10.0         68.02 (0.12)   68.74 (0.26)   63.34 (0.43)   83.74 (0.19)   82.92 (0.30)   79.94 (0.99)
 EWC-2-0.1-4          70.16 (0.16)   70.76 (0.24)   67.72 (0.43)   81.94 (0.10)   80.20 (0.60)   239.01 (1.32)
 EWC-2-1.0-4          68.51 (0.16)   69.01 (0.27)   64.84 (0.49)   82.93 (0.14)   81.73 (0.42)   288.53 (26.63)
 EWC-2-10.0-4         68.13 (0.12)   68.84 (0.20)   63.96 (0.35)   83.69 (0.11)   83.21 (0.14)   287.97 (26.06)
 ER-FIFO-PL-3-3       74.25 (0.15)   76.34 (0.22)   74.49 (0.48)   84.00 (0.18)   80.34 (0.43)   1881.01 (6.93)
 ER-FIFO-PL-5-3       74.36 (0.08)   76.47 (0.23)   75.00 (0.58)   83.95 (0.13)   80.20 (0.50)   1924.03 (15.96)
 ER-FIFO-PL-3-5       74.55 (0.06)   76.54 (0.24)   74.96 (0.42)   84.40 (0.10)   80.90 (0.60)   3071.01 (28.59)
 ER-FIFO-PL-5-5       74.62 (0.05)   76.67 (0.13)   74.91 (0.21)   84.29 (0.11)   80.65 (0.23)   3128.51 (54.12)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-3-3    73.40 (0.04)   75.28 (0.25)   73.80 (0.40)   82.12 (0.16)   79.80 (0.37)   573.71 (9.83)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-5-3    73.49 (0.09)   75.43 (0.18)   73.90 (0.34)   82.10 (0.19)   80.07 (0.24)   622.28 (6.41)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-3-5    73.50 (0.15)   75.41 (0.26)   73.70 (0.46)   82.27 (0.08)   79.52 (0.14)   891.74 (9.63)
 ER-FIFO-PL-RW-5-5    73.46 (0.04)   75.42 (0.14)   73.89 (0.21)   82.26 (0.06)   79.40 (0.31)   944.21 (6.73)
 ER-FIFO-FM-3-3       74.81 (0.09)   76.91 (0.15)   75.36 (0.62)   84.37 (0.11)   80.80 (0.18)   2022.45 (179.49)
 ER-FIFO-FM-5-3       74.80 (0.06)   76.86 (0.13)   75.27 (0.17)   84.32 (0.16)   80.36 (0.42)   2084.54 (183.02)
 ER-FIFO-FM-3-5       75.10 (0.07)   77.19 (0.13)   75.46 (0.15)   84.70 (0.16)   80.96 (0.27)   3056.44 (52.54)
 ER-FIFO-FM-5-5       75.16 (0.05)   77.33 (0.19)   75.75 (0.60)   84.71 (0.10)   80.88 (0.39)   3268.89 (307.79)
 ER-FIFO-RW-FM-3-3    73.44 (0.05)   75.37 (0.30)   73.80 (0.37)   81.87 (0.19)   79.62 (0.35)   572.95 (2.68)
 ER-FIFO-RW-FM-5-3    73.40 (0.08)   75.31 (0.12)   73.83 (0.30)   81.80 (0.05)   79.52 (0.41)   642.91 (37.83)
 ER-FIFO-RW-FM-3-5    73.71 (0.05)   75.72 (0.15)   74.04 (0.41)   82.27 (0.08)   79.38 (0.44)   896.77 (4.61)
 ER-FIFO-RW-FM-5-5    73.75 (0.15)   75.68 (0.13)   74.32 (0.25)   82.31 (0.05)   79.52 (0.33)   971.52 (39.10)


                                                      35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 17: Results on Amazon-WPDS (α = 0.5%). Accuracies in %.

 Algorithm               Avg Online      Avg Recent      Worst Recent      Avg Reg          Worst Reg       Avg Time
 FBO                     84.85 (0.20)                                                       93.78 (0.26)
 i.i.d. offline          94.15 (0.19)
 NBO-100                 90.49 (0.41)    90.68 (0.34)    88.58 (0.95)      92.22 (0.43)     88.63 (0.76)    105.68 (1.74)
 ER-FIFO-1               87.12 (0.34)    88.06 (0.28)    84.70 (0.40)      93.58 (0.16)     93.02 (0.28)    314.64 (1.60)
 ER-FIFO-RW-10           88.47 (0.67)    89.32 (0.73)    86.85 (1.62)      93.63 (0.30)     93.00 (0.37)    17.09 (0.06)
 ER-FIFO-RW-100          86.65 (0.21)    87.39 (0.31)    83.22 (1.07)      93.68 (0.20)     93.11 (0.37)    181.74 (1.46)
 MIR-10-4                89.46 (0.46)    90.19 (0.51)    88.00 (1.55)      93.31 (0.34)     91.82 (0.94)    28.88 (0.23)
 MIR-100-4               86.99 (0.48)    87.87 (0.59)    84.28 (0.87)      93.62 (0.38)     92.86 (0.67)    286.59 (2.91)
 MIR-10-10               89.15 (0.61)    89.95 (0.66)    87.28 (2.16)      93.45 (0.36)     92.21 (0.82)    47.99 (0.24)
 MIR-100-10              87.16 (0.36)    88.07 (0.42)    84.68 (0.38)      93.78 (0.26)     93.24 (0.29)    479.84 (11.69)
 MaxLoss-10-4            89.42 (0.43)    90.14 (0.54)    87.52 (2.01)      93.33 (0.28)     91.82 (0.84)    24.37 (0.17)
 MaxLoss-100-4           87.06 (0.69)    87.88 (0.75)    84.42 (1.17)      93.72 (0.33)     93.13 (0.41)    247.32 (6.66)
 MaxLoss-10-10           89.32 (0.57)    90.06 (0.61)    87.78 (1.78)      93.49 (0.27)     92.41 (0.57)    34.72 (0.24)
 MaxLoss-100-10          87.11 (0.45)    88.06 (0.66)    84.73 (1.18)      93.73 (0.30)     93.18 (0.30)    358.98 (3.47)
 GEM-PDS-10-4            89.94 (0.46)    90.50 (0.41)    88.74 (1.11)      92.94 (0.46)     90.65 (0.47)    37.30 (0.18)
 GEM-PDS-30-4            90.32 (0.47)    90.84 (0.35)    89.22 (1.08)      92.55 (0.43)     89.64 (0.66)    111.27 (0.22)
 GEM-PDS-10-10           89.77 (0.61)    90.42 (0.51)    88.20 (1.79)      93.10 (0.46)     91.30 (0.45)    82.24 (0.20)
 GEM-PDS-30-10           90.26 (0.58)    90.81 (0.55)    89.32 (1.23)      92.80 (0.26)     89.93 (1.16)    239.08 (0.97)
 L2Reg-10-0.1            89.01 (0.43)    89.79 (0.45)    86.72 (2.43)      93.23 (0.47)     91.46 (1.00)    11.06 (0.16)
 L2Reg-10-1.0            88.00 (0.51)    88.83 (0.57)    85.14 (1.48)      93.62 (0.20)     92.94 (0.35)    8.52 (0.05)
 L2Reg-10-10.0           86.67 (0.30)    87.46 (0.35)    82.21 (1.26)      93.75 (0.18)     93.26 (0.18)    8.53 (0.07)
 EWC-10-0.1-4            89.32 (0.43)    90.05 (0.46)    87.06 (2.60)      93.20 (0.35)     91.21 (1.21)    26.12 (0.41)
 EWC-10-1.0-4            88.94 (0.45)    89.77 (0.49)    86.48 (2.77)      93.34 (0.27)     91.60 (1.27)    23.02 (0.21)
 EWC-10-10.0-4           88.52 (0.48)    89.32 (0.57)    85.75 (2.05)      93.58 (0.24)     92.72 (0.34)    23.34 (0.24)
 ER-FIFO-PL-0-1          85.75 (1.09)    86.39 (1.27)    80.91 (2.85)      93.94 (0.10)     93.39 (0.17)    428.25 (11.42)
 ER-FIFO-PL-1-1          87.84 (0.57)    88.94 (0.69)    86.21 (1.57)      93.77 (0.22)     93.17 (0.27)    427.75 (7.14)
 ER-FIFO-PL-3-1          88.97 (0.36)    89.98 (0.26)    87.72 (0.48)      93.66 (0.28)     92.92 (0.42)    422.17 (2.50)
 ER-FIFO-PL-10-1         89.47 (0.40)    90.39 (0.38)    88.42 (1.43)      93.20 (0.13)     92.07 (0.36)    419.94 (1.45)
 ER-FIFO-RW-PL-0-1       85.28 (1.37)    85.96 (1.41)    80.30 (2.62)      93.66 (0.44)     92.97 (0.58)    277.10 (0.58)
 ER-FIFO-RW-PL-1-1       88.21 (0.95)    89.03 (1.09)    85.95 (2.30)      93.79 (0.25)     93.15 (0.33)    278.52 (1.28)
 ER-FIFO-RW-PL-3-1       89.19 (0.43)    90.03 (0.40)    87.56 (1.09)      93.68 (0.15)     92.88 (0.38)    274.58 (0.62)
 ER-FIFO-RW-PL-10-1      89.84 (0.54)    90.56 (0.49)    88.95 (1.30)      93.39 (0.31)     91.80 (0.59)    280.12 (1.85)


           Table 18: Results on Poverty-WPDS (α = 50%). Results are Pearson correlations.

 Algorithm           Avg Online      Avg Recent       Worst Recent      Avg Reg           Worst Reg        Avg Time
 FBO                 0.781 (0.024)                                                        0.638 (0.017)
 i.i.d. offline      0.832 (0.010)
 NBO-100             0.813 (0.003)   0.831 (0.004)    0.780 (0.010)     0.583 (0.012)     0.520 (0.035)    204.69 (2.12)
 ER-FIFO-50          0.791 (0.007)   0.806 (0.008)    0.748 (0.050)     0.633 (0.018)     0.549 (0.109)    881.86 (57.91)
 ER-FIFO-RW-50       0.793 (0.006)   0.807 (0.009)    0.753 (0.028)     0.641 (0.016)     0.612 (0.024)    244.83 (3.85)
 ER-FIFO-RW-100      0.798 (0.007)   0.812 (0.009)    0.765 (0.045)     0.641 (0.018)     0.611 (0.032)    426.77 (2.04)
 ER-FIFO-RW-150      0.799 (0.004)   0.813 (0.007)    0.765 (0.044)     0.643 (0.015)     0.608 (0.021)    629.51 (8.50)
 MIR-30-4            0.737 (0.021)   0.759 (0.016)    0.691 (0.050)     0.579 (0.015)     0.502 (0.036)    256.05 (31.52)
 MIR-100-4           0.750 (0.007)   0.773 (0.015)    0.702 (0.023)     0.585 (0.007)     0.524 (0.043)    847.82 (27.40)
 MIR-30-10           0.759 (0.010)   0.779 (0.016)    0.694 (0.060)     0.602 (0.008)     0.561 (0.019)    719.60 (42.89)
 MIR-100-10          0.774 (0.007)   0.793 (0.011)    0.747 (0.029)     0.611 (0.014)     0.568 (0.031)    2148.85 (137.06)
 MaxLoss-30-4        0.727 (0.023)   0.752 (0.020)    0.688 (0.038)     0.575 (0.014)     0.509 (0.024)    274.64 (25.15)
 MaxLoss-100-4       0.740 (0.019)   0.760 (0.023)    0.677 (0.039)     0.584 (0.017)     0.471 (0.182)    818.20 (19.62)
 MaxLoss-30-10       0.754 (0.012)   0.776 (0.016)    0.695 (0.053)     0.601 (0.008)     0.561 (0.015)    557.77 (23.40)
 MaxLoss-100-10      0.770 (0.010)   0.790 (0.015)    0.734 (0.054)     0.610 (0.017)     0.569 (0.029)    1643.23 (116.68)
 GEM-PDS-30-4        0.771 (0.005)   0.800 (0.009)    0.783 (0.009)     0.634 (0.014)     0.622 (0.015)    338.23 (7.42)
 GEM-PDS-100-4       0.777 (0.006)   0.809 (0.005)    0.793 (0.013)     0.640 (0.010)     0.627 (0.012)    1125.91 (36.97)
 GEM-PDS-30-10       0.761 (0.004)   0.786 (0.009)    0.773 (0.013)     0.634 (0.014)     0.622 (0.019)    750.12 (4.47)
 GEM-PDS-100-10      0.767 (0.005)   0.798 (0.006)    0.781 (0.012)     0.640 (0.009)     0.629 (0.011)    3247.20 (472.93)
 L2Reg-100-0.1       0.797 (0.007)   0.804 (0.004)    0.743 (0.027)     0.614 (0.012)     0.559 (0.032)    249.46 (19.51)
 L2Reg-100-1.0       0.792 (0.006)   0.807 (0.004)    0.783 (0.008)     0.642 (0.005)     0.619 (0.010)    247.66 (6.89)
 L2Reg-100-10.0      0.780 (0.010)   0.799 (0.006)    0.778 (0.013)     0.641 (0.004)     0.616 (0.008)    247.39 (7.83)
 EWC-100-0.1         0.726 (0.009)   0.744 (0.012)    0.719 (0.018)     0.625 (0.010)     0.601 (0.013)    884.09 (12.90)
 EWC-100-1.0         0.735 (0.004)   0.753 (0.007)    0.734 (0.007)     0.648 (0.003)     0.628 (0.007)    714.14 (61.72)
 EWC-100-10.0        0.716 (0.004)   0.731 (0.007)    0.718 (0.006)     0.652 (0.006)     0.636 (0.015)    719.71 (66.79)



                                                          36
