Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L OWER B OUNDS ON THE D EPTH OF I NTEGRAL R E LU
N EURAL N ETWORKS VIA L ATTICE P OLYTOPES
 Christian Haase
 Freie Universität Berlin, Germany
 haase@math.fu-berlin.de

 Christoph Hertrich
 London School of Economics and Political Science, UK
 c.hertrich@lse.ac.uk

 Georg Loho
 University of Twente, Netherlands
 g.loho@utwente.nl



                                           A BSTRACT

         We prove that the set of functions representable by ReLU neural networks with
         integer weights strictly increases with the network depth while allowing arbitrary
         width. More precisely, we show that dlog2 (n)e hidden layers are indeed neces-
         sary to compute the maximum of n numbers, matching known upper bounds. Our
         results are based on the known duality between neural networks and Newton poly-
         topes via tropical geometry. The integrality assumption implies that these Newton
         polytopes are lattice polytopes. Then, our depth lower bounds follow from a parity
         argument on the normalized volume of faces of such polytopes.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Classical results in the area of understanding the expressivity of neural networks are so-called uni-
versal approximation theorems (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik, 1991). They state that shallow neural net-
works are already capable of approximately representing every continuous function on a bounded
domain. However, in order to gain a complete understanding of what is going on in modern neural
networks, we would also like to answer the following question: what is the precise set of functions
we can compute exactly with neural networks of a certain depth? For instance, insights about exact
representability have recently boosted our understanding of the computational complexity to train
neural networks in terms of both, algorithms (Arora et al., 2018; Khalife & Basu, 2022) and hardness
results (Goel et al., 2021; Froese et al., 2022; Bertschinger et al., 2022).
Arguably, the most prominent activation function nowadays is the rectified linear unit (ReLU) (Glo-
rot et al., 2011; Goodfellow et al., 2016). While its popularity is primarily fueled by intuition and
empirical success, replacing previously used smooth activation functions like sigmoids with ReLUs
has some interesting implications from a mathematical perspective: suddenly methods from discrete
geometry studying piecewise linear functions and polytopes play a crucial role in understanding
neural networks (Arora et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Hertrich et al., 2021) supplementing the
traditionally dominant analytical point of view.
A fundamental result in this direction is by Arora et al. (2018), who show that a function is repre-
sentable by a ReLU neural network if and only if it is continuous and piecewise linear (CPWL).
Moreover, their proof implies that dlog2 (n + 1)e many hidden layers are sufficient to represent ev-
ery CPWL function with n-dimensional input. A natural follow-up question is the following: is this
logarithmic number of layers actually necessary or can shallower neural networks already represent
all CPWL functions?


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hertrich et al. (2021) conjecture that the former alternative is true. More precisely, if ReLUn (k) de-
notes the set of CPWL functions defined on Rn and computable with k hidden layers, the conjecture
can be formulated as follows:
Conjecture 1 (Hertrich et al. (2021)). ReLUn (k − 1) ( ReLUn (k) for all k ≤ dlog2 (n + 1)e.
Note that ReLUn (dlog2 (n + 1)e) is the entire set of CPWL functions defined on Rn by the result of
Arora et al. (2018).
While Hertrich et al. (2021) provide some evidence for their conjecture, it remains open for every
input dimension n ≥ 4. Even more drastically, there is not a single CPWL function known for
which one can prove that two hidden layers are not sufficient to represent it. Even for a function as
simple as max{0, x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 }, it is unknown whether two hidden layers are sufficient.
In fact, max{0, x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 } is not just an arbitrary example. Based on a result by Wang & Sun
(2005), Hertrich et al. (2021) show that their conjecture is equivalent to the following statement.
Conjecture 2 (Hertrich et al. (2021)). For n = 2k , the function max{0, x1 , . . . , xn } is not contained
in ReLUn (k).
This reformulation gives rise to interesting interpretations in terms of two elements commonly used
in practical neural network architectures: max-pooling and maxout. Max-pooling units are used be-
tween (ReLU or other) layers and simply output the maximum of several inputs (that is, “pool” them
together). They do not contain trainable parameters themselves. In contrast, maxout networks are
an alternative to (and in fact a generalization of) ReLU networks. Each neuron in a maxout network
outputs the maximum of several (trainable) affine combinations of the outputs in the previous layer,
in contrast to comparing a single affine combination with zero as in the ReLU case.
Thus, the conjecture would imply that one needs in fact logarithmically many ReLU layers to replace
a max-pooling unit or a maxout layer, being a theoretical justification that these elements are indeed
more powerful than pure ReLU networks.

1.1   O UR R ESULTS

In this paper we prove that the conjecture by Hertrich et al. (2021) is true for all n ∈ N under the
additional assumption that all weights in the neural network are restricted to be integral. In other
words, if ReLUZn (k) is the set of functions defined on Rn representable with k hidden layers and
only integer weights, we show the following.
Theorem 3. For n = 2k , the function max{0, x1 , . . . , xn } is not contained in ReLUZn (k).
Proving Theorem 3 is our main contribution. The overall strategy is highlighted in Section 1.2. We
put all puzzle pieces together and provide a formal proof in Section 4.
The arguments in Hertrich et al. (2021) can be adapted to show that the equivalence between the two
conjectures is also valid in the integer case. Thus, we obtain that adding more layers to an integral
neural network indeed increases the set of representable functions up to a logarithmic number of
layers. A formal proof can be found in Section 4.
Corollary 4. ReLUZn (k − 1) ( ReLUZn (k) for all k ≤ dlog2 (n + 1)e.
To the best of our knowledge, our result is the first non-constant (namely logarithmic) lower bound
on the depth of ReLU neural networks without any restriction on the width. Without the integrality
assumption, the best known lower bound remains two hidden layers Mukherjee & Basu (2017),
which is already valid for the simple function max{0, x1 , x2 }.
While the integrality assumption is rather implausible for practical neural network applications
where weights are usually tuned by gradient descent, from a perspective of analyzing the theoretical
expressivity, the assumption is arguably plausible. To see this, suppose a ReLU network represents
the function max{0, x1 , . . . , xn }. Then every fractional weight must either cancel out or add up
to some integers with other fractional weights, because every linear piece in the final function has
only integer coefficients. Hence, it makes sense to assume that no fractional weights exist in the
first place. However, unfortunately, this intuition cannot easily be turned into a proof because it
might happen that combinations of fractional weights yield integer coefficients which could not be
achieved without fractional weights.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


1.2   O UTLINE OF THE A RGUMENT

The first ingredient of our proof is to apply previous work about connections between neural net-
works and tropical geometry, initiated by Zhang et al. (2018). Every CPWL function can be decom-
posed as a difference of two convex CPWL functions. Convex CPWL functions admit a neat duality
to certain polytopes, known as Newton polytopes in tropical geometry. Given any neural network,
this duality makes it possible to construct a pair of Newton polytopes which uniquely determines
the CPWL function represented by the neural network. These Newton polytopes are constructed,
layer by layer, from points by alternatingly taking Minkowski sums and convex hulls. The number
of alternations corresponds to the depth of the neural network. Thus, analyzing the set of func-
tions representable by neural networks with a certain depth is equivalent to understanding which
polytopes can be constructed in this manner with a certain number of alternations (Theorem 8).
Having translated the problem into the world of polytopes, the second ingredient is to gain a better
understanding of the two operations involved in the construction of these polytopes: Minkowski
sums and convex hulls. We show for each of the two operations that the result can be subdivided into
polytopes of easier structure: For the Minkowski sum of two polytopes, each cell in the subdivision
is an affine product of faces of the original polytopes, that is, a polytope which is affinely equivalent
to a Cartesian product (Proposition 9). For the convex hull of two polytopes, each cell is a join of two
faces of the original polytopes, that is, a convex hull of two faces whose affine hulls are skew to each
other, which means that they do not intersect and do not have parallel directions (Proposition 10).
Finally, with these subdivisions at hand, our third ingredient is the volume of these polytopes.
Thanks to our integrality assumption, all coordinates of all vertices of the relevant polytopes are
integral, that is, these polytopes are lattice polytopes. For lattice polytopes, one can define the
so-called normalized volume (Section 2.3). This is a scaled version of the Euclidean volume with
scaling factor depending on the affine hull of the polytope. It is constructed in such a way that it
is integral for all lattice polytopes. Using the previously obtained subdivisions, we show that the
normalized volume of a face of dimension at least 2k of a polytope corresponding to a neural net-
work with at most k hidden layers has always even normalized volume (Theorem 16). This implies
that not all lattice polytopes can be constructed this way. Using again the tropical geometry inspired
duality between polytopes and functions (Theorem 8), we translate this result back to the world of
CPWL functions computed by neural networks and obtain that k hidden layers are not sufficient to
compute max{0, x1 , . . . , x2k }, proving Theorem 3.

1.3   B EYOND I NTEGRAL W EIGHTS

Given the integrality assumption, a natural thought is whether one can simply generalize our results
to rational weights by multiplying all weights of the neural network with the common denomina-
tor. Unfortunately this does not work. Our proof excludes that an integral ReLU network with k
hidden layers can compute max{0, x1 , . . . , x2k }, but it does not exclude the possibility to compute
2 · max{0, x1 , . . . , x2k } with integral weights. In particular, dividing the weights of the output layer
by two might result in a half-integral neural network computing max{0, x1 , . . . , x2k }.
In order to tackle the conjecture in full generality, that is, for arbitrary weights, arguing via the parity
of volumes seems not to be sufficient. The parity argument is inherently discrete and suffers from the
previously described issue. Nevertheless, we are convinced that the techniques of this paper do in
fact pave the way towards resolving the conjecture in full generality. In particular, the subdivisions
constructed in Section 3 are valid for arbitrary polytopes and not only for lattice polytopes. Hence,
it is conceivable that one can replace the parity of normalized volumes with a different invariant
which, applied to the subdivisions, yields a general depth-separation for the non-integer case.

1.4   F URTHER R ELATIONS TO P REVIOUS W ORK

Similar to our integrality assumption, also Hertrich et al. (2021) use an additional assumption and
prove their conjecture in a special case for so-called H-conforming neural networks. Let us note that
the two assumptions are incomparable: there are H-conforming networks with non-integral weights
as well as integral neural networks which are not H-conforming.
Our results are related to (but conceptually different from) so-called trade-off results between depth
and width, showing that a slight decrease of depth can exponentially increase the required width to


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


maintain the same (exact or approximate) expressive power. Telgarsky (2015; 2016) proved the first
results of this type and Eldan & Shamir (2016) even proved an exponential separation between two
and three layers. Lots of other improvements and related results have been established (Arora et al.,
2018; Daniely, 2017; Hanin, 2019; Hanin & Sellke, 2017; Liang & Srikant, 2017; Nguyen et al.,
2018; Raghu et al., 2017; Safran & Shamir, 2017; Safran et al., 2019; Vardi et al., 2021; Yarotsky,
2017). In contrast, we focus on exact representations, where we show an even more drastic trade-off:
decreasing the depth from logarithmic to sublogarithmic yields that no finite width is sufficient at all
any more.
The duality between CPWL functions computed by neural networks and Newton polytopes inspired
by tropical geometry has been used in several other works about neural networks before (Maragos
et al., 2021), for example to analyze the shape of decision boundaries (Alfarra et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2018) or to count and bound the number of linear pieces (Charisopoulos & Maragos, 2018;
Hertrich et al., 2021; Montúfar et al., 2022).

2     P RELIMINARIES
We write [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} for the set of natural numbers up to n (without zero).

2.1   R E LU N EURAL N ETWORKS

For any n ∈ N, let σ : Rn → Rn be the component-wise rectifier function
                        σ(x) = (max{0, x1 }, max{0, x2 }, . . . , max{0, xn }).

For any number of hidden layers k ∈ N, a (k + 1)-layer feedforward neural network with rectified
linear units (ReLU neural network) is given by k + 1 affine transformations T (`) : Rn`−1 → Rn` ,
x 7→ A(`) x + b(`) , for ` ∈ [k + 1]. It is said to compute or represent the function f : Rn0 → Rnk+1
given by
                           f = T (k+1) ◦ σ ◦ T (k) ◦ σ ◦ · · · ◦ T (2) ◦ σ ◦ T (1) .
The matrices A(`) ∈ Rn` ×n`−1 are called the weights and the vectors b(`) ∈ Rn` are the biases of
the `-th layer. The number n` ∈ N is called the width of the `-th layer. The maximum width of all
hidden layers max`∈[k] n` is called the width of the neural network. Further, we say that the neural
                                    Pk
network has depth k + 1 and size `=1 n` .
Often, neural networks are represented as layered, directed, acyclic graphs where each dimension
of each layer (including input layer ` = 0 and output layer ` = k + 1) is one vertex, weights are
arc labels, and biases are node labels. The vertices of this graph are called neurons. Each neuron
computes an affine transformation of the outputs of their predecessors, applies the ReLU function
on top of that, and outputs the result.

2.2   P OLYTOPES & L ATTICES

We give a brief overview of necessary notions for polytopes and lattices and refer to (Schrijver, 1986,
Ch. 4,7-9) for further reading. For two arbitrary sets X, Y ⊆ Rn , one can define their Minkowski sum
X + Y = {x + y | x ∈ X, y ∈ Y }. By Span(X) we denote the usual linear hull of the set X, that
is, the smallest linear subspace containing X. The affine hull Aff(X) is the smallest affine subspace
containing X. Finally, with a set X we associate a linear space Lin(X) = Span {x − y | x, y ∈ X},
which is Aff(X) shifted to the origin. Note that Lin(X) is usually a strict subspace of Span(X),
unless Aff(X) contains the origin, in which case all three notions coincide.
For a set X ⊂ Rn , its convex hull is
                         (                                                        )
                           X                                              X
            conv(X) =          λs s | S ⊆ X finite, λs ≥ 0 for all s ∈ S,   λs = 1 .
                            s∈S                                             s∈S
                                                        n                  n
                      > hull of a finite set V ⊂ R .nGiven a polytope P ⊂ R , a face of P is a set
A polytope is the convex
of the form arg min c x | x ∈ P for some c ∈ R ; a face of a polytope is again a polytope. The
dimension dim(P ) of P is the dimension of Lin(P ). By convention, we also call the empty set a


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: A regular subdivision: the quadrilateral in R2 is subdivided into six full-dimensional cells
which arise as projections of lower faces of the convex hull of the lifted points in R3 .


face of P of dimension −1. A face of dimension 0 is a vertex and a face of dimension dim(P ) − 1
is a facet. If all vertices belong to Qn , we call P rational; even more, P is a lattice polytope if all
its vertices are integral, that means they lie in Zn .
An important example of a (lattice) polytope is the simplex ∆n0 = conv{0, e1 , e2 , . . . , en } ⊆ Rn
spanned by the origin and all n standard basis vectors.
Finally, we define (regular polyhedral) subdivisions of a polytope. Let P̃ ⊂ Rn+1 be a polytope and
let P ⊂ Rn be its image under the projection proj[n] : Rn+1 → Rn forgetting the last coordinate.
A lower face of P̃ is a set of minimizers with respect to a linear objective (c> , 1) ∈ Rn × R. The
projection of the lower faces of P̃ to P ⊂ Rn forms a subdivision of P , that is, a collection of
polytopes which intersect in common faces and cover P . An example of a subdivision of a polytope
in the plane is given in Figure 1.

A lattice is a subset of Rn of the form
                                          L = {B · z | z ∈ Zp }
for some matrix B ∈ Rn×p with linearly independent columns. In this case, we call the columns
b(1) , . . . , b(p) of B a lattice basis. Every element in L can be written uniquely as a linear combination
of b(1) , . . . , b(p) with integer coefficients. A choice of lattice basis identifies L with Zp .
The classic example of a lattice is Zn itself. In this paper, we will only work with lattices that arise
as
                                       {x ∈ Zn | A · x = 0} ,
for some A ∈ Qq×n , that is, the intersection of Zn with a rational subspace of Rn .
For example, the vectors 21 , 12 form a basis of R2 as a vector space, but they do not form a lattice


basis of Z2 . Instead, they generate the smaller lattice {x ∈ Z2 | 3 divides x1 + x2 }. Choosing two
bases for the same lattice yields a change of bases matrix with integral entries whose inverse is also
integral. It must therefore have determinant ±1.
We will mainly deal with affine lattices, that is, sets of the form K = L + v where L ⊂ Rn is a
lattice and v ∈ Rn . Then, b0 , . . . , br ∈ K form an affine lattice basis if b1 − b0 , . . . , br − b0 is a
(linear) lattice basis of the linear lattice L = K − K parallel to L, that is, every element of K is a
unique affine combination of b0 , . . . , br with integral coefficients.

2.3   N ORMALIZED VOLUME

The main tool in our proof is the normalized volume of faces of (Newton) polytopes. We measure the
volume of a (possibly lower dimensional) rational polytope P ⊂ Rn inside its affine hull Aff(P ).
For this, we choose a lattice basis of Lin(P ) ∩ Zn inside the linear space Lin(P ) parallel to Aff(P ).
Since P is a rational polytope, this lattice basis gives rise to a linear transform from Lin(P ) onto Rr
(r = dim P ) by mapping the lattice basis vectors to the standard unit vectors. Now, the normalized
volume Vol(P ) of P is r! times the Euclidean volume of its image under this transformation. The
scaling factor r! is chosen so that, for each n ≥ 1, the normalized volume of the simplex ∆n0 is one.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              2             1             4
                                                       P ×Q                      P +Q
 2              1                                                    P
            1                                                                          Q
      1                     4

Figure 2: Some lattice segments and lattice           Figure 3: The normalized volume of an affine
polygons with their normalized volumes. Note          product of P and Q can be calculated as the
that the normalized volume of a lattice poly-         volume of the Cartesian product times the inte-
tope differs from its Euclidean volume as it is       gral absolute value of the determinant of the
measured with respect to the induced lattice in       linear map sending P × Q  (left) to P +  Q
its affine hull.                                      (right): Vol(P + Q) = 1+1  1  · det −1 2 1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                    ·
                                                      Vol(P ) · Vol(Q).


The fact that any two lattice bases differ by an integral matrix with integral inverse (and hence de-
terminant ±1) ensures that this is well defined. For full-dimensional polytopes, this yields just a
scaled version of the Euclidean volume. But for lower-dimensional polytopes, our normalization
with respect to the lattice differs from the Euclidean normalization (cf. Figure 2). For us, the cru-
cial property is that every lattice polytope has integral volume (see, e.g., (Beck & Robins, 2007,
§3.5,§5.4)). This will allow us to argue using divisibility properties of volumes.
We give visualizations of the following fundamental statements and defer the actual proofs to the
appendix.
Lemma 5. Let P, Q ⊂ Rn be two lattice polytopes with i = dim(P ) and j = dim(Q). If we have
dim(P + Q) = dim(P ) + dim(Q) then

                         i+j
                                  · Vol(P ) · Vol(Q) divides Vol(P + Q) .
                            i

If P and Q fulfill the assumptions of Lemma 5, then we call P + Q an affine product of P and Q.
This is equivalent to the definition given in the introduction; we visualize the Cartesian product
P × Q for comparison in Figure 3.
Lemma 6. Let P, Q ⊂ Rn be two lattice polytopes with i = dim(P ) and j = dim(Q). If
dim(conv(P ∪ Q)) = dim(P ) + dim(Q) + 1 then
                          Vol(P ) · Vol(Q) divides Vol(conv(P ∪ Q)) .

If P and Q fulfill the assumptions of Lemma 6, then we call conv(P ∪ Q) the join of P and Q,
compare Figure 4. This definition is equivalent with the one given in the introduction.

2.4       N EWTON P OLYTOPES AND N EURAL N ETWORKS

The first ingredient to prove our main result is to use a previously discovered duality between CPWL
functions and polytopes inspired by tropical geometry in order to translate the problem into the world
of polytopes.
As a first step, let us observe that we may restrict ourselves to neural networks without biases. For
this, we say a function g : Rn → Rm is positively homogeneous if it satisfies g(λx) = λg(x) for
all λ ≥ 0.
Lemma 7 (Hertrich et al. (2021)). If a neural network represents a positively homogeneous function,
then the same neural network with all bias parameters b(`) set to zero represents exactly the same
function.

Since max{0, x1 , . . . , x2k } is positively homogeneous, this implies that we can focus on neural
networks without biases in order to prove Theorem 3. Functions computed by such neural networks
are always positively homogeneous.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 P ?Q
                                                            P                      Q


Figure 4: The normalized volume of a join of P and Q can be calculated as the product of the
normalized volumes of P and Q times the integral absolute value of the determinant
                                                                                 of the linear map
                                                                        −2 0 0
sending P ? Q (left) to conv(P ∪Q) (right): Vol(conv(P ∪Q)) = det 2 1 −1 ·Vol(P )·Vol(Q),
                                                                         0 1 1
where P ? Q denotes an embedding of P and Q in orthogonal subspaces with distance 1.


Let f be a positively homogeneous, convex CPWL function. Convexity implies that we can
write f as the maximum of its linear pieces, that is, f (x) = max{a>                    >
                                                                          1 x, . . . , ap x}. The Newton
polytope Pf corresponding to f is defined as the convex hull of the coefficient vectors, that is,
Pf = conv{a1 , . . . , ap }. It turns out that the two basic operations + and max (applied pointwise)
on functions translate nicely to Minkowski sum and convex hull for the corresponding Newton poly-
topes: Pf +g = Pf + Pg and Pmax{f,g} = conv{Pf ∪ Pg }, compare Zhang et al. (2018). Since
a neural network is basically an alternation of affine transformations (that is, weighted sums) and
maxima computations, this motivates the following definition of classes Pk of polytopes which intu-
itively correspond to integral neural networks with k hidden layers. Note that the class Pk contains
polytopes of different dimensions.
We begin with P0 , the set of lattice points. For k ≥ 0, we define
                          0
                         Pk+1 = {conv(Q1 ∪ Q2 ) | Q1 , Q2 ∈ Pk } ,
                                                                     0
                                                                                                     (1)
                         Pk+1 = Q1 + · · · + Q` | Q1 , . . . , Q` ∈ Pk+1      .

The correspondence of Pk to a neural network with k hidden layers can be made formal by the
following. The difference in the theorem accounts for the fact that f is not necessarily convex, and
even if it is, intermediate functions computed by the neural network might be non-convex.
Theorem 8. A positively homogeneous CPWL function f can be represented by an integral k-
hidden-layer neural network if and only if f = g − h for two convex, positively homogeneous CPWL
functions g and h with Pg , Ph ∈ Pk .

A proof of the same theorem for the non-integral case can be found in Hertrich (2022, Thm. 3.35).
A careful inspection of the proof therein reveals that it carries over to the integral case. For the sake
of completeness, we provide a proof in the appendix.

3   S UBDIVIDING M INKOWSKI S UMS AND C ONVEX H ULLS
The purpose of this section is to develop the main geometric tool of our proof: subdividing
Minkowski sums and unions into affine products and joins, respectively. More precisely, we show
the following two statements. They are valid for general polytopes and not only for lattice polytopes.
Proposition 9. For two polytopes P and Q in Rn , there exists a subdivision of P + Q such that
each full-dimensional cell is an affine product of a face of P and a face of Q.
Proposition 10. For two polytopes P and Q in Rn , there exists a subdivision of conv{P ∪ Q} such
that each full-dimensional cell is a join of a face of P and a face of Q.

The strategy to prove these statements is to lift the polytopes P and Q by one dimension to Rn+1 in
a generic way, perform the respective operation (Minkowski sum or convex hull) in this space, and
obtain the subdivision by projecting the lower faces of the resulting polytope in Rn+1 back to Rn .


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


More precisely, given an α ∈ Rn and β ∈ R, we define
                P 0 := {(p, 0) | p ∈ P }          Qα,β := (q, α> q + β) | q ∈ Q

                                            and                                        .

Note that the projections proj[n] (P 0 ) and proj[n] (Qα,β ) onto the first n coordinates result in P and
Q, respectively. Moreover, we obtain subdivisions of P +Q and conv{P ∪Q} by projecting down the
lower faces of P 0 + Qα,β and conv{P 0 ∪ Qα,β }, respectively, to the first n coordinates. It remains
to show that the parameters can be chosen so that the subdivisions have the desired properties.
To this end, we introduce the following notation for faces of the respective polytopes. For each
c ∈ Rn \ {0}, let
      Fc0 = arg min (c> , 1)z | z ∈ P 0    and Gα,β    = arg min (c> , 1)z | z ∈ Qα,β ,

                                                   c

as well as
                                                                             >
             Fc = arg min{c> x | x ∈ P }     and Gc = arg min{(c + α) x | x ∈ Q} .
Observe that Fc = proj[n] (Fc0 ) and Gc = proj[n] (Gα,β
                                                    c ).

With this, we can finally specify what we mean by “choosing α and β generically”: it means that
the linear and affine hulls of Fc and Gc intersect as little as possible.
Lemma 11. One can choose α and β such that Lin Fc ∩ Lin Gc = {0} and Aff Fc0 ∩ Aff Gα,β
                                                                                    c   =∅
for every c ∈ Rn \ {0}.

Using the lemma about generic choices of α and β, we have the tool to prove the existence of the
desired subdivisions. The actual proofs are given in the appendix.

4     U SING N ORMALIZED VOLUME TO P ROVE D EPTH L OWER B OUNDS
In this section we complete our proof by applying a parity argument on the normalized volume of
cells in the subdivisions constructed in the previous section.
Let Qk be the set of lattice polytopes P with the following property: for every face F of P with
dim(F ) ≥ 2k we have that Vol(F ) is even. Note that the class Qk contains polytopes of different
dimensions and, in particular, all lattice polytopes of dimension smaller than 2k .
Our plan to prove Theorem 3 is as follows. We first show that the classes Qk are closed under
Minkowski addition and that taking unions of convex hulls of polytopes in Qk always gives a poly-
tope in Qk+1 . Using this, induction guarantees that Pk ⊆ Qk . We then show that adding the simplex
   k
∆20 to a polytope in Qk gives a polytope which is never contained in Qk . Combining this separation
result with Pk ⊆ Qk and Theorem 8 allows us to prove Theorem 3. The general intuition behind
most of the proofs in this section is to use the subdivisions constructed in the previous section and
argue about the volume of each cell in the subdivision separately, using the lemmas of Section 2.3.

4.1   C LOSEDNESS OF Q

Proposition 12. For P, Q ∈ Qk , we have that P + Q ∈ Qk .

The proof of Proposition 12 is based on the following lemma.
Lemma 13. If d := dim(P + Q) ≥ 2k , then Vol(P + Q) is even.

Proof of Lemma 13. By Proposition 9, it follows that P + Q can be subdivided such that each full-
dimensional cell C in the subdivision is an affine product of two faces F and G of P and Q, re-
spectively. Let i  := dim(F ) and j := dim(G), then d = i + j. By Lemma 5, it follows that
Vol(C) = z · di · Vol(F ) · Vol(G) for some z ∈ Z. We argue now that this quantity is always
even. If either i or j is at least 2k , then Vol(F ) or Vol(G) is even, respectively, because P and Q
are contained in Qk . Otherwise, d = i + j ≥ 2k , but i, j < 2k . In this case, di is always even,

which is a direct consequence of Lucas’ theorem (Lucas, 1878). In any case, for every cell C in the
subdivision, Vol(C) is even. Therefore, also the total volume of P + Q is even.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Proposition 12. To prove the proposition, we need to ensure that not only P + Q, but every
face of P + Q with dimension at least 2k has even normalized volume. If F is such a face, then, by
basic properties of the Minkowski sum, it is the Minkowski sum of two faces P 0 and Q0 of P and Q,
respectively. Since Qk is closed under taking faces, it follows that P 0 , Q0 ∈ Qk . Hence, applying
Lemma 13 to P 0 and Q0 , it follows that F has even volume. Doing so for all faces F with dimension
at least 2k completes the proof.

Proposition 14. For P, Q ∈ Qk , we have that conv(P ∪ Q) ∈ Qk+1 .

Again, the heart of the proof lies in the following lemma.
Lemma 15. If d := dim(conv(P ∪ Q)) ≥ 2k+1 , then Vol(conv(P ∪ Q)) is even.

We defer the proofs of Lemma 15 and Proposition 14 and to the Appendix as they are analogous to
those of Proposition 12 and Lemma 13 building on the respective claims for convex hulls (Lemma 6
and Proposition 10) instead of Minkowski sums.
Theorem 16. For all k ∈ N it is true that Pk ⊆ Qk .

Proof. We prove this statement by induction on k. The class P0 contains only points, so no polytope
in P0 has a face of dimension at least 20 = 1. Therefore, it trivially follows that P0 ⊆ Q0 , settling
the induction start. The induction step follows by applying Proposition 12 and Proposition 14 to the
definition (1) of the classes Pk .

4.2   T HE ODD ONE OUT

The final ingredient for Theorem 3 is to show how ∆n0 breaks the structure of Qk .
Proposition 17. If P ∈ Qk is a polytope in Rn with n = 2k , then P + ∆n0 ∈
                                                                         / Qk .

Proof. Applying Proposition 9 to P and Q = ∆n0 , we obtain that P + ∆n0 can be subdivided such
that each full-dimensional cell C is an affine product of a face F of P and a face G of ∆n0 .
As in the proof of Lemma 13, it follows that all these cells have even volume, with one exception:
if dim F = 0 and dim G = 2k . Revisiting the proof of Proposition 9 shows that there exists
exactly one such cell C in the subdivision. This cell is a translated version of ∆n0 , so it has volume
Vol(C) = 1.
Since all cells in the subdivision have even volume except for one cell with odd volume, we obtain
that Vol(P + ∆n0 ) is odd. Hence, P + ∆n0 cannot be contained in Qk .

Theorem 3. For n = 2k , the function max{0, x1 , . . . , xn } is not contained in ReLUZn (k).

Proof. Suppose for the sake of a contradiction that there is a neural network with integer weights
and k hidden layers computing f (x) = max{0, x1 , . . . , xn }. Since the Newton polytope of f is
Pf = ∆n0 , Theorem 8 yields the existence of two polytopes P, Q ∈ Pk in Rn with P + ∆n0 = Q.
By Theorem 16 we obtain P, Q ∈ Qk . This is a contradiction to Proposition 17.

From this we conclude that the set of functions representable with integral ReLU neural networks
strictly increases when adding more layers.
Corollary 4. ReLUZn (k − 1) ( ReLUZn (k) for all k ≤ dlog2 (n + 1)e.

Proof. Note that k ≤ dlog2 (n + 1)e implies 2k−1 ≤ n. Let f : Rn → R be the function f (x) =
                                                   / ReLUZn (k − 1). In contrast, it is not difficult
max{0, x1 , . . . , x2k−1 }. By Theorem 3 we get f ∈
to see that k − 1 hidden layers with integer weights are sufficient to compute max{x1 , . . . , x2k−1 },
compare for example Zhang et al. (2018); Hertrich (2022). Appending a single ReLU neuron to the
output of this network implies f ∈ ReLUZn (k).


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Christian Haase has been supported by the German Science Foundation (DFG) under grant
HA 4383/8-1.
Christoph Hertrich is supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement ScaleOpt–757481).

R EFERENCES
Motasem Alfarra, Adel Bibi, Hasan Hammoud, Mohamed Gaafar, and Bernard Ghanem. On the de-
 cision boundaries of deep neural networks: A tropical geometry perspective. arXiv:2002.08838,
 2020.
Raman Arora, Amitabh Basu, Poorya Mianjy, and Anirbit Mukherjee. Understanding deep neural
  networks with rectified linear units. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2018.
Matthias Beck and Sinai Robins. Computing the continuous discretely. Undergraduate Texts in
 Mathematics. Springer, New York, 2007. ISBN 978-0-387-29139-0; 0-387-29139-3. Integer-
 point enumeration in polyhedra.
Daniel Bertschinger, Christoph Hertrich, Paul Jungeblut, Tillmann Miltzow, and Simon Weber.
  Training fully connected neural networks is ∃R-complete. arXiv:2204.01368, 2022.
Vasileios Charisopoulos and Petros Maragos. A tropical approach to neural networks with piecewise
  linear activations. arXiv:1805.08749, 2018.
George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of control,
  signals and systems, 2(4):303–314, 1989.
Amit Daniely. Depth separation for neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 690–
 696. PMLR, 2017.
Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Conference
  on Learning Theory (COLT), 2016.
Vincent Froese, Christoph Hertrich, and Rolf Niedermeier. The computational complexity of ReLU
  network training parameterized by data dimensionality. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
  search, 74:1775–1790, 2022.
Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2011.
Surbhi Goel, Adam R. Klivans, Pasin Manurangsi, and Daniel Reichman. Tight hardness results for
  training depth-2 ReLU networks. In 12th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Confer-
  ence (ITCS), 2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. http:
  //www.deeplearningbook.org.
Boris Hanin. Universal function approximation by deep neural nets with bounded width and ReLU
  activations. Mathematics, 7(10):992, 2019.
Boris Hanin and Mark Sellke. Approximating continuous functions by ReLU nets of minimal width.
  arXiv:1710.11278, 2017.
Christoph Hertrich. Facets of neural network complexity. Doctoral thesis, Technische Universität
  Berlin, Berlin, 2022. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-15271.
Christoph Hertrich, Amitabh Basu, Marco Di Summa, and Martin Skutella. Towards lower bounds
  on the depth of ReLU neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kurt Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. Neural networks, 4
  (2):251–257, 1991.

Sammy Khalife and Amitabh Basu. Neural networks with linear threshold activations: structure and
  algorithms. In International Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimiza-
  tion, pp. 347–360. Springer, 2022.

Shiyu Liang and Rayadurgam Srikant. Why deep neural networks for function approximation? In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Edouard Lucas. Théorie des fonctions numériques simplement périodiques. American Journal of
  Mathematics, pp. 289–321, 1878.

Petros Maragos, Vasileios Charisopoulos, and Emmanouil Theodosis. Tropical geometry and ma-
  chine learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):728–755, 2021.

Guido Montúfar, Yue Ren, and Leon Zhang. Sharp bounds for the number of regions of maxout
  networks and vertices of minkowski sums. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry, 6
  (4):618–649, 2022.

Anirbit Mukherjee and Amitabh Basu. Lower bounds over boolean inputs for deep neural networks
  with ReLU gates. arXiv:1711.03073, 2017.

Quynh Nguyen, Mahesh Chandra Mukkamala, and Matthias Hein. Neural networks should be wide
  enough to learn disconnected decision regions. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2018.

Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl Dickstein. On the
 expressive power of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), 2017.

Itay Safran and Ohad Shamir. Depth-width tradeoffs in approximating natural functions with neural
   networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.

Itay Safran, Ronen Eldan, and Ohad Shamir. Depth separations in neural networks: what is actually
   being separated? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2664–2666. PMLR, 2019.

Alexander Schrijver. Theory of Linear and Integer Programming. John Wiley and Sons, New York,
  1986.

Matus Telgarsky. Representation benefits of deep feedforward networks. arXiv:1509.08101, 2015.

Matus Telgarsky. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT),
 2016.

Gal Vardi, Daniel Reichman, Toniann Pitassi, and Ohad Shamir. Size and depth separation in ap-
  proximating benign functions with neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
  4195–4223. PMLR, 2021.

Shuning Wang and Xusheng Sun. Generalization of hinging hyperplanes. IEEE Transactions on
  Information Theory, 51(12):4425–4431, 2005.

Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep relu networks. Neural Networks, 94:
 103–114, 2017.

Liwen Zhang, Gregory Naitzat, and Lek-Heng Lim. Tropical geometry of deep neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    A DDITIONAL P ROOFS

Lemma 5. Let P, Q ⊂ Rn be two lattice polytopes with i = dim(P ) and j = dim(Q). If we have
dim(P + Q) = dim(P ) + dim(Q) then

                      i+j
                            · Vol(P ) · Vol(Q) divides Vol(P + Q) .
                       i

Proof. The assumption dim(P + Q) = dim(P ) + dim(Q) is equivalent to Lin(P ) ∩ Lin(Q) = {0}
so that there is an affine bijection f : Aff(P ) × Aff(Q) → Aff(P + Q) mapping lattice points to
lattice points. Thus, the volume of P +Q equals the volume of P ×Q times the (integral) determinant
of f (cf. Fig. 3).
Multiplicativity of Lebesgue measures together with our normalization yields
                                 Vol(P × Q)   Vol(P ) Vol(Q)
                                            =        ·       .
                                   (i + j)!     i!      j!


Lemma 6. Let P, Q ⊂ Rn be two lattice polytopes with i = dim(P ) and j = dim(Q). If
dim(conv(P ∪ Q)) = dim(P ) + dim(Q) + 1 then
                           Vol(P ) · Vol(Q) divides Vol(conv(P ∪ Q)) .

Proof. This is essentially the same proof, just replace the product P × Q by the join
                P ? Q := conv (P × {0} × {0} ∪ {0} × Q × {1}) ⊂ Rn × Rn × R .
(Cf. Fig. 4.)
Theorem 8. A positively homogeneous CPWL function f can be represented by an integral k-
hidden-layer neural network if and only if f = g − h for two convex, positively homogeneous CPWL
functions g and h with Pg , Ph ∈ Pk .

Proof. We use induction on k. The statement is clear for k = 0 because both properties apply
precisely to linear functions with integral coefficients, settling the induction start.
For the induction step, assume that the equivalence is true up to k − 1 hidden layers for some k ≥ 1.
We show that it is true for k hidden layers, too.
First, focus on the forward direction, that is, suppose f can be represented by an integral k-hidden-
layer neural network. Using Zhang et al. (2018, Lemma 6.2), f is the difference (tropical quotient)
of two tropical polynomials g and h. Moreover, by the same lemma, Pg and Ph arise as weighted
Minkowski sums of convex hulls of pairs of Newton polytopes associated with (k − 1)-hidden-layer
neural networks. By the induction hypothesis, these polytopes are contained in Pk−1 . By (1), this
implies that Pg and Ph are contained in Pk , where the fact that the weights of the neural network are
integers ensures that the resulting polytopes are lattice polytopes. This completes the first direction.
For the converse, suppose that f can be written as g − h with Pg , Ph ∈ Pk . Using Hertrich (2022,
Prop. 3.34) and (1), this implies that g and h can be written as sums of maxima of pairs of convex
CPWL functions with Newton polytopes in Pk−1 . By induction, these functions can be expressed
with (k − 1)-hidden-layer neural networks. The additional maxima and sum operations to obtain
g and h can be realized with a single additional hidden layer (compare Hertrich (2022, Prop. 2.2)).
The fact that Pk contains only lattice polytopes ensures that the resulting neural network has only
integral weights. Since g and h can be expressed with k hidden layers, the same holds true for f .
Lemma 11. One can choose α and β such that Lin Fc ∩ Lin Gc = {0} and Aff Fc0 ∩ Aff Gα,β
                                                                                    c   =∅
for every c ∈ Rn \ {0}.

Proof. We will show that the set of parameters α and β for which these conditions are not satisfied
is a measure-zero set.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let us first focus on the first statement. Suppose there is a direction c ∈ Rn \ {0} such that Lin Fc ∩
Lin Gc ) {0} is a subspace of dimension at least one. By the definitions of Fc and Gc we obtain
c ∈ (Lin Fc )⊥ as well as c + α ∈ (Lin Gc )⊥ . This implies α ∈ (Lin Fc )⊥ +(Lin Gc )⊥ = (Lin Fc ∩
Lin Gc )⊥ , which is a subspace of dimension at most n − 1, and thus a measure-zero set. Hence,
choosing α such that it is not contained in (Lin F ∩ Lin G)⊥ for all pairs of faces F and G with
Lin F ∩ Lin G ) {0} guarantees that the first condition holds.
For the second statement, we choose α satisfying the first statement and observe that for all
c ∈ Rn \ {0} we have Lin Fc ∩ Lin Gc = {0}. This implies |Aff Fc ∩ Aff Gc | ≤ 1 and hence
 Aff Fc0 ∩ Aff Gα,β
                 c  ≤ 1. Suppose there is a direction c ∈ Rn \ {0} for which Aff Fc0 ∩ Aff Gα,β
                                                                                            c   =
{(x, y)} ⊆ R × R. By the choice of our lifting function from Rn to Rn+1 , it follows that
               n

0 = y = α> x + β. Hence, choosing β such that 0 6= αx + β for all pairs of lower faces F 0
of P 0 and Gα,β of Qα,β with Aff F 0 ∩ Aff Gα,β = {(x, y)} guarantees that the second condition
holds.
Proposition 9. For two polytopes P and Q in Rn , there exists a subdivision of P + Q such that
each full-dimensional cell is an affine product of a face of P and a face of Q.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we can assume that P + Q is full-dimensional. Choose α and β
according to Lemma 11 and consider the subdivision induced by projecting down the lower faces of
P 0 + Qα,β . Let C be a cell of dimension n in the subdivision originating as a projection of a lower
face C̃ of P 0 + Qα,β , minimizing a direction (c> , 1) ∈ Rn × R. It follows from basic properties
of the Minkowski sum that C̃ = Fc0 + Gα,βc   and thus C = Fc + Gc . By Lemma 11 it follows that
n ≥ dim Fc + dim Gc ≥ dim C = n. Hence, C is an affine product of Fc and Gc .
Proposition 10. For two polytopes P and Q in Rn , there exists a subdivision of conv{P ∪ Q} such
that each full-dimensional cell is a join of a face of P and a face of Q.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we can assume that conv{P ∪ Q} is full-dimensional. Choose α
and β according to Lemma 11 and consider the subdivision induced by projecting down the lower
faces of conv{P 0 ∪ Qα,β }. Let C be a cell of dimension n in the subdivision originating as a
projection of a lower face C̃ of conv{P 0 ∪ Qα,β }, minimizing a direction (c> , 1) ∈ Rn × R. If C̃
contains only vertices from either P 0 or Qα,β , then C is a face of either P or Q and we are done.
Otherwise, it follows that C̃ = conv{Fc0 ∪ Gα,β
                                             c } and thus C = conv{Fc ∪ Gc }. By Lemma 11 it
follows that n = dim C = dim C̃ = dim Fc0 + dim Gα,β   c    + 1 = dim Fc + dim Gc + 1. Hence, C
is a join of Fc and Gc .
Proposition 14. For P, Q ∈ Qk , we have that conv(P ∪ Q) ∈ Qk+1 .
Lemma 15. If d := dim(conv(P ∪ Q)) ≥ 2k+1 , then Vol(conv(P ∪ Q)) is even.

Proof of Lemma 15. By Proposition 10 it follows that conv{P ∪ Q} can be subdivided such that
each full-dimensional cell C is a join of a face F of P and a face G of Q. Let i := dim(F ) and
j := dim(G), then d = i + j + 1. By Lemma 6, we get that Vol(C) = z · Vol(F ) · Vol(G) for some
z ∈ Z. Since d is at least 2k+1 , either i or j is at least 2k . Therefore, either Vol(F ) or Vol(G) must
be even because P and Q are contained in Qk . Therefore also Vol(C) is even. Doing so for all cells
in the subdivision implies that Vol(conv(P ∪ Q)) is even.

Proof of Proposition 14. Again, to prove the proposition, we need to ensure that not only the convex
hull conv(P ∪ Q) has even normalized volume, but each of its faces of dimension at least 2k+1 . If F
is such a face, let H be a hyperplane containing F . Observe that F is the convex hull of all vertices
of either P or Q that lie within H. In particular, F = conv(P 0 ∪ Q0 ), where P 0 and Q0 are the
(possibly empty) faces of P and Q defined via the hyperplane H, respectively. Since Qk is closed
under taking faces, it follows that P 0 , Q0 ∈ Qk . Hence, applying Lemma 15 to P 0 and Q0 yields that
F has even volume. Doing so for all faces F with dimension at least 2k completes the proof.


                                                   13
