Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


V IEW C O : D ISCOVERING T EXT-S UPERVISED S EGMEN -
TATION M ASKS VIA M ULTI -V IEW S EMANTIC C ONSIS -
TENCY

 Pengzhen Ren1 , Changlin Li2 , Hang Xu3 , Yi Zhu3 , Guangrun Wang4 , Jianzhuang Liu3 ,
  Xiaojun Chang2 , Xiaodan Liang1,5∗
 1
   Sun Yat-sen University 2 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
 3
   Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 University of Oxford 5 MBZUAI
 pzhren@foxmail.com, {changlinli.ai,wanggrun,xdliang328}@gmail.com
 {xu.hang,zhuyi36,liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com, xiaojun.chang@uts.edu.au

                                                     A BSTRACT
           Recently, great success has been made in learning visual representations from text
           supervision, facilitating the emergence of text-supervised semantic segmentation.
           However, existing works focus on pixel grouping and cross-modal semantic align-
           ment, while ignoring the correspondence among multiple augmented views of the
           same image. To overcome such limitation, we propose multi-View Consistent
           learning (ViewCo) for text-supervised semantic segmentation. Specifically, we
           first propose text-to-views consistency modeling to learn correspondence for mul-
           tiple views of the same input image. Additionally, we propose cross-view segmen-
           tation consistency modeling to address the ambiguity issue of text supervision by
           contrasting the segment features of Siamese visual encoders. The text-to-views
           consistency benefits the dense assignment of the visual features by encouraging
           different crops to align with the same text, while the cross-view segmentation con-
           sistency modeling provides additional self-supervision, overcoming the limitation
           of ambiguous text supervision for segmentation masks. Trained with large-scale
           image-text data, our model can directly segment objects of arbitrary categories in
           a zero-shot manner. Extensive experiments show that ViewCo outperforms state-
           of-the-art methods on average by up to 2.9%, 1.6%, and 2.4% mIoU on PASCAL
           VOC2012, PASCAL Context, and COCO, respectively. 1

1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, vision-language contrastive learning (Radford et al. (2021); Li et al. (2021a))
has attracted a lot of attention because it can obtain more generalized feature representa-
tion. And at the same time, it can also make use of abundant image-text pairs to avoid
labor-intensive annotation costs. Vision-language pre-training (VLP) models have exhibited
impressive potential in various visual (Xu et al. (2022); Mu
et al. (2021); Radford et al. (2021)) and multimodal (Wang                                                      image
et al. (2021b); Kim et al. (2021)) tasks, including text-
                                                                                                                      view
supervised semantic segmentation (Xu et al. (2022); Ghiasi
et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2021); Zabari & Hoshen (2021); Zhou                                                   text
et al. (2021a), which uses text instead of traditional dense la-
bels for supervision to achieve zero-shot semantic segmenta-
                                                                                                         ？
tion. It provides a feasible solution for learning segmentation All Hallows Bronx Parks Advocacy Day, all Halloween in parks
                                                                 and squares.
masks without mask annotation.
However, existing works with CLIP-based (Radford et al.                        Figure 1: Illustration of text descrip-
(2021)) segmentation (Xu et al. (2022; 2021); Zhou et al.                      tion ambiguity. Text descriptions are
(2021a)) mainly focus on pixel grouping or cross-modal se-                     highly abstract and difficult to be se-
mantic alignment. They have the following two obvious limi-                    mantically aligned with images. Cross-
tations: (i) the excessive strictness of image-text correspon-                 view semantic consistency modeling
                                                                               can effectively alleviate the effect of the
dence; and (ii) the ambiguity of text description. First, in
                                                                               text description ambiguity issue.
vanilla vision-language contrastive learning, each image-text
           Input      GroupViT       ViewCo    Ground Truth
    ∗
      Corresponding author.                                                                                                    view           pull toge
    1
      Code release: https://github.com/pzhren/ViewCo
                                                                                                                               text           push aw
                                                                                                                                 distance between diffe
                                                              1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             𝑢
                 𝑣


                                 𝑥            𝑢            𝑣          𝑥              𝑢         𝑣
                 Input                  (a) GroupViT                          (b) ViewCo
Figure 2: The consistent comparison of semantic segmentation results in multiple views of a “horse”. (a)
GroupViT: the semantic segmentations of different views are inconsistent. (b) ViewCo: the semantic segmen-
tations of different views are much more consistent. Here, x, u, and v represent the segmentation results on the
original image and views u, v, respectively.

pair is regarded as a unique positive pair, while all the other combinations are regarded as negative
ones. This image-text correspondence is actually too rigorous. In fact, one textual description may
correspond to different images. The excessive strictness is not conducive to the model learning high-
level cross-modal semantic correspondences. Therefore, more relaxed vision-language contrastive
learning needs to be considered. Second, the ambiguity of textual descriptions is also a key chal-
lenge. Compared with the traditional semantic segmentation pipeline that uses dense annotations
as supervision information (Touvron et al. (2021); Ren et al. (2022)), the CLIP-based segmentation
methods (Xu et al. (2022; 2021); Zhou et al. (2021a)) use text as supervision, which is easier to
access but more noisy and ambiguous.
This is mainly because compared with traditional segmentation annotations, text descriptions are
often more abstract and do not contain location information. Moreover, the background in the image
is usually ignored in the description. In some cases, the objects in the image do not even exist in
the text description (see Figure 1). Such ambiguity is common in the textual supervision in vision-
language pre-training. In the semantic segmentation task, the ambiguity of textual supervision makes
the segmented object-label correspondence very fragile. Therefore, Fully mining the information
carried by the dataset itself may need to be considered.
On the other hand, visual self-supervision (Caron et al. (2021); He et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2020a);
Zhou et al. (2021b)) has been widely used for visual pre-training. It includes two categories: re-
constructing masked images (He et al. (2022); Zhou et al. (2021b)) and multicrop image contrast
(Caron et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2020a)). For example, SLIP (Mu et al. (2021)) introduces con-
trastive learning of multicrop visual consistency for VLP. MaskCLIP (Dong et al. (2022)) introduces
a visual self-supervised task of reconstructing masked images. They utilize visual self-supervision
to provide more useful information for VLP models. However, the semantic consistency of multiple
views of an image in segmentation and cross-modal contrast have not received enough attention and
research.
Based on the above observations, in this paper, we explore the impact of multi-view semantic con-
sistency on the task of text-supervised semantic segmentation through visual self-supervision. To
this end, we propose multi-View Consistency learning (ViewCo), which aims at discovering text-
supervised segmentation masks via multi-view semantic consistency. Specifically, we propose text-
to-views consistency modeling to alleviate the excessive strictness of image-text correspondence in
vanilla vision-language contrastive learning. It enables the model to benefit from the dense assign-
ment of visual features by encouraging different crops to align with the same text. This relaxed
one-to-many contrast mechanism also facilitates the learning of multi-view consistent semantics,
enabling the model to acquire high-level cross-modal alignment capabilities. Moreover, as shown in
Figure 1, to alleviate the ambiguity issue of textual supervision, we propose cross-view segmenta-
tion consistency modeling. It overcomes the limitation imposed by textual ambiguity by providing
additional self-supervision to vision-language contrastive learning via cross-view segmentation con-
sistency. ViewCo uses the proposed text-to-views consistency modeling for vision-language cross-
modal contrastive learning and additionally enables cross-view segmentation consistency modeling
by contrasting the segment features of Siamese visual encoders. As shown in Figure 2, with the help
of the two consistency modeling schemes, ViewCo establishes a solid semantic correspondence in
different views, and the semantics in different views maintain a good consistency. The semantic
consistency of GroupViT in different views is difficult to guarantee.
Overall, ViewCo’s design is simple and effective. We train it on large-scale image-text pair datasets
CC12M (Changpinyo et al. (2021)) and YFCC (Thomee et al. (2016)). In the inference stage, we


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


use the similarity scores between the segmentation embeddings generated by the teacher network
and the label prompts to assign labels to the image masks for zero-shot semantic segmentation.
Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, ViewCo achieves an average improvement of 2.9%,
1.6%, and 2.4% mIoU on PASCAL VOC2012, PASCAL Context, and COCO, respectively. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

           • We propose a novel one-to-many text-to-views consistency modeling that improves the
             model’s ability of high-level cross-modal semantic alignment by encouraging different
             crops of an image to align with the same text.
           • To alleviate the problem of supervision failure that may arise from text ambiguity, we pro-
             pose cross-view segmentation consistency modeling to provide additional self-supervision
             for the vision branch and encourage the model to generate consistent segmentation masks
             for different views.
           • ViewCo consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on PASCAL VOC2012,
             PASCAL Context, and MS-COCO when pre-trained on CC12M or CC12M+YFCC.

2      R ELATED W ORK
Vision-Language Pretraining. In recent years, vision-language pre-training models (Chen et al.
(2020b); Desai & Johnson (2021); Li et al. (2020a; 2021a; 2020b)) have developed rapidly with the
help of large-scale image-text pair data available on the Internet. Recently, VLP models such as
CLIP (Radford et al. (2021)), ALIGN (Li et al. (2021a)), and SLIP (Mu et al. (2021)) have made
great progress in visual representation learning by using contrastive learning. And they have been
successfully transferred to various downstream tasks, such as visual question answering (Antol et al.
(2015); Zhou et al. (2020)) and visual reasoning (Zellers et al. (2019)). In particular, CLIP (Radford
et al. (2021)) uses the image-text matching relationship for contrastive learning, and the learned
model can be directly transferred to ImageNet classification (Deng et al. (2009)) in a zero-shot
manner without any fine-tuning. This success is also found on zero-shot semantic segmentation (Xu
et al. (2022)). However, the one-to-one contrastive learning mechanism between image and text in
the vanilla VLP pipeline is too strict, which is not conducive to the model learning high-level cross-
modal semantic alignment. Based on the above observations, this paper proposes one-to-many text-
to-views consistency modeling. It relaxes the original one-to-one correspondence by encouraging
 Contrastive       Contrastive Contrastive
different
   Loss
             crops of   an image
                     Loss        Loss
                                     to match theContrastive
                                                   same
                                                    Loss
                                                             text,Contrastive
                                                                    Loss
                                                                                   Contrastive
                                                                    allowing the model
                                                                                     Loss
                                                                                                     Contrastive
                                                                                          to benefit from
                                                                                                       Loss
                                                                                                               the Contrastive
                                                                                                                   dense
                                                                                                                     Loss
assignment of the visual features.
                                                                  D                                                                     EMA
EVisual
 I      ESelf-Supervision.
         T      EI EI   EI                      This
                                                ET       framework relies on the information carried                   ET        byEഥI the    image
                                                                                                                                               EI         Eit-
                                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                        EMA
self for self-supervision without any additional               EI  ഥ
                                                                   E I
                                                                           annotation
                                                                             EI      E T
                                                                                              information.
                                                                                                   Segment token        Visual     self-supervision
is mainly divided into generative (He et al. (2022); Bao et al. (2021)) and contrastive (He
et al. (2020a); Caron et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2020a)). A generative                                EI             model allows the model
                                                                             “A woman using
to learn          the
      “A woman using
      her tablet while
                         feature   representation
                                        “A woman using
                                        her tablet while
                                                            of the image      by     reconstructing
                                                                             her tablet while
                                                                                                               the
                                                                                                               “A woman masked
                                                                                                                           using
                                                                                                               her tablet while
                                                                                                                                      image. “A       Con-
                                                                                                                                                       woman using
                                                                                                                                                    her tablet while
trastive         models focus more
      it's snowing.”                               on learning-centric global
                                        it's snowing.”                       it's snowing.”representations.    it's snowing.”Since semanticit's snowing.”
                                                                                                                                                        seg-
mentation
  (a) CLIP            requires dense
                                 (b) SLIP prediction of images,            generative models (d)
                                                                   (c) MaskCLIP                            may GroupViTnot help much             because
                                                                                                                                            (e) ViewContrasting
they destroy the original structure and information of im-
ages. On the other hand, the contrastive visual self-                                           view                 pull together positive pairs
supervised model can provide the required multi-view                                            text                 push away negative pairs
features for ViewCo’s text-to-views consistency model-                                            distance between different objects
ing. Moreover, this visual contrastive learning can pro-
vide additional visual self-supervision information for the
VLP model to alleviate the risk of supervision failure
caused by text ambiguity. Therefore, this paper focuses
on the help of visual contrastive learning for semantic
segmentation consistency.
Consistent Semantics. Capturing consistent semantics
is one of the main challenges shared by many tasks Figure 3:               Comparison of single-view
                                                            text-to-image contrastive learning (left) and
such as cross-modality and visual understanding. Vision- multi-view text-to-views contrastive learn-
language contrastive learning (Radford et al. (2021)) is ing (right).
essential to encode different modal data into the same fea-
ture space and enforces the features sharing the same semantics to get closer, and the features with
different semantics to be pushed away. Similarly, multicrop image-level semantic consistency is


                                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Cross-View Segmantation                                                segment token
                                                              Text-to-Views
                            Consistency Module                                                     view features
                                                              Consistency Module
                                                        avg
                                      𝑓𝑠                      MLP
                                                                         𝑍𝐼𝑢   𝑍𝐼𝑣
                                                                                                 Extract Nouns
                      𝑣                                             ℒ[𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑉𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑠]                 & Prompts
                                     EMA       ℒ[𝑆𝑒𝑔]
                                                                    𝑧𝑇     𝑧 𝑡1      𝑧 𝑡2   A woman using her
                                                                                            tablet while it's snowing.

                       𝑢                                                  MLP
                                                                                            A photo of a woman.

                                       𝑓𝑡                                                   A photo of a tablet.
                                                                           𝐸𝑇



Figure 4: Framework of ViewCo. It is mainly composed of a cross-view segmentation consistency module and
a text-to-views consistency module. The visual branch adopts a visual self-supervised model, which consists of
teacher ft and student fs networks with the same structure. ft and fs are the bottom-up segmentation backbone
that outputs segment features of the image.

also the core idea of visual self-supervised contrastive learning (Caron et al. (2021); Chen et al.
(2020a); He et al. (2020a)). For example, DenseCL (Wang et al. (2021a)) performs pixel-level
dense contrastive learning on dense output vectors from multiple views, which is not helpful to
the learning of high-level global semantic information. Further, GroupViT (Xu et al. (2022)) uses
text as supervision and achieves pixel grouping by capturing the contextual consistent semantics of
images. However, in the text-supervised semantic segmentation task, the ambiguous properties of
text relative to dense annotations result in that the semantic consistency of images sharing the same
semantics cannot be sufficiently guaranteed in the embedding space. Furthermore, the strict one-to-
one correspondence between image and text in the vanilla VLP model is also not conducive to the
true alignment of high-level cross-modal semantics. Figure 3 (left) illustrates the above observation:
although one of the views of an image (e.g., the solid circle) is already close to the corresponding
text embedding, other views (e.g., the dashed circles) may still be far away. Previous VLP methods
generally only focus on the alignment of a single view with text. In contrast, as shown in Figure
3 (right), ViewCo focuses on text-to-views consistency modeling, doing one-to-many matching in
cross-modal contrastive learning.

3     M ULTI -V IEW C ONSISTENT L EARNING
As shown in Figure 4, our ViewCo is mainly composed of a cross-view segmentation consistency
module and a text-to-views consistency module. We describe these two modules in Sections 3.1 and
3.2, respectively, and summarize the final loss function in Section 3.3.
3.1   CROSS - VIEW SEGMENTATION CONSISTENCY MODULE
As shown in Figure 4 (left), given a batch of image-text pairs {(xIi , xTi )}Bi=1 , two random aug-
mentations are performed on the input image xIi , generating two warped views u and v. We use
GroupViT (Xu et al. (2022)) as the bottom-up segmentation backbone of ViewCo, where each view
is segmented into K segment tokens. For each of the views (e.g., u), this process is expressed as:
  us        us
ZSeg  = {Zseg  k
                 , k = 1, ..., K} = fs (u) ∈ RK×d , where Zseg us
                                                                  k
                                                                    ∈ Rd is the k-th segment feature
                                                                                     vs
from fs , and d is the dimensionality of the segment feature. Similarly, we have Zseg   k
                                                                                          and the seg-
                   ut         vt
ment features Zsegk and Zsegk from the teacher network ft . We update the parameters of ft using
the exponential moving average (EMA) He et al. (2020b) of the parameters of fs . For example, let
θi and θi be the parameters of fs and ft at training step i, respectively, and then θi is updated as:
θi = αθi−1 + (1 − α)θi , where α is a hyper-parameter for smoothing the update. In addition, the
standard contrastive loss function, called InfoNCE (Oord et al. (2018)), is considered in this paper,
for an encoded query q and a set of encoded samples k = {k0 , k1 , k2 , ...}N that are the keys of a
dictionary, we have:
                                                      exp(q · k+ /τ )
                                 LNCE (q, k) = − log PN                   ,                        (1)
                                                      i=0 exp(q · ki /τ )
where τ is a learnable temperature parameter. And q and k+ are positive pairs, and the other (N −1)
pairs are negative.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                   teacher 𝑢/𝑣
                                                         teacher 𝑢/𝑣                                                                                                                   views           views
            positive pairs
positive pairs                                                                                                                                                            𝑣                𝑣           𝑢                  𝑢
                        𝐼       𝐼                𝐼        𝐼                    𝐼1 𝐼𝑛         𝐼               𝐼           𝐼            𝐼                                            𝐼     𝐼     𝐼    𝐼 𝐼         𝐼    𝐼              𝐼
                   1
                 𝑍Seg    1
                       𝑍Seg                       1
                                                𝑍Seg 𝐼1 1
                                                       𝑍Seg                   𝑍Seg
                                                                                 𝑍Seg         𝑛               𝑛 𝐼𝑛
                                                                                                            𝑍Seg     𝑛
                                                                                                               𝑍Seg𝑍Seg                𝑛                      𝐼
                                                                                                                                                             𝑍1𝑣
                                                                                                                                                                     𝐼
                                                                                                                                                                    𝑍2𝑣        𝑍1𝑣 𝑍𝑛𝐼𝑣 𝑍2𝑣 𝑍1𝑢    𝑍2𝑢𝑍𝑛𝑣   𝑍1𝑢𝑍𝑛𝐼𝑢 𝑍2𝑢           𝑍𝑛𝑢


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ⋮
           negative  pairs                          𝑍Seg                                    𝑍Seg                                     𝑍Seg


                                                                                                                                                                                               ⋮

                                                                                                                                                                                                            ⋮
negative pairs


                                                                                                                                                                               ⋮
                                                                                                                                 ⋮
                                                                                                            ⋮
                                                                   ⋮
                                                ⋮
                            1           2            1    𝐾    2                   𝐾    1          2             1   𝐾       2              𝐾



              𝐼                     𝐼                                                             𝐼
               1
             𝑍Seg                 1
                                𝑍Seg                                𝐼𝑛
                                                                   𝑍Seg                            𝑛
                                                                                                 𝑍Seg                                                  𝑍1𝑇               𝑍1𝑇
                    1                       1                             1                             1


           𝐼          𝐼                                             𝑛                             𝑛                                                    𝑍2𝑇               𝑍2𝑇
             student 𝑍Seg
  student 𝑍Seg1                     1                              𝑍Seg 2
                                                                                                 𝑍Seg 2
                                                                                                                                                text         text


                                                              ⋮


                                                                                       ⋮
                    2                       2

     𝑣/𝑢        𝑣/𝑢
              ⋮                     ⋮                               ⋮                             ⋮                                                    ⋮                  ⋮
              𝐼                     𝐼                               𝐼                             𝐼
              1
            𝑍Seg                  1
                                𝑍Seg
                                                                     𝑛
                                                                   𝑍Seg                            𝑛
                                                                                                 𝑍Seg                                                  𝑍𝑛𝑇               𝑍𝑛𝑇
                   𝐾                        𝐾                             𝐾                             𝐾


                                                              (a) L[Seg]                                                                                           (b) L[Text-Views]
Figure 5: Illustration of the contrastive loss of (a) cross-view segmentation consistency modeling and (b) text-
                                Ii
to-views consistency modeling. ZSegk
                                     is the k-th semantic feature of the i-th image (i.e., view u or v). ZiIv and
ZiIu are the embeddings of the views v and u of the i-th image, respectively.

Intuitively, the segment features obtained from different crops of𝑏 the   same image should be roughly
                                                                       ℒ[𝐼𝑚𝑔−𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡]
                                                                              𝑏 ℒ[𝐼𝑚𝑔−𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡]
the same, i.e., cross-view
                    𝑎 ℒ [𝑆𝑒𝑔]segmentation
                              𝑎 ℒ [𝑆𝑒𝑔]   consistency.  To this end, for the semantic segmentation task,
we replace the image-level contrastive learning in previous methods (Caron et al. (2021); Zhou et al.
(2021b)) with cross-view segmentation consistency learning within images. Therefore, we define
the minimization training objective of the cross-view segmentation consistency module in ViewCo
as:
                                        Lt↔s       t→s       s→t
                                          [Seg] = L[Seg] + L[Seg] .                                  (2)
It is a bi-directional contrast loss between the segment features from the teacher ft and the student fs .
Lt→s
  [Seg] considers two pairs of views (i.e., (ut , vs ) and (vt , us )) outputted by ft and fs . The segment
                                                             ut    vs T
features of (ut , vs ) from the same image are multiplied (Zseg ·Zseg     ∈ RK×K ) after l2 normalization.
In the image branch of ViewCo, we use the EMA policy for parameter updates, so the learnable
grouping tokens on the corresponding position IDs of different views of the same image are highly
                                                                                           ut        vs
correlated, and they have the same semantics. Therefore, the semantic pairs {(Zseg            i
                                                                                                , Zseg  i
                                                                                                          ), i =
                                                                                         ut       vs
1, ..., K} on the diagonal are regarded as positive, and the other K(K−1) pairs {(Zsegi , Zsegj ), i, j =
1, ..., K, i ̸= j} are regarded as negative. Therefore, the contrastive loss Lt→s  [Seg] of the teacher-to-
student segment features is defined as Lt→s[Seg] = L ut →vs + L vt →us  , more specifically:
                                                                   B               K
                                                     1 XX
                  Lt→s
                   [Seg] = −
                                                                   ut
                                                           (LNCE (Zseg      vs
                                                                        , {Zseg }K ) + LNCE (Zseg
                                                                               k k=1
                                                                                              vt       us K
                                                                                                   , {Zseg }
                                                                                                          k k=1
                                                                                                                )).                                                                                                           (3)
                                                    KB i=1            k                          k
                                                                              k=1

Similarly, the contrastive loss Ls→t                                                             s→t
                                 [Seg] of the student-to-teacher segment features is defined as L[Seg] =
Lus →vt + Lvs →ut , more specifically:
                                                                   B               K
                                                     1 XX
                  Ls→t
                   [Seg] = −
                                                                   us
                                                           (LNCE (Zseg      vt
                                                                        , {Zseg }K ) + LNCE (Zseg
                                                                               k k=1
                                                                                              vs       ut
                                                                                                   , {Zseg }K )).
                                                                                                          k k=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (4)
                                                    KB i=1            k                          k
                                                                              k=1

Figure 5a shows the positive and negative pairs for cross-view segmentation consistency learning in
the vision branch.

3.2     TEXT- TO - VIEWS CONSISTENCY MODULE
Previous methods (Radford et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2022)) build visual-linguistic semantic corre-
spondences by performing a contrastive loss on image-text pairs. In this paper, we consider the
contrastive learning between multiple views and text, using one-to-many text-to-views consistency
modeling instead of one-to-one text-to-image contrastive learning. The model learns to capture
intra-modal and inter-modal semantic consistency through the alignment of multi-view images and
text.
Specifically, for a given image-text pair (xIi , xTi ), by performing two different augmentations to
the input image, we have a triplet (ui , vi , xTi ). As shown in Figure 4 (right), in the training
phase, we take the output (Ziu , Ziv ) of the view pair (ui , vi ) through the student network fs and
the output ZiT of the text encoder ET to calculate the contrastive loss respectively. The visual
embeddings (Ziu , Ziv ) and text embedding ZiT are mapped to the same feature space through two
MLPs, respectively, before performing the final l2 regularization. This procedure is represented as:


                                                                                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    ui
ZiIu = MLP(AvgPool(Z[Seg]      ui
                          )), Z[Seg]                                 vi
                                     = fs (ui ); ZiIv = MLP(AvgPool(Z[Seg]      vi
                                                                           )), Z[Seg] = fs (vi ).
The multi-view feature ZiI = {ZiIu , ZiIv } and text embedding ZiT constitute positive pairs, and the
other 2B(B −1) pairs are negative pairs. The contrastive loss of text-to-views consistency modeling
is defined as follows:
                               LI{u,v} ↔T = LI{u,v} →T + LT →I{u,v} ,                             (5)
where the contrastive loss of views I{u,v} -to-text is defined as:
                                   B   K
                           1 XX
           LI{u,v} →T = −        (LNCE (ZiIu , {ZiT }B              Iv    T B
                                                     i=1 ) + LNCE (Zi , {Zi }i=1 )).                 (6)
                          KB i=1
                                       k=1

and the contrastive loss of text-to-views I{u,v} is defined as:
                                   B   K
                             1 XX
           LT →I{u,v} = −          (LNCE (ZiT , {ZiIu }B              T     Iv B
                                                       i=1 ) + LNCE (Zi , {Zi }i=1 )).               (7)
                            KB i=1
                                       k=1

Additionally, in order to further enhance the association between multi-view semantics and text
semantics, we also compute the multi-label image-text contrastive loss (Xu et al. (2022)) of multi-
view and “prompted text” pairs {(ZiIu , {Zitm }M    B       Iv    tm M     B               tm M
                                               m=1 )i=1 , (Zi , {Zi }m=1 )i=1 }, where {Zi }m=1
are the embeddings of the additional M text prompts {Tim }M                                   T
                                                              m=1 generated by the i-th text xi ac-
                                                                           Iu    tm M
cording to the “prompt engineering” mechanism (Radford et al. (2021)). (Zi , {Zi }m=1 ), i.e., the
embedding of the i-th image view u and the generated M text embeddings {Zitm }M    m=1 are positive
pairs, and the other combinations are negative pairs. Therefore, similar to Eq.(5), the multi-label
contrastive loss of multi-view I{u,v} and multi-prompt {T m }Mm=1 is defined as:

                   LI{u,v} ↔{T m }M
                                  m=1
                                      = LI{u,v} →{T m }M
                                                       m=1
                                                           + L{T m }M
                                                                    m=1 →I{u,v}
                                                                                .                    (8)
First, the views-to-prompts loss is the average of the losses of the two views. Considering a single
view, e.g. u, the contrastive loss of u to all the prompts is defined as:
                                       B       PM                        !
                                                           Iu    tm
                                    1 X          m=1 exp(Zi · Zi /τ )
                   LIu →{T m }M = −       log PM PB           Iu    tm
                                                                           .                          (9)
                              m=1   B i=1      m=1   j=1 exp(Zi ·Zj /τ )

Second, the contrastive loss of multi-prompt-to-views is defined as:
                                      M   B
                                 1 XX
        L{T m }M           =−                (LNCE (Zitm , {ZiIu }B              tm    Iv B
                                                                  i=1 ) + LNCE (Zi , {Zi }i=1 )).    (10)
               m=1 →I{u,v}      2M B m=1 i=1

In particular, a similar work to our text-to-views consistency module is DeCLIP (Li et al. (2021b)).
It believes that the text description may only be a small part of the image, so in addition to the global
view in CLIP (Radford et al. (2021)), DeCLIP also adds a local view for image self-supervision,
which may cause information leakage. In addition, DeCLIP uses EDA (Wei & Zou (2019)) as a text
augmentation strategy. The augmented text still contains multiple semantics, which is not helpful to
the alignment of local semantics in segmentation tasks. In contrast, ViewCo uses self-supervision of
two local views to ensure the difficulty of the task, while using a “prompt engineering” mechanism
to obtain an augmented text with a single semantic. Combining one-to-many alignment can help
ViewCo to better mine consistent segmentation semantics in images.

3.3   OVERALL L OSS F UNCTION
Finally, the total loss of ViewCo is the sum of the cross-view segmentation consistency contrastive
loss and the two cross-modal contrastive losses:
                           L = Lt↔s
                                [Seg] + LI{u,v} ↔T + LI{u,v} ↔{T m }M
                                                                    m=1
                                                                        .                           (11)

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Architecture. In the cross-view segmentation consistency module, ft and fs have the same network
structure. The parameters of ft are updated using the exponential moving average of the parameters


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Pre-training                                   Transfer (mIoU (%))
                                                                         PASCAL      PASCAL
         Arch      Model           Dataset     Supervision   Zero-Shot                            COCO
                                                                           VOC        Context
                    DeiT          ImageNet        class         %          53.0         35.9         -
                   DINO           ImageNet         self         %          39.1         20.4         -
         ViT       DINO         CC12M+YFCC         self         %          37.6         22.8         -
                   MoCo           ImageNet         self         %          34.3         21.3         -
                   MoCo         CC12M+YFCC         self         %          36.1         23.0         -
                    CLIP         LAION-20M         text         !            -          13.5        8.2
                  GroupViT         CC12M           text         !          41.1         18.2       18.4
                 GroupViT1      CC12M+YFCC         text         !          51.2          22.3      20.9
                    SLIP         LAION-20M     text & self      !            -          12.3        8.8
         CLIP
                 CLIP-MAE        LAION-20M     text & self      !            -          16.8       11.8
                 MaskCLIP        LAION-20M     text & self      !            -          17.7       11.8
                ViewCo (ours)      CC12M       text & self      !         45.7           20.8      20.6
                ViewCo (ours)   CC12M+YFCC     text & self      !         52.4           23.0      23.5

Table 2: Comparisons with recent methods. Zero-shot means that the model is directly transferred to the
semantic segmentation task without any fine-tuning on the target dataset.
of fs . We use GroupViT (Xu et al. (2022)) with two stages as the backbone for semantic feature
extraction of ViewCo’s visual branch. It is built on ViT-S (Dosovitskiy et al. (2020); Touvron et al.
(2021)) with 12 Transformer layers. The input image size is 224 × 224, the patch size is 16 × 16,
and the hidden dimensionality is 384. The 2-stage GroupViT finally outputs 8 segment tokens, i.e.,
K = 8). Following Radford et al. (2021), ViewCo’s text encoder ET consists of 12 Transformer
layers with a hidden feature dimensionality of 256.
Training and Inference. In the training phase, we use CC12M (Changpinyo et al. (2021)) and the
filtered YFCC (Thomee et al. (2016)) as training datasets, which contain 12M and 14M image-text
pairs, respectively. See A.1 of the supplementary material for more training details. In the inference
phase, following (Xu et al. (2022); Radford et al. (2021)), the image is segmented by associating the
image patches with the K segment tokens outputted by the teacher network ft . The semantics in
the images are further classified by computing the similarity of the K visual-semantic embeddings
to the text embeddings generated from the class labels of the test dataset.
Zero-Shot Transfer to Semantic Segmentation. We evaluate ViewCo on the task of zero-shot
transfer to semantic segmentation on the validation sets of PASCAL VOC 2012 (Everingham et al.
(2010)), PASCAL Context (Mottaghi et al. (2014)) and COCO Stuff (Lin et al. (2014)) datasets.
The three datasets contain 20, 59, and 80 foreground classes and an additional background class,
respectively. During inference, following GroupViT (Xu et al. (2022)), ViewCo predicts only the
foreground classes by thresholding the softmax-normalized-similarity between the embedding of
the outputted image segments and the text segmentation labels. The thresholds on PASCAL VOC
2012, PASCAL Context, and COCO are set to 0.95, 0.35, and 0.95, respectively. We resize each
input image to have a shorter side of 448.
4.2   C OMPARISONS WITH R ECENT M ETHODS
We first compare the performance of ViewCo with some ViT-S-based zero-shot baselines. Then,
to further evaluate the performance of ViewCo on the zero-shot semantic segmentation task, we
compare ViewCo with some fully supervised transfer and CLIP-based models.
Comparison with Zero-Shot Baselines. Table 1 shows
the performance comparison of ViewCo and zero-shot                                             Mask
                                                            Arch.              Method
                                                                                              mIoU (%)
baselines on PASCAL VOC 2012. Among them, the               ViT              pixel-wise         20.1
four ViT-based baselines train vision and text encoders     ViT               K-means           25.0
                                                            ViT              Mean-shift         20.7
through the image-text contrastive loss defined in CLIP     ViT           Spectral clustering   19.7
(Radford et al. (2021)). They adopt four different pixel    GroupViT               -            51.2
grouping methods: pixel-wise, K-means, Mean-shift           ViewCo (ours)          -            52.4
(Comaniciu & Meer (2002)), and Spectral clustering
(Shi & Malik (1997)) respectively. And GroupViT (Xu Table 1: Comparison with zero-shot base-
                                                          lines on PASCAL VOC 2012.
et al. (2022)) uses the bottom-up patch grouping mecha-
nism. As shown in Table 1, ViewCo significantly outperforms the CLIP-trained ViT and GroupViT
(52.4% vs. 51.2%) baselines. It is worth noting that ViewCo and GroupViT adopt the same segmen-
tation backbone, indicating that ViewCo can effectively improve the model’s ability of segmentation
and cross-modal semantic alignment with the help of the two consistent semantic modelings.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Comparison with Other SoTA Methods. These methods include one fully supervised baseline
DeiT (Touvron et al. (2021)), two visual self-supervised baselines DINO (Caron et al. (2021)) and
MoCo (He et al. (2020a)), two vision-language contrastive learning baselines CLIP (Radford et al.
(2021)) and GroupViT (Xu et al. (2022)), two vision-language contrast and visual self-supervised
learning combined baselines SLIP (Mu et al. (2021)) and CLIP-MAE (Dong et al. (2022)), and one
vision-language contrast and self-distillation combined baseline MaskCLIP (Dong et al. (2022)).
Table 2 shows the mIoU performance comparison between ViewCo and the SoTA methods on PAS-
CAL VOC 2012, PASCAL Context, and COCO validation sets. ViewCo significantly outperforms
them on all three datasets. Compared to GroupViT, when pre-trained on CC12M, ViewCo achieves
a 4.6% mIoU improvement on PASCAL VOC. Similarly, when pre-trained on CC12M+YFCC,
ViewCo achieves a 2.6% mIoU improvement on COCO compared to GroupViT. Similar to ViewCo,
SLIP, MaskCLIP, and CLIP-MAE all use additional supervision information in the vision branch of
the VLP models. Compared with them, ViewCo still has clear advantages in PASCAL Context and
COCO. In addition, ViewCo obtains segmentation performance close to the fully supervised DeiT
on PASCAL VOC, which again demonstrates the effectiveness of ViewCo for zero-shot semantic
segmentation.
4.3      A NALYSIS
In this section, for the convenience of comparison, we use CC12M as the pre-training dataset by
default for the ablation of ViewCo components, qualitative analysis, and image classification perfor-
mance comparison. GroupViT (Xu et al. (2022)) is used as the baseline for ViewCo.
Image-Level Contrast vs. Semantic-Level Contrast. To ab-
late the role of the cross-view segmentation consistency mod-                                  COCO
                                                                               Visual branch
                                                                                              mIoU (%)
ule in the vision branch, we add an image-level contrastive         GroupViT         -           18.4
module to GroupViT in the visual branch, where we first cal-        GroupViT+   image-level      18.6
                                                                    ViewCo     semantic-level 19.1(0.7↑)
culate the average of the K segment tokens outputted by the
teacher and student networks, and then perform contrastive
learning. For ViewCo, we remove the text-to-views consis- Table 3: Image-level contrast vs.
tency module and directly average pool the multi-view fea- semantic-level contrast. “-” indicates
tures outputted by the student network. To be consistent with that no visual self-supervision module
                                                                  is used. GroupViT+ represents modi-
GroupViT, we use the pooled visual features for contrastive fying the corresponding component in
learning with text embeddings. As shown in Table 3, adding a GroupViT.
visual self-supervised module for vision-language contrastive
learning can improve the performance of the model on semantic segmentation by improving the
quality of visual feature learning. Furthermore, the improved performance (i.e., 19.1 vs. 18.6) of
semantic-level learning relative to image-level contrastive learning suggests that the cross-view seg-
mentation consistency module can further improve the performance by capturing the consistency of
cross-view semantic segmentation.
Vision-Language Contrast: Text-to-Image vs.
Text-to-Views. We further ablate the text-to-views                                  Vision
                                                                                              COCO
                                                                   Visual branch  -language
consistency module in ViewCo. In single-view                                                mIoU (%)
                                                                                   contrast
vision-language contrastive learning, we use the      GroupViT+     image-level     single     18.6
                                                      GroupViT+     image-level    multiple 19.7 (1.1↑)
average embedding of multi-view features out-         ViewCo       semantic-level   single     19.1
putted by the student network and the text embed-     ViewCo       semantic-level  multiple 20.6 (1.5↑)
ding for contrastive learning during training. As
shown in Table 4, text-to-views consistency mod- Table 4: Vision-language contrast: single-view
eling significantly improves the performances of vs. multi-view. “single” and “multiple” denote
the models compared to single-view text-to-image the number of image views used in vision-language
(i.e., 1.1% and 1.5%). This indicates that text-to- contrastive learning.
views consistency modeling has better high-level
semantic alignment capabilities than text-to-image single-view modeling. This is exactly what pre-
vious methods of single-view vision-language contrastive learning do not have.
Qualitative Analysis. Figure 2 shows some visualization results of multi-view semantic seg-
mentation consistency for ViewCo and GroupViT. As shown in Figure 2(a), in GroupViT, the
semantic segmentations of different views from the same image are inconsistent. For exam-
   1
       The latest version of GroupViT reports the results of training on the CC3M+CC12M+YFCC dataset.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                dog


         GroupViT
                                                                                                bicycle
                                                                                                cat
                                                                                                bottle
         ViewCo (ours)


                         (a) segmentation and prediction                (b) segmentation
Figure 6: Comparison of semantic segmentation of images in rare scenes. (a) Image segmentation and seman-
tic prediction. (b) Image segmentation. ViewCo can better learn high-level cross-modal semantic alignment
with the help of two consistency modeling schemes.
ple, in image x, “umbrella” is misclassified as “cow”, and in view u, “umbrella” is mis-
classified as “horse”. There is also the problem of inconsistent semantic segmentations be-
tween views u and v. As shown in Figure 2(b), the semantic segmentation in differ-
ent views in ViewCo is completely consistent. This shows that our cross-view segmenta-
tion consistency modeling and text-to-views consistency modeling in ViewCo are effective.
To evaluate ViewCo’s ability to perform seman-
tic segmentation through semantic understand-                     Pre-training            Zero-shot
                                                                    dataset     Acc@1 (%)       Acc@5 (%)
ing in rare scenes, we show the more visual           GroupViT      CC12M           37.5            65.5
comparison in Figure 6. The images of rare            ViewCo        CC12M        39.5 (2.0↑)     68.4 (2.9↑)
scenes are selected from the Internet. In Fig-        ViT        CC12M+YFCC         42.4              -
                                                      GroupViT   CC12M+YFCC         42.9            71.7
ure 6(a), we use the class labels of the PASCAL       ViewCo     CC12M+YFCC      46.3 (3.4↑)    74.0 (2.3 ↑)
VOC 2012 dataset as the label set for the im-
ages. ViewCo’s segmentation and prediction re-          Table 5: Zero-shot performance on ImageNet.
sults in rare scenes are significantly better than
GroupViT’s. This indicates that ViewCo can better understand high-level semantics in images
through consistent semantic learning. In Figure 6(b), we only focus on the model’s ability to segment
images in rare scenes. Compared to GroupViT, ViewCo handles the details of image segmentation
much better.
More visual comparison results are shown in Figure 7 of A.2 of the supplementary material. In addi-
tion, we also visually compare the segmentation consistency of ViewCo and GroupViT on different
views in A.3. Finally, we present an analysis of ViewCo’s cross-view segmentation consistency in
A.4.
Image Classification. We also evaluate the classification performance of ViewCo. As shown in
Table 5, ViewCo significantly outperforms ViT (i.e., 46.3% vs. 42.4%) and GroupViT (i.e., 46.3%
vs. 42.9%), showing that ViewCo achieves better cross-modal semantic alignment through text-to-
views consistency modeling.

5 C ONCLUSION
We propose a novel and simple multi-view consistency learning (ViewCo) for text-supervised se-
mantic segmentation. To deal with the problems of excessively strict image-text correspondence
and ambiguous text supervision in the VLP model, ViewCo models the text-to-views consistency
and cross-view segmentation consistency. ViewCo can generate consistent segmentations and better
capture high-level cross-modal semantic alignment. We expect that this exploration of multi-view
consistent learning is also applicable to other VLP tasks.

6       ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
No.2020AAA0109700, National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under
Grant No.61976233, Guangdong Outstanding Youth Fund (Grant No.2021B1515020061),
Shenzhen Fundamental Research Program (Project No.RCYX20200714114642083,
No.JCYJ20190807154211365). We thank MindSpore and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open
Fund for the partial support of this work, which is a new deep learning computing framwork2 .

    2
        https://www.mindspore.cn


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zit-
  nick, and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2425–2433, 2015.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.08254, 2021.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12m: Pushing
  web-scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3558–3568, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 104–120. Springer, 2020b.
Dorin Comaniciu and Peter Meer. Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space analysis.
  IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 24:603–619, 2002.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Karan Desai and Justin Johnson. Virtex: Learning visual representations from textual annotations.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11162–11173, 2021.
Xiaoyi Dong, Yinglin Zheng, Jianmin Bao, Ting Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Hao Yang, Ming Zeng,
  Weiming Zhang, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen, et al. Maskclip: Masked self-distillation advances con-
  trastive language-image pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12262, 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020.
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman.
 The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 88
 (2):303–338, 2010.
Golnaz Ghiasi, Xiuye Gu, Yin Cui, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Open-vocabulary image segmentation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.12143, 2021.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020a.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020b.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wonjae Kim, Bokyung Son, and Ildoo Kim. Vilt: Vision-and-language transformer without convo-
 lution or region supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5583–5594.
 PMLR, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster),
  2015.
Gen Li, Nan Duan, Yuejian Fang, Ming Gong, and Daxin Jiang. Unicoder-vl: A universal encoder
  for vision and language by cross-modal pre-training. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 11336–11344, 2020a.
Junnan Li, Ramprasaath Selvaraju, Akhilesh Gotmare, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and Steven
  Chu Hong Hoi. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum
  distillation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:9694–9705, 2021a.
Linjie Li, Yen-Chun Chen, Yu Cheng, Zhe Gan, Licheng Yu, and Jingjing Liu. Hero: Hierarchical
  encoder for video+ language omni-representation pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00200,
  2020b.
Yangguang Li, Feng Liang, Lichen Zhao, Yufeng Cui, Wanli Ouyang, Jing Shao, Fengwei Yu,
  and Junjie Yan. Supervision exists everywhere: A data efficient contrastive language-image pre-
  training paradigm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05208, 2021b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with restarts. Learning, 10:3,
   2016.
Roozbeh Mottaghi, Xianjie Chen, Xiaobai Liu, Nam-Gyu Cho, Seong-Whan Lee, Sanja Fidler,
  Raquel Urtasun, and Alan Yuille. The role of context for object detection and semantic seg-
  mentation in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 891–898, 2014.
Norman Mu, Alexander Kirillov, David Wagner, and Saining Xie. Slip: Self-supervision meets
  language-image pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12750, 2021.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Pengzhen Ren, Changlin Li, Guangrun Wang, Yun Xiao, Qing Du, Xiaodan Liang, and Xiaojun
  Chang. Beyond fixation: Dynamic window visual transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11987–11997, 2022.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. Proceedings of IEEE
   Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 731–737, 1997.
Bart Thomee, David A Shamma, Gerald Friedland, Benjamin Elizalde, Karl Ni, Douglas Poland,
  Damian Borth, and Li-Jia Li. Yfcc100m: The new data in multimedia research. Communications
  of the ACM, 59(2):64–73, 2016.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Hervé Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.
Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning
  for self-supervised visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3024–3033, 2021a.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zekun Wang, Wenhui Wang, Haichao Zhu, Ming Liu, Bing Qin, and Furu Wei. Distilled dual-
  encoder model for vision-language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08723, 2021b.
Jason Wei and Kai Zou. Eda: Easy data augmentation techniques for boosting performance on text
  classification tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11196, 2019.
Jiarui Xu, Shalini De Mello, Sifei Liu, Wonmin Byeon, Thomas Breuel, Jan Kautz, and Xiaolong
   Wang. Groupvit: Semantic segmentation emerges from text supervision. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18134–18144, 2022.
Mengde Xu, Zheng Zhang, Fangyun Wei, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, and Xiang Bai. A sim-
 ple baseline for zero-shot semantic segmentation with pre-trained vision-language model. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2112.14757, 2021.
Nir Zabari and Yedid Hoshen. Semantic segmentation in-the-wild without seeing any segmentation
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03185, 2021.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition: Visual
  commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 6720–6731, 2019.
Chong Zhou, Chen Change Loy, and Bo Dai. Extract free dense labels from clip. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.01071, 2021a.
Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan Yuille, and Tao Kong. Image
   bert pre-training with online tokenizer. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2021b.
Luowei Zhou, Hamid Palangi, Lei Zhang, Houdong Hu, Jason Corso, and Jianfeng Gao. Unified
  vision-language pre-training for image captioning and vqa. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 13041–13049, 2020.


                                                12
