Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    H OW M UCH DATA A RE AUGMENTATIONS W ORTH ?
         A N I NVESTIGATION INTO S CALING L AWS ,
      I NVARIANCE , AND I MPLICIT R EGULARIZATION
 Jonas Geiping                                                                    Micah Goldblum
 University of Maryland, College Park                                             New York University

 Gowthami Somepalli                                                               Ravid Shwartz-Ziv
 University of Maryland, College Park                                             New York University

 Tom Goldstein                                                              Andrew Gordon-Wilson
 University of Maryland, College Park                                           New York University

                                              A BSTRACT
         Despite the clear performance benefits of data augmentations, little is known about
         why they are so effective. In this paper, we disentangle several key mechanisms
         through which data augmentations operate. Establishing an exchange rate between
         augmented and additional real data, we find that in out-of-distribution testing
         scenarios, augmentations which yield samples that are diverse, but inconsistent
         with the data distribution can be even more valuable than additional training data.
         Moreover, we find that data augmentations which encourage invariances can be
         more valuable than invariance alone, especially on small and medium sized training
         sets. Following this observation, we show that augmentations induce additional
         stochasticity during training, effectively flattening the loss landscape.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Even with the proliferation of large-scale image datasets, deep neural networks for computer vision
represent highly flexible model families and often contain orders of magnitude more parameters
than the size of their training sets. As a result, large models trained on limited datasets still have
the capacity for improvement. To make up for this data shortage, standard operating procedure
involves diversifying training data by augmenting samples with randomly applied transformations
that preserve semantic content. These augmented samples expand the volume of data available for
training, resulting in downstream performance benefits that one might expect from a larger dataset.
However, the now profound significance of data augmentation (DA) for boosting performance
suggests that its benefits may be more nuanced than previously believed.
In addition to adding extra samples, augmentation promotes invariance by encouraging models
to make consistent predictions across augmented views of each sample. The need to incorporate
invariances in neural networks has motivated the development of architectures that are explicitly
constrained to be equivariant to transformations (Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Finzi et al., 2020). If the
downstream effects of data augmentations were attributable solely to invariance, then we could replace
DA with explicit model constraints. However, if explicit constraints cannot replicate the benefits of
augmentation, then augmentations may affect training dynamics beyond imposing constraints.
Finally, augmentation may improve training by serving as an extra source of stochasticity. Under DA,
randomization during training comes not only from randomly selecting samples from the dataset to
form batches but also from sampling transformations with which to augment data (Fort et al., 2022).
Stochastic optimization is associated with benefits in non-convex problems wherein the optimizer can
bias parameters towards flatter minima (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2018; Geiping et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021a).
In this paper, we re-examine the role of data augmentation. In particular, we quantify the effects of
data augmentation in expanding available training data, promoting invariance, and acting as a source
of stochasticity during training. In summary:


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • We quantify the relationship between augmented views of training samples and extra
         data, evaluating the benefits of augmentations as the number of samples rises. We find
         that augmentations can confer comparable benefits to independently drawn samples on
         in-domain test sets and even stronger benefits on out-of-distribution testing.
       • We observe that models that learn invariances via data augmentation provide additional
         regularization compared to invariant architectures and we show that invariances that are
         uncharacteristic of the data distribution still benefit performance.
       • We then clarify the regularization benefits gained from augmentations through measurements
         of flatness and gradient noise showing how DA exhibits flatness-seeking behavior.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Data Augmentations in Computer Vision. Data augmentations have been a staple of deep learning,
used to deform handwritten digits as early as Yaeger et al. (1996) and LeCun et al. (1998), or
to improve oversampling on class-imbalanced datasets (Chawla et al., 2002). These early works
hypothesize that data augmentations are necessary to prevent overfitting when training neural networks
since they typically contain many more parameters than training data points (LeCun et al., 1998).
We restrict our study to augmentations which act on a single sample and do not modify labels. Namely,
we study augmentations which can be written as (T (x), y), where (x, y) denotes an input-label pair,
and T ∼ T is a random transformation sampled from a distribution of such transformations. For a
broad and thorough discussion on image augmentations, their categorization, and applications to com-
puter vision, see Shorten & Khoshgoftaar (2019) and Xu et al. (2022). We consider basic geometric
(random crops, flips, perspective) and photometric (jitter, blur, contrast) transformations, and common
augmentation policies, such as AutoAug (Cubuk et al., 2019), RandAug (Cubuk et al., 2020), AugMix
(Hendrycks et al., 2020) and TrivialAug (Müller & Hutter, 2021) which combine basic augmentations.
Understanding the Role of Augmentation and Invariance. Works such as Hernández-García &
König (2018) propose that data augmentations (DA) induce implicit regularization. Empirical eval-
uations describe useful augmentations as “label preserving”, namely they do not significantly change
the conditional probability over labels (Taylor & Nitschke, 2018). Gontijo-Lopes et al. (2020b;a) in-
vestigate empirical notions of consistency and diversity, and variations in dataset scales (Steiner et al.,
2022). They measure consistency (referred to as affinity) as the performance of models trained without
augmentation on augmented validation sets. They also measure diversity as the ratio of training loss of
a model trained with and without augmentations and conclude that strong data augmentations should
be both consistent and diverse, an effect also seen in Kim et al. (2021). In contrast to Gontijo-Lopes
et al. (2020b), Marcu & Prugel-Bennett (2022) find that the value of data augmentations cannot be
measured by how much they deform the data distribution. Other work proposes to learn invariances
parameterized as augmentations from the data (Benton et al., 2020), investigates the number of sam-
ples required to learn an invariance (Balestriero et al., 2022b), uncovers the tendency of augmentations
to sacrifice performance on some classes in exchange for gains on others (Balestriero et al., 2022a),
or argues that data augmentations cause models to misrepresent uncertainty (Kapoor et al., 2022).
Theoretical investigations in Chen et al. (2020a) formalize data augmentations as label-preserving
group actions and discuss an inherent invariance-variance trade-off. Variance regularization also
arises when modeling augmentations for kernel classifiers (Dao et al., 2019). For a binary classifier
with finite VC dimension, the bound on expected risk can be reduced through additional data generated
via augmentations until inconsistency between augmented and real data distributions overwhelms
would-be gains (He et al., 2019b). The regularizing effect of data augmentations is investigated in
LeJeune et al. (2019) who propose a model under which continuous augmentations increase the
smoothness of neural network decision boundaries. Rajput et al. (2019) similarly find that linear
classifiers trained with sufficient augmentations can approximate the maximum margin solution.
Hanin & Sun (2021) relate data augmentations to stochastic optimization. A different angle towards
understanding invariances through data augmentations is presented in Zhu et al. (2021), where
the effect of DA in increasing the theoretical sample cover of the distribution is investigated, and
augmentations can reduce the amount of data required, if they “cover” the real distribution.
Stochastic Optimization and Neural Network Training. The implicit regularization of SGD is
regarded as an essential component for neural network generalization (An, 1996; Neyshabur et al.,
2017). Stochastic training which randomizes gradients can drive parameters into flatter minima,


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         0.9
                                                                                                                                        100k


                                                                                                   Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                         0.8

CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy   0.7                                                                                                             50k

                         0.6

                         0.5                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                               Baseline (No Aug.)
                         0.4
                                                                       Augmentation Strategy
                                                                          Baseline (No Aug.)                                                   Flips&Crops
                         0.3                                              Flips&Crops                                                  −50k
                                                                                                                                               Horiz. Flips
                                                                          Horiz. Flips
                         0.2                                              Perspective                                                          Perspective
                                                                          TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                       −100k   TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.1
                           500    1000   2000   5000   10000   20000       50000 100000 200000                                                     50k        100k      150k   200k   250k   300k   350k
                                                Number of Base Samples                                                                                           Number of Base Samples


Figure 1: Power laws f (x) = ax−c + b for select augmentations applied randomly and the gain in terms of
effective extra samples from Equation (1). Fitted curves marked in solid colors, with extrapolated regions dashed.
Left: Number of base samples (from CINIC-10) on the logarithmic horizontal axis compared to validation accu-
racy. The scaling behavior of each augmentation is closely matched by these power laws. Right: Number of base
samples compared to effective extra data, showing how the benefits of each data augmentation scale as the model
is trained on more and more data. Policies that are strong but inconsistent, such as TrivialAug, reach the highest
peak benefit (at 50 000 base samples TrivialAug generates effectively 100 000 extra samples), but also fall off
faster than consistent augmentations, such as horizontal flips, which provide benefits up to 350 000 base samples.
associated with superior generalization (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a).
In fact, Geiping et al. (2021) find that neural networks trained with non-stochastic full batch gradient
descent require explicit flatness-seeking regularizers in order to achieve comparable test accuracy.
Data augmentations provide an additional source of stochasticity during training on top of batch
sampling, which we will investigate in this work.
We fuse together the above three topics and explore the role data augmentations holistically at
scale.In doing so, we fill in several gaps in the literature discussed in this section. Unlike work which
quantifies data augmentations in terms of accuracy boosts for fixed sample sizes, we compare the
benefits of augmentations to those achieved by instead collecting more data. While other works have
studied the role of data augmentations in learning invariance, we find that even invariances which have
no relationship to invariances in the training data distribution are still effective. Finally, we develop
an understanding of batch augmentation by showing that stochastically applied augmentations
increase gradient noise during training, leading to qualitatively distinct minima.

3                              AUGMENTATIONS AS A DDITIONAL DATA

A central role of data augmentation is to serve as extra data and expand limited datasets used for
training large models. In this section, we quantify this property, conducting a series of experiments
culminating in measurements exchange rates, which indicate exactly how much data an augmentation
is worth – the number of additional data samples which would yield the same performance gain as the
augmentation. Such exchange rates constitute a novel angle for quantifying the practical benefits of
data augmentations and conceptualize qualitative notions of consistency, diversity, and robustness to
distribution shifts, and allow us to observe the properties of data augmentations over a wider range of
dataset sizes. We conduct these experiments on subsets of the CINIC-10 dataset (Darlow et al., 2018),
a drop-in replacement for CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), which contains ∼200 000 samples. This
allows us to train models with augmented data on subsets similar to CIFAR-10, but compare to refer-
ence models trained without augmentations on larger datasets. We start with ResNet-18 architectures,
evaluating their exchange rate behavior, but consider other architectures in Section 3.1.2. Our dataset
setup is quite specific to CIFAR-10/CINIC-10, revisiting this experiment e.g. for ImageNet would
require running a pairing such as ImageNet/JFT-300 (Sun et al., 2017), which would be prohibitive
for all experiments in this work. We include a validation of results on ImageNet in Appendix F and
other datasets in Appendix B, to verify that the behaviors observed are not specific to CIFAR-10.

3.1                              E XCHANGE R ATES : H OW M ANY S AMPLES ARE AUGMENTATIONS W ORTH ?

We visualize the validation accuracies for a range of models trained with select augmentations in
Figure 1 (left). The validation behavior of these models can be well described by power laws of
the form f (x) = ax−c + b, describing the relationship between number of samples and validation


                                                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


accuracy. From these power laws, we derive the exchange rates of various augmentations compared
                                                             ′
to the reference curve of un-augmented models fref = a′ x−c + b′ . For an augmentation policy
                       −c
described by faug = ax + b, we define its exchange rate via
                                                                                                                       −1
                                                                    vEffective Extra Samples from Augmentations (x) = fref (faug (x)) − x                                                                         (1)
for a base dataset size x. We visualize this quantity in Figure 1 (right). This metric measures exactly
the gain in accuracy between the un-augmented and augmented power laws shown on the left-hand
side and converts this quantity into additional samples by evaluating on how much more data the
reference models would need to realize the same accuracy as the augmented model.
A core property of augmentations that becomes evident in this analysis is the relationship between
consistency of augmented samples with the underlying data distribution (Taylor & Nitschke, 2018;
Gontijo-Lopes et al., 2020b; He et al., 2019b) and diversity of extra data (Gontijo-Lopes et al.,
2020b). In Figure 1, we find that an augmentation strategy, such as TrivialAug (Müller & Hutter,
2021) (a policy consisting of a random draw from a table of 14 common photo- and geometric
transforms, applied in tandem with horizontal flips and random crops), shown in orange, is highly
diverse, generating a large amount of effective extra samples when the number of base samples is
small. However, this policy also falls off quickest as more base samples are added: The policy is
ultimately inconsistent with the underlying data distributions and when enough real samples are
present, gains through augmentation deteriorate. On the flip side, augmenting with only horizontal
flips, shown in green, is less diverse, and hence yields limited impact for smaller dataset sizes.
However, the augmentation is much more consistent with the data distribution, and as such horizontal
flips are beneficial even for large dataset sizes.

                                     Takeaway: The impact of augmentations is linked to dataset size; diverse but inconsistent aug-
                                     mentations provide large gains for smaller sizes but are hindrances at scale. Estimation of the
                                     value of future data collection should take this effect of augmentations on scaling into account.

3.1.1                                         M EASURING D IVERSITY AND C ONSISTENCY DIRECTLY
We can disambiguate the effects of consistency and diversity further by analyzing these augmentations
for a moment not as randomly applied augmentations, but as fixed enlargements of the dataset,
replacing each base sample with a fixed number of augmented views. In Figure 2 (right), we see that
a replacement of each sample with a single augmented view generated by TrivialAug is detrimental
to performance (see single repetition plotted in red). As such, TrivialAug is inconsistent with the
data distribution. On the other hand, evaluating the gains realized by replicating each sample in the
dataset a fixed number of times via the augmentation policy, we also see that TrivialAug leads to
significantly more diversity in this controlled experiment, compared to random flips (Figure 2, left).
Another way to look at Figure 2 is again as a measurement of extra data. Simply replacing each base
sample by a single augmented sample is not a benefit (see single repetition plotted in red), yet we
quickly find that large gains can be attributed simply to the duplication (green) and quadruplication
(purple) of existing data and fixed multiplication can be worth substantial extra data.
                                          Repetitions    0    1       2    4     8     16   Random
                                    40k                                                                                                          100k
                                                                                                            Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
Effective Extra Samples from Aug.


                                    35k

                                    30k                                                                                                           50k
                                    25k

                                    20k
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                    15k

                                    10k
                                                                                                                                                −50k
                                     5k

                                      0

                                    −5k                                                                                                         −100k
                                                                                                                                                        Repetitions   0     1    2     4    8      16   Random

                                                   50k       100k         150k       200k     250k   300k                                                       50k       100k       150k       200k    250k     300k
                                                             Number of Base Samples                                                                                       Number of Base Samples

Figure 2: Exchange Rates via Equation (1) when creating larger datasets from a fixed number of repetitions of
base samples via random data augmentations. Zero repetitions denote the unaugmented data. Left: Exchange
rate for random horizontal flips as the augmentation policy is repeated. Right: Exchange Rates for TrivialAug.
Even a few repetitions of existing samples generate most of the effective additional data observed in Figure 1.

                                                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                          100k
                                     100k


Effective Extra Samples from Aug.


                                                                                                     Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                                                                                                                                           50k
                                      50k
                                                                                                                                             0
                                        0 Width
                                             4                                                                                           −50k
                                    −50k
                                             8
                                                                                                                                         −100k
                                             16
                                    −100k
                                             32                                                                                          −150k

                                    −150k    128                                                                                                     ConvMixer        PyramidNet         ResNet-18       SwinTransformer
                                                                                                                                         −200k
                                             256                                                                                                     VGG13
                                                   50k        100k     150k     200k   250k   300k                                                          50k        100k         150k         200k           250k          300k
                                                              Number of Base Samples                                                                                   Number of Base Samples

Figure 3: Exchange Rates via Equation (1) for TrivialAug when modifying the model architecture. Rates for
various widths of a ResNet-18 (left). 64 is the default in other parts of this work. Exchange Rates for select
vision architectures (right) with similar parameter counts. Exchange rates behave similarly for a range of
models architectures, but quantitative benefits increase as models widen and capacity increases.
                                     400k                                                                                                 400k
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Baseline (No Aug.)
Effective Extra Samples from Aug.


                                                                                                     Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                                     300k                                                                                                 300k                                                       Flips&Crops

                                     200k                                                                                                 200k                                                       Horiz. Flips
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Perspective
                                     100k                                                                                                 100k
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                        0                                                                                                    0
                                             Baseline (No Aug.)
                                    −100k                                                                                                −100k
                                             Flips&Crops
                                    −200k    Horiz. Flips                                                                                −200k

                                    −300k    Perspective                                                                                 −300k
                                             TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                    −400k                                                                                                −400k
                                                   50k        100k     150k     200k   250k   300k                                               5   1000         2       5        10k       2           5     100k       2

                                                              Number of Base Samples                                                                                   Number of Base Samples

Figure 4: Exchange Rates as Figure 1, but evaluated on CIFAR-10 validation (left) and CIFAR-10-C (right).
Note that for CIFAR-10-C, inconsistent augmentations are worth more than any number of additional in-domain
samples. Augmentations really are worth much more, under slight (left) and large (right) distribution shifts.

3.1.2                                       E XCHANGE R ATES FOR M ODEL S CALING AND M ODEL VARIATIONS

Figure 3 evaluates the effective samples gained from augmentation as model width increases (left) and
model architecture changes (right). For both plots, the references fref are based on the unaugmented
models with that same configuration of width or architecture. We find that model width of the
evaluated ResNet-18 reliably correlates with the gains from augmentations to larger dataset sizes.
Evaluating different architectures, we find that while global behavior is similar for all models, the
exact exchange rates are similar for the convolutional architectures of ResNet, PyramidNet (Han et al.,
2017) and VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), mirroring their closely related inductive biases. On
the other hand, from the two transformer architectures, we find that a notably limited benefit from
augmentations versus real data for the Swin-Transformer (Liu et al., 2021b; 2022), but a large benefit
for the ConvMixer (Trockman & Kolter, 2022). In direct comparison of both architectures, the Swin-
Transformer contains a large number of features designed specifically for vision tasks, whereas Con-
vMixer is much more general, so that their differing inductive biases are again reflected in Figure 3.

                                     Takeaway: Relative gains through augmentations as sample sizes scale are broadly consistent
                                     across model widths and architectures, and absolute gains increase with model capacity.


3.2                                     E XCHANGE R ATES IN O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION S ETTINGS

A benefit of extra data generated from augmentations that is often underappreciated is illustrated in
Figure 4, showing exchange rates of the same models trained on CINIC-10 as analyzed in Figure 1, but
evaluated on the CIFAR-10 validation set (left). Comparing CINIC-10 and CIFAR-10, both datasets
are nearly indistinguishable using simple summary statistics (Darlow et al., 2018), yet there is a minor
distribution shift caused by different image processing protocols during dataset curation. In this setting,


                                                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Repetitions   0     1    2     4    8     16   Random                                                                             Repetitions           0       1      2   4   8       16     Random
                                                                                                                                                400k
                                    250k


                                                                                                          Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                                                                                                                                                300k
                                    200k                                                                                                        200k

                                                                                                                                                100k
                                    150k
                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                    100k
                                                                                                                                              −100k

                                    50k                                                                                                       −200k

                                                                                                                                              −300k
                                      0
                                                                                                                                              −400k
                                                                                                                                                                                    2      3   4       5 6 7 89       2   3   4   5 6 7 89        2   3
                                                   50k       100k       150k       200k    250k    300k                                           1000                                                         10k                       100k
                                                             Number of Base Samples                                                                                                                      Number of Base Samples

Figure 5: Exchange Rates from a fixed number of repetitions of samples via TrivialAug. "0" repetitions denote
the unaugmented data. As Figure 2, but evaluated on CIFAR-10 val. (left) and CIFAR-10-C (right). We find
that even for this mild OOD shift, replacing each sample via augmentation (red) wins above 75 000 samples. For
CIFAR-10-C, even a single repetition is worth more than any almost number of additional in-domain samples.
diverse augmentations are now quickly on-par with models trained on many more samples. Figure 5
shows that this effect is apparent, even if base samples are replaced by a fixed number of augmented
samples. Four augmented samples are quickly worth more than additional real samples, and with
enough base samples, even replacing each sample by a fixed augmented version is beneficial. These
effects can be exaggerated by evaluating on the CIFAR-10-C dataset of common corruptions applied
to CIFAR-10 (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018). There, we quickly find that evaluating exchange rates
for this large distribution shift, that the stronger augmentations evaluated, quickly produces benefits
beyond what a collection containing even substantial amounts of in-domain data would achieve.
The increased diversity in these augmentations broadens the support of the data distribution, and
the support of the CIFAR-10 dataset appears to be well contained within the transformed data. In
practical applications in domain adaptation (Zhang et al., 2019; Ahuja et al., 2021) and unsupervised
learning (Chen et al., 2020b), actively broadening the support of the data distribution in the face of
uncertainty is advantageous as suddenly each augmentation is effectively worth much more data.

                                     Takeaway: Data augmentations broaden the support of training data, which significantly
                                     extends their usefulness even on larger dataset scales in OOD testing scenarios.


                                                                                                                                                                         120k
4                                      AUGMENTATIONS AND I NVARIANCE                                                                                                              ResNet-18
                                                                                                                                                                                  ResNet-18 with Horiz. Flip Augs
                                                                                                                                                                         100k
                                                                                                                                                                                  FlipInvariantResNet
                                                                                                                                              Effective Extra Samples.


The success of augmentations is often attributed       80k  OrbitResNet
                                                            E2CNN
to the invariances encoded into the model by en-       60k
forcing the assignment of identical labels across
                                                       40k
transformations of each training sample. If the
success of data augmentations can be attributed        20k

solely to invariance, then we can build exactly          0
invariant models that achieve comparable ac-                      50k   100k      150k     200k 250k 300k
curacy when trained without data augmentation.                           Number of Base Samples

Several works propose such mechanisms for
                                                  Figure 6: Exchange Rates for horiz. flips of ResNet
constraining neural network layers to be invari- and various invariant architectures. All models have
ant, and we will leverage these in our study.     an equal number of base parameters and are based
                                                                                                          on a Resnet-18 template. Invariant architectures show
4.1 I NVARIANT N EURAL N ETWORKS
                                                                                                          opposite scaling behavior to augmentations.
W ITHOUT AUGMENTATION

In order to probe the benefits of invariance without augmentations, we evaluate the following three
methods for constructing invariant networks, for the case of invariance to horizontal flips:
Prediction averaging: Insert augmented views of a sample into the model and average the corre-
sponding predictions (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). We use this procedure during both training and
inference , and refer to the approach applied to a ResNet as flip-invariant ResNet-18.
Orbit Selection: An invariance can also be enforced via orbit selection (Gandikota et al., 2022),


                                                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                20.0

                                                 None
                                                Horizotnal
                                                 HorizotnalFlip
                                                  Horizotnal
                                                Horizotnal  Flip
                                                             Flip
                                                            Flip
                                                                                         40
                                                 Random Crop
               101
                                                 Combined Augmentation


                                                                             Test Accuracy
  Test Error                                                                             30
                 5.0


                                                                                         20

                 2.0

                                                                                         10

               100
                                                                                             0
                       1        2               3                   4                            No Augmentation Horizontal Flip   Random Crop    Combined
                            Training Samples Per Class                                                                                           Augmentation


Figure 7: Out-of-distribution augmentations still boost performance. Left: Test error (log-scale) as a
function of training samples when test images are rotations of training images. Right: Test accuracy on rotated
samples from CIFAR-10 that were not used for training. All experiments performed on rotated CIFAR-10
samples with the ResNet-18 architecture. Bars mark standard error over 5 trials.

which corresponds to a normalization of the invariance. Here, an orbit mapping uniquely selects a
single element from the group of transformation before the data is passed into the model.
E2CNN: General E(2)-Equivariant Steerable CNN (E2CNN) (Weiler & Cesa, 2019) constrains
convolutional kernels to reflect a group equivariance. We instantiate an E2CNN with the same
architecture as the ResNet-18 studied so far.
In Section 3, we saw that horizontal flips are consistent with the CIFAR-10 distribution, so it may not
be surprising that horizontal flip invariant networks perform better than those trained with neither
augmentations nor invariance constraints. Moreover, networks trained with data augmentations
outperform invariant models for small and medium sample sizes. However, we observe in Figure 6
that all investigated invariant architectures (red, green, blue) catch up to models trained with random
augmentations (in orange) as we increase the number of base samples. We will see in Section 5
that data augmentations serve as flatness-seeking regularizers, and the benefits of this additional
regularization wane as the number of samples increases.
4.2                  O UT-O F -D ISTRIBUTION AUGMENTATIONS S TILL I MPROVE P ERFORMANCE

Previously, we observed the performance benefits of data augmentations which promote invariances
consistent with the data distribution, or approximately so. But can it still be useful to augment our data
with a transformation that generates samples completely outside the support of the data distribution
and which are inconsistent with any label? To answer this question, we construct a synthetic dataset
in which the exact invariances are known.
We begin by randomly sampling a single base image from each CIFAR-10 class. We then construct
10 classes by continuously rotating each of the base images, so that all samples in a class correspond
to rotations of a single image. Thus, the classification task at hand is to determine which base image
was rotated to form the test sample. We randomly sample rotations from each of these classes to
serve as training data and another disjoint set of rotations to serve as test data. We then use horizontal
flip and random crop data augmentations to generate out-of-distribution samples, since horizontally
flipped or cropped image views cannot be formed merely via rotation. Note that this experiment
is distinct from typical co-variate shift setups where the distribution of data domains differs, but
the support is far from disjoint and may even be identical.
In Figure 7, we see that these out-of-distribution augmentations are beneficial nonetheless. Notably,
random crops, which can generate significantly more unique views than horizontal flips, yield massive
performance boosts for identifying rotated images, even though we know that the cropped samples
are out-of-distribution. We also see in this figure that random crops are especially useful if we instead
use as our test set rotations of samples from CIFAR-10 that were not used for training. Specifically,
we assign a base test image and its rotations the same label as the base image from the training
set with the same CIFAR-10 label. This experiment supports the observations from Section 3 that
augmentations can be particularly beneficial for OOD generalization.

               Takeaway: Comparing invariant architectures to augmentations, we find that augmentations
               dominate on smaller scales, but invariant architectures catch up in the large-sample regime.
               Augmentations can provide benefits even on apparently unrelated invariances, which is
               particularly helpful for OOD generalization.


                                                                         7
                                   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                 1R $XJ
                                  1R $XJ                                               +RUL]  )OLS    5DQG  &URS
                                                                                       +RUL]  )OLS   5DQG  &URS                     7ULY  $XJ   +RUL]  )OLS
                                                                                                                                   7ULY  $XJ      +RUL]  )OLS  5DQG  &URS
                                                                                                                                                                  5DQG  &URS5DQG  $XJ
                                                                                                                                                                               5DQG  $XJ     +RUL]  )OLS
                                                                                                                                                                                         +RUL]  )OLS        5DQG  &URS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       5DQG  &URS
1RUP RI 6WG RI *UDGLHQW
1RUP RI 6WG RI *UDGLHQW



                                                                          1R $XJ                  +RUL]  )OLS   5DQG  &URS             7ULY  $XJ    +RUL]  )OLS   5DQG  &URS   5DQG  $XJ    +RUL]  )OLS   5DQG  &URS


                                   *UDGLHQW 6WDQGDUG 'HY


                                                                          )L[HG 9LHZV  6DPH %DWFK                 1R  1R
                                                                                                                   1R  1R                 <HV  1R
                                                                                                                                           <HV  1R               <HV  <HV
                                                                                                                                                                   <HV  <HV           1R  <HV
                                                                                                                                                                                         1R  <HV
                                                                         )L[HG 9LHZV  6DPH %DWFK
                                   Figure 8: Randomly applied augmentations significantly increase stochasticity late in training but decrease
                                   stochasticity early. Standard deviation of gradient across epochs for different augmentations and different
                                   mini-batch sampling strategies. Shown is the mean over 10 runs, and shaded regions represent one standard error.

                                   5                             AUGMENTATIONS A S A S OURCE OF S TOCHASTICITY D URING T RAINING

                                   Typical loss functions are summed over training samples. During optimization, gradients are
                                   computed using small mini-batches of random samples, resulting in stochasticity. Augmentations
                                   increase the number of available data, often so much that we never sample the same data twice.
                                   Since data augmentations expand and diversify the training set, they may serve as additional sources
                                   of stochasticity during optimization. If data augmentations do increase the variety of gradients, they
                                   could as a result cause us to find qualitatively different minima. Stochastic optimization is thought
                                   to be associated with flat minima of the loss landscape which are in turn associated with superior
                                   generalization (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a). This flatness-seeking
                                   behavior may be the effect of both the augmented loss function and also how we sample it.
                                   To put this hypothesis to the test, we measure the standard deviation of gradients during optimization
                                   for models trained with and without data augmentations, and we quantify the flatness of the
                                   corresponding minima. We construct experiments that disentangle the augmented loss function
                                   from the additional stochasticity produced by sampling augmentations. We consider a “same batch"
                                   strategy in which gradient updates are averaged over multiple views of a single image, resulting
                                   in lower stochasticity. We also consider “fixed views" where we repeat a frozen set of augmented
                                   views per element of the training set, as in Figure 2.


                                   5.1                           M EASURING STOCHASTICITY

                                   To measure stochasticity, we train a model on a given training set and augmentation strategy, and we
                                   freeze the model every 10 epochs to estimate the standard deviation (formally the norm of parameter-
                                   wise standard deviations) of its gradients over randomly sampled batches comprising 128 base
                                   images, the same batch size used during training. That is, we measure the square root of the average
                                   squared distance between a randomly sampled batch gradient and the mean gradient. We adopt a
                                   filter-normalized distance function (Li et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020) to account for invariances
                                   in neural networks whereby shrinking the parameters in convolutional filters may not effect the
                                   network’s output but may make the model more sensitive to parameter perturbations of a fixed size.
                                   In Figure 8, we see that non-augmented datasets actually yield noisier gradients early in training, but
                                   this noise vanishes rapidly as over-fitting occurs. In contrast, randomly applied data augmentations
                                   result in flatter curves, indicating that the added diversity of views available for sampling preserves
                                   stochasticity later in training. We also see that for each augmentation policy, applying augmentations
                                   randomly results in the most stochasticity late in training, while including multiple random views
                                   in the same batch (Hoffer et al., 2020; Fort et al., 2022) results in less. Sampling augmentations
                                   from a fixed set of four views per sample (denoted “fixed views”) results in even less stochasticity,
                                   and including each of the four views in every batch results in the least stochasticity (denoted “fixed
                                   vews”, “same batch”). This ordering, which holds across all data augmentations we try, is consistent
                                   with the intuition that more randomness in augmentation leads to more stochasticity in training,
                                   notably only manifesting during later epochs. We will now see that the late-training stochasticity
                                   we measure correlates strongly with the flatness of the minima these optimization procedures find.


                                                                                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.2     M EASURING F LATNESS

We adopt the flatness measurements from Huang et al. (2020) as these measurements are non-local,
do not require Hessian computations which are dubious for non-smooth ReLU networks, and they
are consistent with our filter-normalized gradient standard deviation measurements. Specifically, we
measure the average filter-normalized distance in random directions from the trained model parameters
before we reach a loss function value of 1.0, where loss is evaluated on the non-augmented dataset.
Under this metric, larger values correspond to flatter minima as parameters can be perturbed further
without increasing loss. We use the same ResNet-18 models trained in the stochasticity experiments
above with the same exact augmentation setups.
Investigating Figure 8 and Figure 9, (see also Table 4), we observe that flatness correlates
strongly with late-training stochasticity. Models trained without augmentation or with non-random
augmentation, where all views are seen in each batch, are less stochastic at the end of training and
find sharper minima. While previous works have associated SGD with flatness-seeking behavior
(Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2018; Geiping et al., 2021), data augmentations appear to contribute to this
phenomenon. Simply put, training with randomized data augmentations finds flatter minima, and
models trained with strong data augmentations lie at especially flat minima.

      Takeaway: Randomly applied augmentations provide benefits beyond invariance by flattening
      the loss landscape, which is reflected in both measurements of flatness after training and
      measurements of gradient noise late in the training.


5.3     DATASET SCALING AND F LATNESS
                                                         Empirical Flatness (higher is flatter)


                                                                                                  25

Figure 9 directly measures flatness for several
                                                        20
dataset scales. We first notice that base mod-
els become flatter (with respect to their base
                                                        15
samples) as the number of samples increases.                                               Augmentation Strategy
                                                                                              Horiz. Flips
Surprisingly, stronger augmentations can pro-           10                                    Flips&Crops
duce this effect quicker and raise flatness values                                            Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                              Perspective
even for lower sample sizes. As a notable ex-            5
                                                                                              TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
ample, TrivialAug produces models that remain                                                          2   3   4   5   6 7 8 9   2   3   4   5   6 7 8 9
                                                         1000                 10k                          100k
relatively flat for all sample sizes considered.                         Number of Base Samples
Furthermore, all augmentations converge to sim-
                                                      Figure 9: Left: Flatness for augmented models trained
ilar flatness in the sample size limit, as regular- on several dataset sizes from Figure 1. All strategies
ization becomes less relevant in the large data converge to similar levels of flatness when scaling.
regime. Over all plots we can even correlate the
number of samples gained through augmentations and flatness and find that for all weaker augmenta-
tions, flatness of the solution is strongly correlated with the number of extra samples that are gained
from the augmentation. We include more details in Appendix H.

      Takeaway: Strong data augmentations flatten the loss landscape to levels otherwise only
      reached with significantly larger datasets.

6     C ONCLUSION
Data augmentations have a profound impact on the performance of neural networks, but their precise
role has not been well understood; for example, if augmentations are simply a heuristic for learning
certain symmetries, should we not prefer to directly encode these symmetries through advances in
group equivariant networks? Through the lens of exchange rates and power laws, we observe the gains
through augmentations as datasets scale and domains change. We find that augmentations dominating
invariant architectures on smaller scales, but, scale in opposite ways. Augmentations are further
distinguished from invariances in the way they can improve performance even out-of-distribution.
Ultimately we find that we can connect these findings to the regularization effect induced by data
augmentations, which we also measure, showing how augmentations flatten the loss landscape. This
work promotes an all-encompassing understanding of neural network training, shedding light on the
nuanced but significant role of data augmentation in the success of deep learning.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
We foresee no direct negative societal consequences from this work. We do think that data augmen-
tations are beneficial, especially in applications with only limited data, or where data curation is
expensive. We argue that knowing how to exchange a smaller (but verified and curated) dataset for a
larger dataset that is not augmented, but also due to its size less curated is hopefully helpful to the
community.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We use an academic cluster with NVIDIA RTXA4000 cards and also NVIDIA GTX2080ti
cards. Each job is scheduled on a single GPU and the default setting of 60000 gradient steps
takes roughly an hour to train and evaluate. Including all preliminary experiments we estimate a
total usage of about 400 GPU days for this project. To replicate all experiments in the main body
without repeated trials, we estimate a requirement of about 10 GPU days. We provide code at
https://github.com/JonasGeiping/dataaugs and with the supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported by NSF CAREER IIS-2145492, NSF I-DISRE 193471, NIH
R01DA048764-01A1, NSF IIS-1910266, NSF 1922658 NRT-HDR, Meta Core Data Science, Google
AI Research, BigHat Biosciences, Capital One, and an Amazon Research Award.

R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja, Ethan Caballero, Dinghuai Zhang, Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet, Yoshua Bengio,
  Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Irina Rish. Invariance Principle Meets Information Bottleneck for Out-of-
  Distribution Generalization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
  3438–3450. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2021/hash/1c336b8080f82bcc2cd2499b4c57261d-Abstract.html. (p.
  6)

Guozhong An. The Effects of Adding Noise During Backpropagation Training on a Generalization
  Performance. Neural Computation, 8(3):643–674, April 1996. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/
  neco.1996.8.3.643. (p. 2)

Randall Balestriero, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. The Effects of Regularization and Data
  Augmentation are Class Dependent. arXiv:2204.03632 [cs, stat], April 2022a. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2204.03632. (p. 2)

Randall Balestriero, Ishan Misra, and Yann LeCun. A Data-Augmentation Is Worth A Thousand
  Samples: Analytical Moments And Sampling-Free Training. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, October 2022b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ekQ_
  xrVWwQp. (p. 2)

Gregory Benton, Marc Finzi, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew G Wilson.    Learning In-
  variances in Neural Networks from Training Data.    In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 17605–17616. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2020.     URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  cc8090c4d2791cdd9cd2cb3c24296190-Abstract.html. (p. 2)

N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer. SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-
  sampling Technique. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 16:321–357, June 2002. ISSN
  1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.953. URL https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/
  article/view/10302. (p. 2)

Shuxiao Chen, Edgar Dobriban, and Jane Lee. A Group-Theoretic Framework for Data Augmentation.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 21321–21333. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  f4573fc71c731d5c362f0d7860945b88-Abstract.html. (p. 2)


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A Simple Framework
  for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, November 2020b. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html. (p. 6)
Gregory Cohen, Saeed Afshar, Jonathan Tapson, and André van Schaik. EMNIST: Extending MNIST
  to handwritten letters. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
  2921–2926, May 2017. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2017.7966217. (p. 16)
Miles Cranmer. PySR: High-Performance Symbolic Regression in Python, Novem-
 ber   2022.      URL    https://github.com/MilesCranmer/PySR/blob/
 05fc197f84474bf2a5c4369926927411d865ef0d/CITATION.md. (p. 26)
Miles Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David Spergel,
 and Shirley Ho. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive biases. In
 Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 NIPS’20, pp. 17429–17442, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
 978-1-71382-954-6. (p. 26)
Ekin D. Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V. Le. AutoAugment:
  Learning Augmentation Strategies From Data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 113–123, 2019. URL https://openaccess.
  thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/html/Cubuk_AutoAugment_Learning_
  Augmentation_Strategies_From_Data_CVPR_2019_paper.html. (p. 2, 16)
Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jon Shlens, and Quoc Le.      RandAugment: Practi-
  cal Automated Data Augmentation with a Reduced Search Space.     In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 18613–18624. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  d85b63ef0ccb114d0a3bb7b7d808028f-Abstract.html. (p. 2, 16)
Tri Dao, Albert Gu, Alexander Ratner, Virginia Smith, Chris De Sa, and Christopher Re. A Kernel
  Theory of Modern Data Augmentation. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1528–1537. PMLR, May 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v97/dao19b.html. (p. 2)
Luke N. Darlow, Elliot J. Crowley, Antreas Antoniou, and Amos J. Storkey. CINIC-10 is not
  ImageNet or CIFAR-10. arXiv:1810.03505 [cs, stat], October 2018. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1810.03505. (p. 3, 5, 16)
Marc Finzi, Samuel Stanton, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Generalizing Convolutional
 Neural Networks for Equivariance to Lie Groups on Arbitrary Continuous Data. In Proceedings of
 the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3165–3176. PMLR, November 2020.
 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/finzi20a.html. (p. 1)
Stanislav Fort, Andrew Brock, Razvan Pascanu, Soham De, and Samuel L. Smith. Drawing
  Multiple Augmentation Samples Per Image During Training Efficiently Decreases Test Error.
  arXiv:2105.13343 [cs], February 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.13343. (p.
  1, 8)
Kanchana Vaishnavi Gandikota, Jonas Geiping, Zorah Lähner, Adam Czapliński, and Michael
  Moeller. A Simple Strategy to Provable Invariance via Orbit Mapping. In Asian Conference on
  Computer Vision (ACCV), Macau, December 2022. arXiv. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.11916. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.11916. (p. 6)
Jonas Geiping, Micah Goldblum, Phil Pope, Michael Moeller, and Tom Goldstein. Stochastic Training
  is Not Necessary for Generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  September 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZBESeIUB5k. (p. 1, 3,
  9)
Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Sylvia Smullin, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Ethan Dyer. Tradeoffs in Data
  Augmentation: An Empirical Study. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  September 2020a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZcKPWuhG6wy. (p. 2)


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Sylvia J. Smullin, Ekin D. Cubuk, and Ethan Dyer. Affinity and Diversity:
  Quantifying Mechanisms of Data Augmentation. arXiv:2002.08973 [cs, stat], June 2020b. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.08973. (p. 2, 4)
Dongyoon Han, Jiwhan Kim, and Junmo Kim. Deep Pyramidal Residual Networks. In 2017 IEEE
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6307–6315, July 2017. doi:
 10.1109/CVPR.2017.668. (p. 5)
Boris Hanin and Yi Sun. How Data Augmentation affects Optimization for Linear Regression. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8095–8105. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  442b548e816f05640dec68f497ca38ac-Abstract.html. (p. 2)
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, June 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. (p. 15)
Tong He, Zhi Zhang, Hang Zhang, Zhongyue Zhang, Junyuan Xie, and Mu Li. Bag of
  Tricks for Image Classification with Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 558–567, 2019a.
  URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/html/He_Bag_
  of_Tricks_for_Image_Classification_with_Convolutional_Neural_
  Networks_CVPR_2019_paper.html. (p. 15, 30)
Zhuoxun He, Lingxi Xie, Xin Chen, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Qi Tian. Data Augmentation
  Revisited: Rethinking the Distribution Gap between Clean and Augmented Data. arXiv:1909.09148
  [cs, stat], November 2019b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09148. (p. 2, 4)
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness to Common Cor-
  ruptions and Perturbations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, September
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJz6tiCqYm. (p. 6, 16, 31)
Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Lak-
  shminarayanan. AugMix: A Simple Data Processing Method to Improve Robustness and
  Uncertainty. In International Conference on Learning Representations, March 2020. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1gmrxHFvB. (p. 2, 16)
Alex Hernández-García and Peter König. Further Advantages of Data Augmentation on Convolutional
  Neural Networks. In Věra Kůrková, Yannis Manolopoulos, Barbara Hammer, Lazaros Iliadis,
  and Ilias Maglogiannis (eds.), Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2018,
  Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 95–103, Cham, 2018. Springer International Publishing.
  ISBN 978-3-030-01418-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01418-6_10. (p. 2)
Elad Hoffer, Tal Ben-Nun, Itay Hubara, Niv Giladi, Torsten Hoefler, and Daniel Soudry. Augment
  Your Batch: Improving Generalization Through Instance Repetition. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8126–8135, June 2020. doi:
  10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00815. (p. 8)
W. Ronny Huang, Zeyad Emam, Micah Goldblum, Liam Fowl, Justin K. Terry, Furong Huang,
  and Tom Goldstein. Understanding Generalization Through Visualizations. pp. 87–97. PMLR,
  February 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v137/huang20a.html. (p.
  3, 8, 9)
Stanis\law Jastrz˛ebski, Zachary Kenton, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua Bengio,
  and Amos Storkey. Three factors influencing minima in sgd. In International Conference on
  Artificial Neural Networks 2018; International Conference on Learning Representations 2018
  (Workshop Track), Rhodes, Greece, 2018. (p. 1, 3, 8, 9)
Sanyam Kapoor, Wesley J. Maddox, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. On Uncertainty,
  Tempering, and Data Augmentation in Bayesian Classification. arxiv:2203.16481[cs, stat], March
  2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.16481. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.16481. (p.
  2)


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jaehyung Kim, Dongyeop Kang, Sungsoo Ahn, and Jinwoo Shin. What Makes Better Augmen-
  tation Strategies? Augment Difficult but Not too Different. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, September 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=Ucx3DQbC9GH. (p. 2)
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. 2009. URL https:
  //www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/learning-features-2009-TR.pdf. (p. 3, 16)
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. (p. 2, 16)
Daniel LeJeune, Randall Balestriero, Hamid Javadi, and Richard G. Baraniuk. Implicit Rugosity
  Regularization via Data Augmentation. arXiv:1905.11639 [cs, stat], October 2019. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/1905.11639. (p. 2)
Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the Loss Land-
  scape of Neural Nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/
  hash/a41b3bb3e6b050b6c9067c67f663b915-Abstract.html. (p. 8)
Tianyi Liu, Yan Li, Song Wei, Enlu Zhou, and Tuo Zhao. Noisy Gradient Descent Converges
  to Flat Minima for Nonconvex Matrix Factorization. In Proceedings of The 24th International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1891–1899. PMLR, March 2021a. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v130/liu21e.html. (p. 1, 3, 8)
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows. In 2021 IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 9992–10002, Montreal, QC, Canada,
  October 2021b. IEEE. ISBN 978-1-66542-812-5. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986. URL
  https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9710580/. (p. 5)
Ze Liu, Han Hu, Yutong Lin, Zhuliang Yao, Zhenda Xie, Yixuan Wei, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Zheng
  Zhang, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Baining Guo. Swin Transformer V2: Scaling Up Capacity and
  Resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 12009–12019, 2022. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/
  CVPR2022/html/Liu_Swin_Transformer_V2_Scaling_Up_Capacity_and_
  Resolution_CVPR_2022_paper.html. (p. 5)
Antonia Marcu and Adam Prugel-Bennett. On the Effects of Artificial Data Modification. In
 Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15050–15069. PMLR,
 June 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/marcu22a.html. (p. 2)
Samuel G. Müller and Frank Hutter. TrivialAugment: Tuning-Free Yet State-of-the-Art Data
  Augmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 774–782, 2021. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2021/
  html/Muller_TrivialAugment_Tuning-Free_Yet_State-of-the-Art_
  Data_Augmentation_ICCV_2021_paper.html. (p. 2, 4, 16)
Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Nathan Srebro. Geometry of
  Optimization and Implicit Regularization in Deep Learning. arXiv:1705.03071 [cs], May 2017.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.03071. (p. 2)
Shashank Rajput, Zhili Feng, Zachary Charles, Po-Ling Loh, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Does Data
  Augmentation Lead to Positive Margin? In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 5321–5330. PMLR, May 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v97/rajput19a.html. (p. 2)
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision,
  115(3):211–252, December 2015. ISSN 1573-1405. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y. (p. 30)


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Connor Shorten and Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar. A survey on Image Data Augmentation for Deep Learn-
  ing. Journal of Big Data, 6(1):60, July 2019. ISSN 2196-1115. doi: 10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0. (p. 2)
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image
  Recognition. arXiv:1409.1556 [cs], September 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.
  1556. (p. 5, 6, 15)
Andreas Peter Steiner, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, Ross Wightman, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Lucas Beyer. How to train your ViT? Data, Augmentation, and Regularization in Vi-
  sion Transformers. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, June 2022. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=4nPswr1KcP. (p. 2)
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting Unrea-
  sonable Effectiveness of Data in Deep Learning Era.   In Proceedings of the IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 843–852, 2017.     URL https:
  //openaccess.thecvf.com/content_iccv_2017/html/Sun_Revisiting_
  Unreasonable_Effectiveness_ICCV_2017_paper.html. (p. 3, 30)
Luke Taylor and Geoff Nitschke. Improving Deep Learning with Generic Data Augmentation. In
  2018 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1542–1547, November
  2018. doi: 10.1109/SSCI.2018.8628742. (p. 2, 4)
Asher Trockman and J. Zico Kolter. Patches Are All You Need? arxiv:2201.09792[cs], January 2022.
  doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2201.09792. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.09792. (p. 5, 15)
Maurice Weiler and Gabriele Cesa. General E(2)-Equivariant Steerable CNNs. In Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates,
 Inc., 2019.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
 45d6637b718d0f24a237069fe41b0db4-Abstract.html. (p. 1, 7)
Ross Wightman, Hugo Touvron, and Hervé Jégou. ResNet strikes back: An improved training
  procedure in timm. arXiv:2110.00476 [cs], October 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2110.00476. (p. 30)
Mingle Xu, Sook Yoon, Alvaro Fuentes, and Dong Sun Park. A Comprehensive Survey of Image
 Augmentation Techniques for Deep Learning. arxiv:2205.01491[cs], May 2022. doi: 10.48550/
 arXiv.2205.01491. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.01491. (p. 2)
Larry Yaeger, Richard Lyon, and Brandyn Webb. Effective training of a neural network character
  classifier for word recognition. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS’96, pp. 807–813, Cambridge, MA, USA, December 1996.
  MIT Press. (p. 2)
Yuchen Zhang, Tianle Liu, Mingsheng Long, and Michael Jordan. Bridging Theory and Algorithm
  for Domain Adaptation. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 7404–7413. PMLR, May 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
  zhang19i.html. (p. 6)
Sicheng Zhu, Bang An, and Furong Huang.       Understanding the Generalization Ben-
  efit of Model Invariance from a Data Perspective.   In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 4328–4341. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021.         URL      https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  2287c6b8641dd2d21ab050eb9ff795f3-Abstract.html. (p. 2)


A    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
For all sections if not otherwise mentioned, we run the following protocol. We train the model (in
the main body a ResNet-18), with stochastic gradient descent for 60000 steps with a batch size of
128. This corresponds to 160 epochs for a dataset of size 48000. We keep this number of gradient
steps fixed when increasing or decreasing the dataset size. We linearly warm up the learning rate for


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the first 2000 steps (about 5 epochs) up to peak rate of 0.1 and then decay to zero by a half-cycle
of cosine annealing. For all experiments, we include a standard weight decay of 5e − 4 and train
with Nesterov momentum of 0.9. The data is shuffled randomly after every epoch and we record
validation accuracy every 10000 steps. All training runs are non-deterministic based on stochasticity
due to random shuffling and cudnn non-determinism. We run at least five trials for each experiment
in the main body and three trials for each in the supplementary material. In each plot, the standard
deviation is shaded. For five trials this corresponds close to a 97.5% confidence interval.
We use CIFAR-10 in its default configuration. For CINIC-10, we clean and resample the train and
test sets. We first remove all CIFAR-10 train and test images from the dataset, we then further
remove all exactly duplicated images and missing images, merge all remaining images and sample
a new validation set of 10000 images. We provide code to replicate the creation of this cleaned
dataset with the supplementary material. Overall we recover a new training set of size 193523. For
CIFAR-10-C experiments in the supp. material, we report average accuracy over all transformations
in CIFAR-10-C with a severity of 3. For all experiments where we consider only a subset of the
existing data (e.g. each experiment with less than 193523 samples for CINIC-10), we sample a new
subset of the training set for each experiment separately, to rule out confounding effects of good or
bad splits of the training data, especially for smaller subset sizes. This new test set for CINIC-10 turn
out to be harder than the CIFAR-10 test set, but we verify that the hyperparameters discussed above
would result in more than 95% accuracy when training with CIFAR training data.
For experiments in the main body where data augmentations are randomly sampled a finite number
of times, we store all augmentations in a database (lmdb) that is recreated in each run. As a result,
each experiment contains a fixed set of finite views of each original datapoint, but these views are
randomized across experiments. Due to random shuffling, samples from this enlarged dataset are
drawn randomly and multiple views of the image are only guaranteed to occur in the same batch in
the batch augmentation experiments in Section 5.
To compute measurements of exchange rates, we first compute the mean validation accuracy
CINIC-10 for each experiment. We then train the reference models for CINIC-10 subset sizes
of 1000, 2000, 3000, 6000, 12000, 24000, 48000, 96000, 128000, 144000, 168000, 180000, 192000.
To estimate parameters a, b, c for fp (x) = ax−c + b in the exchange rate plots in all sections we
use a non-linear least-squares algorithm, initialized from starting parameters that describe the curve
for no augmentations. For this we use the Levenberg-Marquardt implementation of MINPACK, as
wrapped in scipy.
To cross-reference the average validation accuracy of these reference models with our data augmen-
tation experiments in Table 1, we assert that validation accuracies are monotonically increasing as
subset sizes increase and fit a linear spline fref for interpolation. We then compute the exchange
                         −1
ratios of Table 1 via fref  (x)/b, for the base dataset size b which is 48000 in Table 1 and input
mean validation accuracy x for each experiment. For values outside the interval spanned by the
minimal and maximal validation accuracies of the reference data, we reuse the power laws of the form
fp (x) = ax−c + b described in Sec. 3.3 and again compute fp−1 (x)/b. We mark these extrapolated
values by a ∗ in the table.
The ResNet-18 model employed in the model is a modern variant (He et al., 2016; 2019a) and contains
the usual CIFAR-10 stem consisting of a single 3 × 3 convolutional layer without pooling, instead of
the ImageNet stem (of two convolutional layers with stride and max-pooling). For experiments in
the supplementary material, we further consider a ResNet-8 (i.e. three stages and a single block per
stage) (He et al., 2016), a VGG-11 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) with batch normalization, and
a ConvMixer architecture (Trockman & Kolter, 2022) of depth 8 with hidden dimension 128 and
spatial kernel size of 7.
We implement and run all experiments in PyTorch and make use of torchvision implementa-
tions for a range of data augmentations investigated in this work. We provide code to replicate all
experiments at https://github.com/JonasGeiping/dataaugs and with the supplemen-
tary material.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.1                                    H YPERPARAMETERS FOR AUGMENTATIONS

For each augmentation we broadly follow established defaults. For completion we record these, and
additional details here.
Horiz. Flips: A data point is flipped horizontally with probability 0.5.
Det. Horiz. Flips: Deterministic horizontal flips. For 1×, this corresponds to flipping every data
point. 2× corresponds to both flips being contained in the dataset.
Vert. Flips: A data point is flipped vertically with probability 0.5.
Det. Vert. Flips: Deterministic vertical flips. For 1×, this corresponds to flipping every data point.
2× corresponds to both flips being contained in the dataset.
Random Crops: The image is padded by with zero-padding by 4 pixels in each direction and then a
image of size 32 × 32 is cropped (This is classical random cropping for CIFAR-10).
Flips&Crops: Both random crops and horizontal flips are employed, as described above.
Perspectives: Performs a random perspective transform with probability 0.5 with bilinear resampling.
Jitter: Color jitter, randomly transforming contrast, hue and brightness of the image. For each
distortion, sample a new scale uniformly from [0.5, 1.5].
Blur: Blurs the image with a Gaussian blur with σ = 3.
AutoAug: Employ the augmentation policy of Cubuk et al. (2019), with the CIFAR-10 policy.
AugMix: The augmentation policy of Hendrycks et al. (2020).
RandAug: The augmentation policy of Cubuk et al. (2020), again with the CIFAR-10 policy.
TrivialAug: The augmentation policy of Müller & Hutter (2021) in its “wide" configuration.
AutoAug&Flips&Crops: The AutoAug policy followed by random horizontal flips and random
crops as described above.
AugMix&Flips&Crops: The Augmix policy followed by random horizontal flips and random crops
as described above.
RandAug&Flips&Crops: The RandAug policy followed by random horizontal flips and random
crops as described above.
TrivialAug&Flips&Crops: The TrivialAug policy followed by random horizontal flips and random
crops as described above.

A.2                                    DATA L ICENSING

We investigate, MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009), EM-
NIST (Cohen et al., 2017), CIFAR10-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018) and CINIC-10 (Darlow et al.,
2018) and refer to these publications for additional details. We remove duplicates and missing data
from CINIC-10 as described in the experimental setup.

                                                            192000 Base Samples                            0.82                           192000 Base Samples                                                                                                      0.84
                                 Augmentation
                           0.8         Horiz. Flips                                                         0.8                                                                           0.82                      192000 Base Samples                            0.83
                                       TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                                           0.78
 CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                  CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                 CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                          0.75                                                                                                                                                             0.8                                                                     0.82
                                                                                                           0.76                                                                                                                                                                                   192000 Base Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.81
                           0.7                                                                             0.74                                                                           0.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     96000 Base Samples
                                                                                                           0.72                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                          0.65                                                                                                                                                            0.76
                                                                                                            0.7                            48000 Base Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.79
                                                             24000 Base Samples                            0.68                                                                           0.74
                           0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.78
                                                                                                           0.66
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.72                                                                     0.77
                          0.55                                                                             0.64
                                   3      4   5   6 7 8 9           2      3                                      5   6 7 8 9         2       3   4   5   6 7                                         2     3   4    5   6 7 8 9                                          2   3     4   5   6 7 8 9           2     3
                                                        100k                                                                100k                                                             100k                                  1M                                                                 1M
                                          Size of Generated Dataset                                                       Size of Generated Dataset                                                 Size of Generated Dataset                                                     Size of Generated Dataset


Figure 10: Repeated Data for CINIC-10. These are vertical slices through Figure 2. For (left-to-right): 24000,
48000, 96000, 192000 base samples.



                                                                                                                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                            0.86
                                  Augmentation
                                                           192000 Base Samples                                                                                                              0.88                                                                      0.88
                                        Horiz. Flips                                                        0.84
                            0.8
                                        TrivialAug&Flips&Crops


 CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                  CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                  CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy
                                                                                                            0.82                                                                            0.86                                                                      0.86
                                                                                                                                           192000 Base Samples
                           0.75                                                                              0.8                                                                                                                                                      0.84
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.84

                                                                                                            0.78
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.82                                                                      0.82
                            0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      192000 Base Samples
                                                                                                            0.76                                                                                                      192000 Base Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8                                                                       0.8
                                                             24000 Base Samples                             0.74                            48000 Base Samples
                           0.65                                                                                                                                                                                        96000 Base Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.78                                                                      0.78
                                                                                                            0.72

                                                                                                                                                                                            0.76                                                                      0.76
                                                                                                             0.7
                                    3      4   5   6 7 8 9          2      3                                       5   6 7 8 9         2       3   4   5   6 7                                          2     3   4    5   6 7 8 9                                           2   3     4   5   6 7 8 9           2     3
                                                         100k                                                                100k                                                              100k                                  1M                                                                  1M
                                           Size of Generated Dataset                                                       Size of Generated Dataset                                                  Size of Generated Dataset                                                      Size of Generated Dataset


Figure 11: Repeated Data for CINIC-10, evaluated on CIFAR-10. These are vertical slices through Figure 5
(left). For (left-to-right): 24000, 48000, 96000, 192000 base samples.

                                                                                                             0.7
                                  Augmentation                                                                                                                                               0.7
                                        Horiz. Flips                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.7
                           0.65
                                        TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
 CIFAR10-C Val. Accuracy


                                                                                  CIFAR10-C Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                  CIFAR10-C Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIFAR10-C Val. Accuracy
                                                                                                            0.65                                                                            0.65                                                                      0.65

                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                             0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                            0.55                                                                      0.55
                           0.55

                                                                                                            0.55                                                                                                       96000 Base Samples                                                            192000 Base Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                             24000 Base Samples                                                                                                              0.5
                            0.5                                                                                                             48000 Base Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.45
                                                                                                             0.5                                                                            0.45
                                    3      4   5   6 7 8 9          2      3                                       5   6 7 8 9         2       3   4   5   6 7                                          2     3   4    5   6 7 8 9                                           2   3     4   5   6 7 8 9           2     3
                                                         100k                                                                100k                                                              100k                                  1M                                                                  1M
                                           Size of Generated Dataset                                                       Size of Generated Dataset                                                  Size of Generated Dataset                                                      Size of Generated Dataset


Figure 12: Repeated Data for CINIC-10, evaluated on CIFAR-10-C. These are vertical slices through Figure 5
(right). For (left-to-right): 24000, 48000, 96000, 192000 base samples.


B                                  A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We include additional material for the experimental section in a series of figures and tables. Table 1 is
an extended table of the exchange rates for CINIC-10 for a sample size of 48000, including repetitions
up to 32× and ablating the number of steps (This is a slice of Figure 1). Behavior is consistent over
additional repetitions, so we chose not to include these additional rows in the main body. This table
further includes additional data augmentations not featured in the main body, over which behavior is
consistent. Table 2 and Table 3 are then variants of this table where validation accuracy is evaluated
on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-10-C, respectively. CIFAR-10-C is a significant distribution shift that
cannot be mitigated by additional CINIC-10 data, only training on, e.g. blurred samples, provides
robustness to this distortion. We further find that training with horizontal flips in our experimental
setup is quickly disadvantageous.
To provide additional clarification for Figure 2, we also provide slices through this plot at sample
sizes of 24000, 48000, 96000 and 192000 in Figure 10 for CINIC validation data, Figure 11 for
CIFAR-10 and Figure 12 for CIFAR-10-C data. Further, Figure 13 shows the data points underlying
Figure 3 for additional clarification.
An additional table comparing the end-of-training stochasticity in Figure 8 and flatness measurements
in Figure 9 for ease of references is Table 4.

C                                  A DDITIONAL DATASETS AND M ODELS
We further verify that the findings discussed in the main body are not limited to the choice of dataset
and model therein and provide additional reproduction aside from the investigation into model
architectures in Figure 3. We repeat the tabular representation of exchange rates and a simplfied form
of Figure 11 for a tiny ResNet-8 in Figure 14 and Table 5, a VGG-11 in Figure 15 and Table 6 and a
ConvMixer (as representative of modern ConvNet/Transformer variations) in Figure 16 and Table 7.
We then further repeat these experiments with models trained on the MNIST training set in Figure 17
and Table 8, CIFAR-100 in Figure 18 and Table 9, as well as EMNIST in Figure 19 and Table 10.
We further include repeated experiments for Sec. 5 on CIFAR-100 in Figure 20 and Table 11.



                                                                                                                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    0.9


                                                    0.8


                                                    0.7


                           CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy
                                                    0.6


                                                    0.5
                                                                           Arch., Augmentation Strategy
                                                                               ResNet-18, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                    0.4
                                                                               ResNet-18, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                               ConvMixer, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                    0.3                        ConvMixer, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                               VGG13, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                               VGG13, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                    0.2                        PyramidNet, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                               PyramidNet, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                    0.1                        SwinTransformer, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                               SwinTransformer, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                           0     50k    100k      150k       200k        250k       300k
                                                                       Number of Base Samples

Figure 13: Power laws f (x) = ax−c + b for TrivialAug with flips and crops applied randomly. Equation (1).
Fitted power law curves marked in solid colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Standard deviation around
measured samples (dotted) is shaded. Figure 3 is based on this data, comparing exchanges from unaugmented to
augmented separately for each model.


Table 1: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10
training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 192000 samples. We measure
the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the in-domain CINIC-10 val. set. Values marked with ∗ fall outside the
range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws. For a select augmentations we also include
experiments with 240000 steps, i.e. 640 passes through the data to verify the utility of our chosen schedule of
60000 steps.

                                                          CINIC-10 (in-domain)
   Augmentation                                           1x   2x      4x     8x             16x          32x            rand (160)   rand (640)
   -                                                      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                1.00         1.00           1.00         1.00
   Horiz. Flips                                           0.99 1.55 1.79 1.84                1.85         1.79           1.88         -
   Det. Horiz. Flips                                      0.96 1.89 -         -              -            -              -            -
   Vert. Flips                                            0.68 0.94 1.09 1.23                1.17         1.14           1.25         1.20
   Det. Vert. Flips                                       0.05 1.30 -         -              -            -              -            -
   Random Crops                                           0.98 1.90 2.36 2.54                2.61         2.74           2.59         2.74
   Flips&Crops                                            0.99 1.93 2.94 3.72                4.00*        4.00*          3.79         -
   Perspectives                                           0.88 1.53 1.89 2.29                2.54         2.68           2.50         -
   Jitter                                                 0.91 0.92 0.90 0.87                0.82         0.81           0.93         0.88
   Blur                                                   0.76 0.76 0.75 0.70                0.66         0.62           0.76         0.69
   AutoAug                                                0.78 0.95 1.02 1.20                1.39         1.52           1.63         1.77
   AugMix                                                 0.87 0.95 0.98 1.00                1.02         1.00           1.14         1.13
   RandAug                                                0.88 1.49 1.91 2.20                2.51         2.67           2.49         -
   TrivialAug                                             0.72 0.96 1.23 1.50                1.70         1.87           2.12         -
   AutoAug&Flips&Crops                                    0.75 1.43 2.22 3.21                4.00*        4.00*          4.00*        4.08*
   Augmix&Flips&Crops                                     0.86 1.62 2.50 3.09                3.82         3.84           3.74         3.74
   RandAug&Flips&Crops                                    0.84 1.71 2.65 3.78                4.00*        4.00*          4.00*        -
   TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                 0.70 1.31 1.98 2.86                3.71         4.00*          4.00*        -


                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10
training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 192000 samples. We measure
the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the CIFAR-10 val. set. Values marked with ∗ fall outside the range of
reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws.

                                     CIFAR-10 (slightly out-of-domain)
       Augmentation                  1x    2x        4x       8x      16x           32x      rand (160)
       -                             1.00  1.00      1.00     1.00    1.00          1.00     1.00
       Horiz. Flips                  0.95  1.34      1.58     1.37    1.42          1.35     1.66
       Det. Horiz. Flips             0.95  1.46      -        -       -             -        -
       Vert. Flips                   0.47  0.56      0.62     0.64    0.64          0.66     0.68
       Det. Vert. Flips              0.02* 0.71      -        -       -             -        -
       Random Crops                  0.94  1.82      1.93     1.91    1.75          1.92     1.91
       Flips&Crops                   0.96  1.78      2.15     2.58    2.26          3.05     1.94
       Perspectives                  0.95  2.06      3.29     4.02* 4.73*           4.96*    4.34*
       Jitter                        0.97  1.04      1.09     0.95    0.89          0.86     1.08
       Blur                          1.52  1.44      1.35     1.20    1.03          0.97     1.40
       AutoAug                       0.99  1.60      2.00     2.39    3.14          3.46     4.00*
       AugMix                        1.77  2.38      2.61     3.10    3.18          3.20     3.31
       RandAug                       1.15  2.29      3.42     4.00* 4.56*           5.19*    4.02*
       TrivialAug                    0.89  1.81      2.30     3.17    4.00*         4.02*    4.78*
       AutoAug&Flips&Crops           0.96  2.53      4.46* 6.30* 6.93*              7.27*    7.18*
       AugMix&Flips&Crops            1.74  4.41* 6.86* 8.66* 8.92*                  9.45*    9.01*
       RandAug&Flips&Crops           0.96  2.32      4.00* 5.10* 6.24*              6.80*    5.12*
       TrivialAug&Flips&Crops        0.93  2.43      4.30* 6.10* 6.84*              7.34*    7.60*


Table 3: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10
training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 192000 samples. We measure
the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the CIFAR-10-C val. set. Values marked with ∗ fall outside the range of
reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws. Note that especially values > 10 are an extensive
extrapolation far outside the measured range. Values marked with ✓ are outside the range of the estimated power
law, meaning that (at least according to the behavior predicted by it), no amount of additional real data with be
sufficient to match the accuracy achieved with this augmentation - there is no exchange rate.

                                    CIFAR-10-C (out-of-domain)
      Augmentation                  1x     2x          4x    8x             16x       32x     rand (160)
      -                             1.00   1.00        1.00 1.00            1.00      1.00    1.00
      Horiz. Flips                  0.84   0.67        0.66 0.55            0.53      0.52    0.63
      Det. Horiz. Flips             0.93   0.55        -     -              -         -       -
      Vert. Flips                   0.15   0.11        0.11 0.11            0.11      0.12    0.11
      Det. Vert. Flips              0.02*  0.12        -     -              -         -       -
      Random Crops                  0.82   0.86        0.70 0.66            0.60      0.69    0.67
      Flips&Crops                   0.86   0.66        0.63 0.78            0.64      0.71    0.25
      Perspectives                  34.16* ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      Jitter                        16.81* 190.76* ✓         16.99*         7.26*     3.08    163.08*
      Blur                          ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      AutoAug                       ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      AugMix                        ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      RandAug                       ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      TrivialAug                    ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      AutoAug&Flips&Crops           ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      AugMix&Flips&Crops            ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      RandAug&Flips&Crops           91.64* ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓
      TrivialAug&Flips&Crops        ✓      ✓           ✓     ✓              ✓         ✓       ✓


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: End-of-training stochasticity correlates strongly with flatness. Gradient standard deviation across
batches at the end of training and flatness measurements for ResNet-18 models trained on CIFAR-10 with
various augmentations and strategies for sampling augmented views.

      Augmentation                        Fixed Views       Same Batch        Grad. Std.     Flatness
      No Augmentation                          -                -               13.201       11.4192
                                               ✗                ✗              24.7397       16.3284
                                               ✓                ✗               13.612       10.1113
      Flips & Crops
                                               ✗                ✓               15.676        11.914
                                               ✓                ✓               10.263        8.2033
                                               ✗                ✗               31.339       20.1336
                                               ✓                ✗               22.689       16.3189
      TrivialAug &Flips & Crops
                                               ✗                ✓               25.53        16.1076
                                               ✓                ✓               14.105       10.4287
                                               ✗                ✗               29.912       18.6886
      RandAug & Horiz. Flip &                  ✓                ✗               16.585       11.5707
      Random Crop                              ✗                ✓              22.0127       13.3998
                                               ✓                ✓               10.865        8.1097


Table 5: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10
training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 192000 samples for ResNet-8
models. We measure the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the CINIC-10 val. set. Values marked with ∗ fall
outside the range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws.

                                CINIC-10 (in-domain)
   Augmentation                 1x   2x      4x     8x        16x     32x      rand (160)   rand (640)
   -                            1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00           1.00    1.00     1.00         1.00
   Horiz. Flips                 1.02 1.50 1.74 1.78           1.69    1.67     1.91         1.69
   Det. Horiz. Flips            1.05 2.03 -         -         -       -        -            -
   Vert. Flips                  0.68 0.92 1.10 1.03           1.02    1.00     1.22         1.09
   Det. Vert. Flips             0.09 1.31 -         -         -       -        -            -
   Random Crops                 0.98 1.82 2.40 2.44           2.51    2.62     -            2.62
   Flips&Crops                  0.96 1.89 2.69 2.99           3.33    4.00*    1.07         3.83
   Perspectives                 0.90 1.57 1.95 2.13           2.29    2.18     2.39         2.35
   Jitter                       1.00 1.15 1.18 1.05           1.06    1.04     1.24         1.21
   Blur                         0.77 0.90 0.98 0.96           0.96    0.93     1.05         0.97
   AutoAug                      0.93 1.32 1.64 1.64           1.69    1.68     1.91         1.80
   AugMix                       1.03 1.31 1.52 1.54           1.54    1.48     1.75         1.67
   RandAug                      0.97 1.66 2.06 2.26           2.42    2.45     2.67         2.68
   TrivialAug                   0.82 1.39 1.84 1.96           2.07    1.99     2.19         2.24
   AutoAug&Flips&Crops          0.85 1.62 2.15 2.65           2.89    3.14     2.62         3.00
   AugMix&Flips&Crops           0.92 1.75 2.44 2.79           3.08    3.45     2.82         3.22
   RandAug&Flips&Crops          0.93 1.78 2.47 2.84           3.28    4.00*    2.84         3.92
   TrivialAug&Flips&Crops       0.75 1.62 2.03 2.51           2.75    2.91     2.52         2.93


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         0.74 192k base samples

                         0.72                                                                                                       0.75


                                                                                                           CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                          0.7 96k base samples                                                                                             192k base samples

                         0.68
                                                                                                                                     0.7
                         0.66

                         0.64
                                                                                                                                    0.65
                         0.62 48k base samples                            Aug. Strategy
                                                                             Horiz. Flip
                          0.6
                                                                             TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.58                                                TrivialAug                                              0.6
                                                                             Perspective
                         0.56
                                4   5 6 7 89      2    3   4   5 6 7 89        2    3     4   5 6 7 89                                      4   5 6 7 89         2    3   4   5 6 7 89    2   3   4   5 6 7 89
                                           100k                       1M                             10M                                               100k                          1M                      10M
                                        Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples                                                             Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples

Figure 14: Validation accuracy versus dataset size as larger datasets are generated from a fixed number of
base samples and selected data augmentations. ResNet-8 models are trained on fixed datasets generated via
augmentation from 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10 train set and evaluated on the CINIC-10 val. set
(left) and the CIFAR-10 val. set (right), std. error over 3 runs shaded. The accuracy of reference models trained
without augmentations is marked with horizontal lines.


Table 6: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10
training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 192000 samples for VGG-11
models. We measure the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the CINIC-10 val. set. Values marked with ∗ fall
outside the range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws.

                                                                          CINIC-10 (in-domain)
                          Augmentation                                    1x   2x      4x     8x                                                 16x           32x        rand (160)      rand (640)
                          -                                               1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                                                    1.00          1.00       1.00            1.00
                          Horiz. Flips                                    1.00 1.54 1.77 1.78                                                    1.77          1.78       1.89            1.86
                          Det. Horiz. Flips                               0.98 1.97 -         -                                                  -             -          -               -
                          Vert. Flips                                     0.54 0.83 0.93 0.95                                                    0.93          0.92       1.00            0.97
                          Det. Vert. Flips                                0.02 1.08 -         -                                                  -             -          -               -
                          Random Crops                                    0.98 1.70 2.11 2.12                                                    2.22          2.11       -               2.24
                          Flips&Crops                                     0.98 1.86 2.56 2.99                                                    3.08          3.11       1.01            3.15
                          Perspectives                                    0.79 1.20 1.54 1.56                                                    1.51          1.46       1.76            1.51
                          Jitter                                          0.89 0.86 0.86 0.84                                                    0.79          0.81       0.86            0.82
                          Blur                                            0.60 0.59 0.58 0.54                                                    0.56          0.51       0.62            0.55
                          AutoAug                                         0.72 0.91 1.05 1.10                                                    1.26          1.24       1.59            1.51
                          AugMix                                          0.91 0.97 0.97 0.96                                                    0.95          0.97       1.02            1.00
                          RandAug                                         0.83 1.37 1.79 1.92                                                    2.00          1.98       2.14            2.19
                          TrivialAug                                      0.64 0.94 1.14 1.37                                                    1.55          1.65       1.94            2.00
                          AutoAug&Flips&Crops                             0.67 1.28 2.09 2.68                                                    3.13          3.21       4.00*           4.00*
                          AugMix&Flips&Crops                              0.83 1.55 2.31 2.79                                                    3.06          2.81       3.22            3.12
                          RandAug&Flips&Crops                             0.79 1.57 2.27 3.09                                                    3.32          3.33       3.97            3.92
                          TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                          0.54 1.13 1.83 2.46                                                    2.93          3.35       4.00*           4.00*


                                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                192k base samples                                                                                    0.85

                         0.75                                                                                                               192k base samples


                                                                                                            CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                                96k base samples                                                                                      0.8

                          0.7

                                                                                                                                     0.75
                                48k base samples
                         0.65                                              Aug. Strategy
                                                                              Horiz. Flip
                                                                              TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                  0.7

                          0.6                                                 TrivialAug
                                                                              Perspective
                                 4   5 6 7 89       2   3   4   5 6 7 89        2    3     4   5 6 7 89                                      4   5 6 7 89         2    3   4   5 6 7 89    2   3   4   5 6 7 89
                                            100k                       1M                             10M                                               100k                          1M                      10M
                                         Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples                                                             Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples

Figure 15: Validation accuracy versus dataset size as larger datasets are generated from a fixed number of
base samples and selected data augmentations. VGG-11 models are trained on fixed datasets generated via
augmentation from 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10 train set and evaluated on the CINIC-10 val. set
(left) and the CIFAR-10 val. set (right), std. error over 3 runs shaded. The accuracy of reference models trained
without augmentations is marked with horizontal lines.


Table 7: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CINIC-
10 training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 192000 samples for
ConvMixer models. We measure the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the CINIC-10 val. set. Values marked
with ∗ fall outside the range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws.

                                                                           CINIC-10 (in-domain)
                          Augmentation                                     1x   2x      4x     8x                                                 16x           32x        rand (160)      rand (640)
                          -                                                1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                                                    1.00          1.00       1.00            1.00
                          Horiz. Flips                                     0.95 1.37 1.39 1.59                                                    1.50          1.69       1.41            1.66
                          Det. Horiz. Flips                                1.04 1.50 -         -                                                  -             -          -               -
                          Vert. Flips                                      0.37 0.45 0.45 0.48                                                    0.55          0.50       0.48            0.49
                          Det. Vert. Flips                                 0.04 0.43 -         -                                                  -             -          -               -
                          Random Crops                                     0.78 0.93 0.97 1.18                                                    1.36          1.30       1.00            1.26
                          Flips&Crops                                      0.87 1.05 1.40 1.71                                                    1.59          1.63       1.00            1.72
                          Perspectives                                     0.71 0.97 1.26 1.85                                                    2.24          2.03       2.04            2.33
                          Jitter                                           0.78 0.91 0.90 1.04                                                    1.11          1.34       0.87            1.26
                          Blur                                             0.34 0.46 0.51 0.49                                                    0.56          0.61       0.54            0.65
                          AutoAug                                          0.59 0.89 1.42 1.77                                                    1.96          2.30       1.57            2.07
                          AugMix                                           0.77 0.91 0.89 1.31                                                    1.60          1.77       1.40            1.70
                          RandAug                                          0.80 1.28 1.71 1.76                                                    2.05          2.59       2.21            2.28
                          TrivialAug                                       0.48 1.11 1.72 2.31                                                    2.84          2.91       2.28            2.66
                          AutoAug&Flips&Crops                              0.49 1.04 1.85 2.19                                                    2.67          2.80       2.49            2.91
                          AugMix&Flips&Crops                               0.65 1.22 1.58 1.91                                                    2.10          2.12       1.92            2.20
                          RandAug&Flips&Crops                              0.57 1.19 1.82 2.40                                                    2.65          2.69       2.89            2.89
                          TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                           0.41 1.07 1.83 2.21                                                    2.92          3.55       2.67            3.08


                                                                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                192k base samples
                          0.8                                                                                                         0.8

                         0.78


                                                                                                            CIFAR-10 Val. Accuracy
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                         0.76 96k base samples                                                                                       0.75

                         0.74                                                                                                               192k base samples

                         0.72 48k base samples                                                                                        0.7

                          0.7                                              Aug. Strategy
                                                                              TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.68                                                 Horiz. Flip                                            0.65
                                                                              TrivialAug
                         0.66                                                 Perspective
                                 4   5 6 7 89       2   3   4   5 6 7 89        2    3     4   5 6 7 89                                      4   5 6 7 89       2   3   4   5 6 7 89     2   3   4   5 6 7 89
                                            100k                       1M                             10M                                               100k                       1M                       10M
                                         Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples                                                             Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples

Figure 16: Validation accuracy versus dataset size as larger datasets are generated from a fixed number of
base samples and selected data augmentations. ConvMixer models are trained on fixed datasets generated via
augmentation from 48000 base samples from the CINIC-10 train set and evaluated on the CINIC-10 val. set
(left) and the CIFAR-10 val. set (right), std. error over 3 runs shaded. The accuracy of reference models trained
without augmentations is marked with horizontal lines.


Table 8: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the MNIST
training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 60000 samples for ResNet-18
models. We measure the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the MNIST val. set. Values marked with ∗ fall outside
the range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws. Values marked with ✓ are outside the
range of the estimated power law, meaning that (at least according to the behavior predicted by it), no amount
of additional real data with be sufficient to match the accuracy achieved with this augmentation - there is no
exchange rate.

                                                                    MNIST (in-domain)
   Augmentation                                                     1x    2x      4x                                          8x                   16x          32x         rand (160)       rand (640)
   -                                                                1.00  1.00    1.00                                        1.00                 1.00         1.00        1.00             1.00
   Horiz. Flips                                                     0.24  0.24    0.34                                        0.27                 0.26         0.29        0.40             0.25
   Det. Horiz. Flips                                                0.02* -       -                                           -                    -            -           -                -
   Vert. Flips                                                      0.20  0.22    0.22                                        0.22                 0.22         0.24        0.23             0.22
   Det. Vert. Flips                                                 0.02* -       -                                           -                    -            -           -                -
   Random Crops                                                     1.11  1.16    ✓                                           1.17                 ✓            ✓           -                37.32*
   Flips&Crops                                                      0.17  0.23    0.21                                        0.22                 0.24         0.25        0.88             0.23
   Perspectives                                                     1.16  1.14    7.84*                                       1.17                 1.17         ✓           1.15             37.32*
   Jitter                                                           1.08  0.81    1.17                                        1.08                 1.11         1.15        0.81             1.10
   Blur                                                             1.08  1.10    1.12                                        0.77                 1.15         7.84*       1.17             1.14
   AutoAug                                                          0.72  1.16    1.08                                        1.16                 4.38*        7.84*       7.84*            ✓
   AugMix                                                           1.11  1.14    1.16                                        1.16                 1.17         1.17        1.12             1.15
   RandAug                                                          1.10  1.15    4.38*                                       ✓                    ✓            ✓           1.16             ✓
   TrivialAug                                                       0.54  4.38* 1.12                                          1.12                 4.38*        ✓           1.16             ✓
   AutoAug&Flips&Crops                                              0.14  0.17    0.20                                        0.24                 0.26         0.24        0.24             0.26
   AugMix&Flips&Crops                                               0.15  0.21    0.21                                        0.24                 0.23         0.24        0.24             0.24
   RandAug&Flips&Crops                                              0.17  0.21    0.21                                        0.23                 0.24         -           0.23             0.23
   TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                           0.12  0.15    0.16                                        0.21                 0.22         0.23        0.21             0.24


                                                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                1
                         0.996 48k base samples

MNIST Val. Accuracy                                                                                                                          0.98


                                                                                                                    MNIST Val. Accuracy
                         0.994

                                                                                                                                             0.96
                         0.992


                          0.99                                                                                                               0.94                                                                Augmentation Strategy
                                                                                   Aug. Strategy                                                                                                                    Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                       TrivialAug
                         0.988                                                                                                               0.92
                                                                                       TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                       Horiz. Flip
                         0.986                                                         Perspective
                                                                                                                                              0.9
                                     4    5 6 7 89         2   3   4   5 6 7 89          2    3    4   5 6 7 89
                                                    100k                          1M                          10M                                      5   1000        2          5   10k   2   5    100k   2   5

                                              Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples                                                                              Number of Base Samples

Figure 17: Left: Validation accuracy versus dataset size as larger datasets are generated from a fixed number
of base samples and selected data augmentations. ResNet-18 models are trained on fixed datasets generated via
augmentation from 48000 base samples from the MNIST train set and evaluated on the MNIST val. set. Right:
Extrapolated scaling behavior of reference models for MNIST.

Table 9: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the CIFAR-
100 training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 50000 samples for
ResNet-18 models. We measure the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the CIFAR-100 val. set. Values marked
with ∗ fall outside the range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws.

                                                                           CIFAR-100 (in-domain)
   Augmentation                                                            1x   2x       4x      8x                                                               16x                 32x           rand (160)       rand (640)
   -                                                                       1.00 1.00     1.00    1.00                                                             1.00                1.00          1.00             1.00
   Horiz. Flips                                                            0.95 1.39* 1.57* 1.59*                                                                 1.56*               1.52*         1.61*            1.55*
   Det. Horiz. Flips                                                       0.89 1.64* -          -                                                                -                   -             -                -
   Vert. Flips                                                             0.62 0.94     1.13* 1.14*                                                              1.11*               1.02          1.18*            1.14*
   Det. Vert. Flips                                                        0.18 1.19* -          -                                                                -                   -             -                -
   Random Crops                                                            0.90 1.58* 1.88* 2.00*                                                                 1.99*               1.99*         -                2.04*
   Flips&Crops                                                             0.87 1.60* 2.08* 2.30*                                                                 2.35*               2.28*         0.99             2.35*
   Perspectives                                                            0.78 1.33* 1.66* 1.90*                                                                 1.97*               1.94*         1.87*            1.96*
   Jitter                                                                  0.88 0.90     0.94    0.88                                                             0.82                0.80          0.90             0.82
   Blur                                                                    0.77 0.75     0.74    0.70                                                             0.67                0.67          0.73             0.69
   AutoAug                                                                 0.71 0.92     0.99    1.01                                                             1.10*               1.14*         1.40*            1.37*
   AugMix                                                                  0.86 0.97     1.00    1.02                                                             1.03                1.02          1.15*            1.14*
   RandAug                                                                 0.79 1.30* 1.58* 1.80*                                                                 1.86*               1.88*         1.81*            1.87*
   TrivialAug                                                              0.59 0.91     1.12* 1.21*                                                              1.32*               1.48*         1.78*            1.86*
   AutoAug&Flips&Crops                                                     0.60 1.22* 1.73* 2.04*                                                                 2.20*               2.23*         2.29*            2.37*
   AugMix&Flips&Crops                                                      0.75 1.47* 1.94* 2.23*                                                                 2.26*               2.30*         2.15*            2.20*
   RandAug&Flips&Crops                                                     0.67 1.39* 1.94* 2.23*                                                                 2.26*               2.31*         2.24*            2.24*
   TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                                  0.51 1.03     1.58* 1.92*                                                              2.10*               2.22*         2.37*            2.55*


                          0.8
                                                                                                                                              1
CIFAR100 Val. Accuracy


                         0.75
                                                                                                                    CIFAR100 Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                             0.8


                          0.7                                                                                                                0.6

                                48k base samples
                                                                                                                                             0.4
                         0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Augmentation Strategy
                                                                                   Aug. Strategy                                                                                                                    Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                       TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                0.2
                          0.6
                                                                                       Horiz. Flip
                                                                                       Perspective                                            0
                         0.55                                                          TrivialAug
                                 4       5 6 7 89          2   3   4   5 6 7 89          2    3    4   5 6 7 89
                                                100k                          1M                              10M                                  5       1000    2          5       10k   2   5    100k   2   5

                                             Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples                                                                               Number of Base Samples

Figure 18: Left: Validation accuracy versus dataset size as larger datasets are generated from a fixed number
of base samples and selected data augmentations. ResNet-18 models are trained on fixed datasets generated via
augmentation from 48000 base samples from the CIFAR-100 train set and evaluated on the CIFAR-100 val. set.
Right: Extrapolated scaling behavior of reference models for CIFAR-100.



                                                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 10: Extended table of Exchange rates for augmentations applied to 48000 base samples from the
EMNIST training set, compared to reference models trained without augmentations on up to 124800 samples
for ResNet-18 models. We measure the exchange rate w.r.t. accuracy on the EMNIST val. set. Values marked
with ∗ fall outside the range of reference datasets and are extrapolated using power laws. Values marked with ✓
are outside the range of the estimated power law, meaning that (at least according to the behavior predicted by
it), no amount of additional real data with be sufficient to match the accuracy achieved with this augmentation -
there is no exchange rate.

                                                                     EMNIST (in-domain)
                       Augmentation                                  1x    2x     4x                                8x                        16x             32x        rand (160)          rand (640)
                       -                                             1.00  1.00 1.00                                1.00                      1.00            1.00       1.00                1.00
                       Horiz. Flips                                  0.12  0.15 0.15                                0.16                      0.15            0.15       0.16                0.16
                       Det. Horiz. Flips                             0.02* -      -                                 -                         -               -          -                   -
                       Vert. Flips                                   0.12  0.16 0.17                                0.18                      0.16            0.17       0.17                0.17
                       Det. Vert. Flips                              0.02* -      -                                 -                         -               -          -                   -
                       Random Crops                                  0.61  0.93 1.90                                2.10                      5.90*           ✓          -                   ✓
                       Flips&Crops                                   0.10  0.12 0.15                                0.18                      0.19            0.23       1.12                0.20
                       Perspectives                                  0.95  2.04 1.99                                2.11                      2.06            ✓          ✓                   2.18
                       Jitter                                        0.72  1.45 0.90                                0.91                      1.36            0.98       1.03                1.24
                       Blur                                          0.82  0.81 0.75                                0.88                      0.94            0.93       0.92                1.16
                       AutoAug                                       1.24  1.26 0.99                                0.92                      2.12            2.07       13.79*              2.03
                       AugMix                                        1.60  0.90 1.04                                2.10                      2.04            2.02       1.56                1.99
                       RandAug                                       1.24  2.14 2.05                                2.07                      ✓               ✓          ✓                   ✓
                       TrivialAug                                    0.86  0.79 0.96                                1.91                      1.57            1.84       ✓                   ✓
                       AutoAug&Flips&Crops                           0.10  0.12 0.12                                0.14                      0.21            0.21       0.30                0.25
                       AugMix&Flips&Crops                            0.10  0.12 0.12                                0.17                      0.17            0.19       0.21                0.16
                       RandAug&Flips&Crops                           0.10  0.13 0.15                                0.18                      0.20            0.20       0.24                0.21
                       TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                        0.06  0.10 0.11                                0.15                      0.20            0.22       0.28                0.23


                                                                                                                                 0.95
                       0.95
                              48k base samples
                                                                                                                                  0.9
EMNIST Val. Accuracy


                       0.94
                                                                                                          EMNIST Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                 0.85
                       0.93
                                                                                                                                  0.8
                       0.92
                                                                                                                                 0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                          Augmentation Strategy
                       0.91                                              Aug. Strategy                                                                                                        Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                            Perspective                                           0.7
                                                                            TrivialAug
                        0.9                                                                                                      0.65
                                                                            Horiz. Flip
                                                                            TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                       0.89                                                                                                       0.6
                               4   5 6 7 89      2    3   4   5 6 7 89        2    3     4   5 6 7 89
                                          100k                       1M                             10M                                 5   1000   2      5   10k    2    5   100k   2   5

                                       Size of Dataset Generated from 48k Base Samples                                                                 Number of Base Samples

Figure 19: Left: Validation accuracy versus dataset size as larger datasets are generated from a fixed number
of base samples and selected data augmentations. ResNet-18 models are trained on fixed datasets generated
via augmentation from 48000 base samples from the EMNIST train set and evaluated on the EMNIST val. set.
Right: Extrapolated scaling behavior of reference models for EMNIST.


Table 11: Gradient standard deviation across batches at the end of training and flatness measurements for
Mobilenet V2 models trained on CIFAR-100 with various augmentations and strategies for sampling augmented
views. Averaged over 3 runs

                                   Augmentation                                   Fixed Views                                     Same Batch                        Grad. Std.           Flatness
                                   No Augmentation                                          -                                              -                            46.39                7.78
                                                                                           No                                            No                             46.37                7.79
                                   Horiz. Flip & Rand. Crop
                                                                                          Yes                                            No                             42.62                3.41



                                                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Gradient Standard Dev.
                                         60


                                         55


                                         50


                                         45


                                              20   40         60          80          100           120            140            160


                                                    Augmentation, Fixed Views, Same Batch          No Aug., No, No
                                                                                                   Horiz. Flip & Rand. Crop, No, No
                                                                                                   Horiz. Flip & Rand. Crop, Yes, No


Figure 20: Standard deviation of gradient across epochs for different augmentations and different mini-batch
sampling strategies. Each dot indicates the mean over 3 runs, and shaded regions represent confidence intervals
of width one standard error.


D     A LTERNATIVE P OWER L AWS
In the main body, we propose to investigate power laws of the form f (x) = ax−c + b and fit these
to measured data to estimate scaling rates for accuracy with respect to number of samples. We
believe this choice to be sound in principle, as over all variants, e.g. in Figure 1 (left), these curves fit
experimental results well. In this section, though, we want to validate this choice and discuss possible
alternatives.

D.1    E QUATIONS SUGGESTED VIA S YMBOLIC R EGRESSION

To potentially discover alternative functional forms we turn to symbolic regression using machine
learning scoring rules (Cranmer et al., 2020) using the implementation of Cranmer (2022). We search
for symbolic expressions containing elementary operations and exponential functions with a symbolic
complexity less or equal than 10. For exponentiation, we limit complexity in the exponent to 1. We
search for 24000 iterations and then extract the functional form of the equation f , discarding the
constants obtained during discovery, and use standard nonlinear regression, as described previously
to fit constants for each curve f and faug . We symbolically invert the found equation f and compute
f −1 (faug )(x) − x as described in Section 3.
To run a representative example with higher complexity, we re-evaluate Figure 1 and discover a
new functional form as described above using data from baseline experiments without augmentation.
We first note that we refind a result close to our original hypothesis with fsym (x) = x0.061279207 −
1.2693417, at complexity 5. Yet, we find the following function with complexity 10 using symbolic
regression:
                                                                                          1.34957448025087
                                                                          − (0.000168170796495114x+1) 0.761082360343512
               fsym (x) = 0.897637144733759e                                                                                            ,
i.e. the functional form                                                                b
                                                                                 −
                                                             f (x) = a exp           (cx+1)d   .
We plot results for a re-analysis of Figure 1 with this form in Figure 21. Unsurprisingly, this is a
better fit for the baseline without augmentations, data on which this function was found. Interestingly
though, this does not lead to significant qualitative changes. The perspective transform is valued
differently based on this new fit of the baseline, but trends are broadly consistent.
If we take this to the extreme, and search for a functional form specifically without atoms used
previously (containing now only additions, subtractions, divisions and multiplications), we find
                                                         10798.9835603424
                    fsym (x) = 0.866576773986552 −                             ,
                                                      x + 17236.4768553924
from which we fit
                                                       b
                                       f (x) = a −         ,
                                                     x+c

                                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                              Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                              Flips&Crops
                         0.8
                                                                                                                                              Horiz. Flips
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy
                         0.7                                                                                                                  Perspective


                                                                                                   Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                                                                                                                                              TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.6

                                                                                                                                       150k
                         0.5
                                                                      Augmentation Strategy
                                                                         Baseline (No Aug.)                                            100k
                         0.4                                             Flips&Crops
                                                                         Horiz. Flips                                                   50k
                         0.3                                             Perspective
                                                                         TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                           0
                          500    1000   2000   5000   10000   20000       50000 100000 200000                                                     50k        100k       150k    200k    250k   300k   350k
                                               Number of Base Samples                                                                                              Number of Base Samples

                                                                           −      b
Figure 21: Func. Form f (x) = a exp (cx+1)d found via symbolic regression for select augmentations applied
randomly and the gain in terms of effective extra samples from Equation (1). Fitted curves marked in solid
colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Left: Number of base samples (from CINIC-10) on the logarithmic
horizontal axis compared to validation accuracy. Right: Number of base samples compared to effective extra
data, showing how the benefits of each data augmentation scale as the model is trained on more and more data.

                                                                                                                                              Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                              Flips&Crops
                         0.8
                                                                                                                                              Horiz. Flips
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                         0.7                                                                                                                  Perspective
                                                                                                   Effective Extra Samples from Aug.


                                                                                                                                              TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.6
                                                                                                                                       300k
                                                                                                                                       250k
                         0.5
                                                                      Augmentation Strategy                                            200k
                                                                         Baseline (No Aug.)
                         0.4                                                                                                           150k
                                                                         Flips&Crops
                                                                         Horiz. Flips                                                  100k
                         0.3                                             Perspective                                                    50k
                                                                         TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                           0
                          500    1000   2000   5000   10000   20000       50000 100000 200000                                                     50k        100k       150k    200k    250k   300k   350k
                                               Number of Base Samples                                                                                              Number of Base Samples

                                          b
Figure 22: Func. Form f (x) = a − x+c        found via symbolic regression for select augmentations applied
randomly and the gain in terms of effective extra samples from Equation (1). Fitted curves marked in solid
colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Left: Number of base samples (from CINIC-10) on the logarithmic
horizontal axis compared to validation accuracy. Right: Number of base samples compared to effective extra
data, showing how the benefits of each data augmentation scale as the model is trained on more and more data.


which we also use for an exemplary reanalysis and show in Figure 22. This agains fits the baseline
very well, but for example fits the result with flips and crops less well than Figure 1.
We could ultimately also search for functions with higher complexity. For example, this is a symbolic
regression result with larger complexity:
                                                                                          0.617062576584116
                               fsym = 0.170768861592998 (0.000145101205003307x+1)0.768875806100543 − 0.103778477468959,
from which we extract
                                                                                                                                 b
                                                                                  fsym = a (cx+1)d − e
and which we visualize in Figure 23. Here, we note the close relationship to the previously found
result at complexity 10, and similar conclusions hold.

D.2                             A LTERNATIVE S UGGESTIONS

Alternatively, we know that the functional form f (x) = ax−c + b can only locally describe the
relationship between accuracy and data samples, as the resulting function is potentially unbounded
above for some choices of (a, b, c), yet accuracy is strictly bounded by 1.0. As, such, we might
wonder about fitting a globally accurate form, such as f (x) = a tanh (x−c ) + b, which is bounded.
We include a re-interpretation with this form in Figure 24, but again find no broad qualitative changes.



                                                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                 Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                                 Flips&Crops
                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                 Horiz. Flips
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy
                         0.7                                                                                                                     Perspective


                                                                                                  Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                                                                                                                                                 TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.6
                                                                                                                                      300k
                                                                                                                                      250k
                         0.5
                                                                     Augmentation Strategy                                            200k
                                                                        Baseline (No Aug.)
                         0.4                                                                                                          150k
                                                                        Flips&Crops
                                                                        Horiz. Flips                                                  100k
                         0.3                                            Perspective                                                    50k
                                                                        TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                           0
                          500   1000   2000   5000   10000   20000       50000 100000 200000                                                         50k         100k       150k    200k     250k   300k   350k
                                              Number of Base Samples                                                                                                  Number of Base Samples

                                                                         b
Figure 23: Func. Form f (x) = a (cx+1)d − e found via symbolic regression for select augmentations applied
randomly and the gain in terms of effective extra samples from Equation (1). Fitted curves marked in solid
colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Left: Number of base samples (from CINIC-10) on the logarithmic
horizontal axis compared to validation accuracy. Right: Number of base samples compared to effective extra
data, showing how the benefits of each data augmentation scale as the model is trained on more and more data.

                                                                                                                                                  Baseline (No Aug.)
                         0.9
                                                                                                                                                  Flips&Crops
                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                  Horiz. Flips
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                         0.7                                                                                                                      Perspective
                                                                                                  Effective Extra Samples from Aug.



                         0.6                                                                                                                      TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                                                                       100k
                         0.5
                                                                     Augmentation Strategy                                              50k
                         0.4
                                                                        Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                        Flips&Crops                                                          0
                         0.3
                                                                        Horiz. Flips
                                                                                                                                      −50k
                         0.2                                            Perspective
                                                                        TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                                                                      −100k
                          500   1000   2000   5000   10000   20000       50000 100000 200000                                                          50k        100k        150k    200k    250k   300k   350k
                                              Number of Base Samples                                                                                                    Number of Base Samples


Figure 24: Func. bounded Form f (x) = a tanh x−c + b found via symbolic regression for select augmenta-

tions applied randomly and the gain in terms of effective extra samples from Equation (1). Fitted curves marked
in solid colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Left: Number of base samples (from CINIC-10) on the logarith-
mic horizontal axis compared to validation accuracy. Right: Number of base samples compared to effective extra
data, showing how the benefits of each data augmentation scale as the model is trained on more and more data.


E                              E XPERIMENTAL A BLATIONS
To validate the experimental setup executed in the main body of this work, we run a series of
comparative studies. First, we construct a CINIC-10 setup in this work with a novel, sanitized test
set that makes it hard to compare validation accuracies to baseline CIFAR-10 and CINIC-10. As
such, we verify our implementations of all architectures and chosen budget and training setup in
Table 12, where we find these implementations to perform as expected, and reach high performance
on CIFAR-10. For reference, we also record the number of parameters for each investigated model
here.
Secondly, we vary the budget used in our study. In all other experiments in this work we consider
a budget of 60000 steps (which is 160 epochs at batch size 128 and a dataset size of 48000). In
Figure 25, we check, for the case of TrivialAug, how the results of Figure 1 vary, as the budget is
varied. There, we find that qualitative behavior is stable across all considered budget variations, but
quantitative results depend on the chosen budget.
Third, we switch from validation accuracy after training to peak validation accuracy observed during
training in Figure 26. Peak validation accuracy during training as an oracle would return early-
stopping results, if the investigated models would overfit to their training data. However, we find
in Figure 26 that behavior and analysis are almost indistinguishable under this metric, validating
the choice of final validation accuracy without early stopping and the choice of fixed budgets for all
dataset sizes.


                                                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Model Architecture                                                     Number of Parameters                                                       CIFAR-10 Validation Accuracy
                                     ResNet-18 (width 64)                                                        11 173 962                                                                       94.75
                                      ResNet-18 (width 4)                                                          44 622                                                                         78.25
                                     ResNet-18 (width 16)                                                         7 014 662                                                                       90.76
                                     ResNet-18 (width 128)                                                       44 662 922                                                                       95.08
                                     ResNet-18 (width 256)                                                      178 585 866                                                                       95.38
                                          ResNet-8                                                                 78 042                                                                         81.06
                                          ResNet-20                                                                272 474                                                                        88.82
                                         ResNet-110                                                               1730 714                                                                        93.51
                                         ResNet-152                                                              58 156 618                                                                       95.39
                                       PyramidNet-110                                                             3 904 446                                                                       94.95
                                           VGG13                                                                  9 416 010                                                                       93.07
                                     SwinTransformer (v2)                                                         4 090 794                                                                       77.86
                                         ConvMixer                                                                1 277 962                                                                       94.57

Table 12: Baseline validation of our implementation. For each of the model architectures investigated in this
work, we report number of parameters and validation accuracy of the model when trained on CIFAR-10 with
the same experimental setup as described in the remainder of this work and augmentation policy TrivialAug &
Random Crops & Flips.


                                                                                                           120000
                                                                                                 150k
                                                             Effective Extra Samples from Aug.


                                                                                                           240000
                                                                                                           30000
                                                                                                 100k
                                                                                                           60000
                                                                                                           90000
                                                                                                  50k



                                                                                                    0



                                                                                                 −50k

                                                                                                                   50k     100k       150k                                       200k           250k      300k
                                                                                                                           Number of Base Samples

Figure 25: Power laws, Variant of Figure 1. Number of base samples compared to effective extra data, showing
how the benefits of each TrivialAug scale as the model is trained on more data and vary as the model is trained
with various step budgets.

We further include additional model architectures in Figure 27, validating that model family is a
much stronger predictor of qualitative behavior than model size, by including additional results for
the larger ResNet-110, ResNet-152, and the smaller ResNet-8 and ResNet-20.


                              0.9
                                                                                                                                                                          100k
                                                                                                                                      Effective Extra Samples from Aug.


                              0.8
Peak CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy


                              0.7
                                                                                                                                                                           50k

                              0.6

                              0.5                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                  Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                         Augmentation Strategy
                              0.4                                                                           Baseline (No Aug.)                                                    Flips&Crops
                                                                                                            Flips&Crops                                                           Horiz. Flips
                                                                                                                                                                          −50k
                              0.3                                                                           Horiz. Flips
                                                                                                            Perspective                                                           Perspective
                              0.2                                                                           TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                                TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                               500   1000   2000   5000   10000                                  20000       50000 100000 200000                                                        50k       100k      150k    200k    250k   300k   350k
                                                   Number of Base Samples                                                                                                                              Number of Base Samples


Figure 26: Power laws based on Peak Val. Accuracy, Variant of Figure 1. Evaluating f (x) = ax−c + b
for select augmentations applied randomly and the gain in terms of effective extra samples from Equation (1).
Fitted curves marked in solid colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Left: Number of base samples (from
CINIC-10) on the logarithmic horizontal axis compared to peak validation accuracy. Right: Number of base
samples compared to effective extra data, showing how the benefits of each data augmentation scale as the
model is trained on more and more data.

                                                                                                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         0.9


                         0.8
                                                                                          Arch., Augmentation Strategy                                                        100k


                                                                                                                                         Effective Extra Samples from Aug.
                                                                                             ResNet-18, Baseline (No Aug.)
                         0.7                                                                 ResNet-18, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                             ConvMixer, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                                                               50k
CINIC-10 Val. Accuracy



                                                                                             ConvMixer, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.6
                                                                                             ResNet-110, Baseline (No Aug.)                                                      0
                                                                                             ResNet-110, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.5                                                                 ResNet-152, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                             ResNet-152, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                              −50k
                                                                                             ResNet20, Baseline (No Aug.)
                         0.4
                                                                                             ResNet20, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                             ResNet8, Baseline (No Aug.)                                                     −100k
                         0.3                                                                 ResNet8, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                             VGG13, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                                                             −150k    ConvMixer      PyramidNet-110        ResNet-110      ResNet-152
                                                                                             VGG13, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                         0.2                                                                 PyramidNet-110, Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-18      ResNet20       ResNet8       SwinTransformer
                                                                                             PyramidNet-110, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops                                          −200k
                         0.1                                                                 SwinTransformer, Baseline (No Aug.)                                                      VGG13
                                                                                             SwinTransformer, TrivialAug&Flips&Crops
                                       0             50k           100k            150k            200k           250k            300k
                                                                                                                                                                                           50k        100k          150k       200k         250k        300k
                                                                    Number of Base Samples                                                                                                             Number of Base Samples

Figure 27: Extension of Figure 3. Power Laws and Exchange Rates via Equation (1) for TrivialAug when
modifying more model architectures. Left: Accuracy power laws for various vision architectures. Right:
Exchange Rates for select vision architectures. Exchange rates behave similarly for large classes of architectures.



                               1

                                                                                                                                                                              400M
                                                                                                                                         Effective Extra Samples from Aug.

                          0.8
ImageNet Val. Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                              200M

                          0.6                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                                             −200M
                          0.4

                                                                                                                                                                             −400M
                                                                                           Augmentation Strategy                                                                      Baseline (No Aug.)
                          0.2                                                                    Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                                                                             −600M    Rand. Resized Crops & Flips
                                                                                                 Rand. Resized Crops & Flips
                                                                                                 TrivialAug&Flips&RRCrops                                                             TrivialAug&Flips&RRCrops
                               0                                                                                                                                             −800M
                                   2       5   10k   2     5   100k 2     5   1M     2       5   10M 2       5 100M 2        5   1B                                               0           0.2B           0.4B          0.6B           0.8B          1B
                                                                  Number of Base Samples                                                                                                               Number of Base Samples


Figure 28: Power laws for a ResNet-50 on ImageNet f (x) = ax−c + b for select augmentations applied
randomly and the gain in terms of effective extra samples from Equation (1). Fitted curves marked in solid
colors, with extrapolated regions dashed. Left: Number of base samples (from ImageNet) on the logarithmic
horizontal axis compared to validation accuracy. The scaling behavior of each augmentation is closely matched
by these power laws. Right: Number of base samples compared to effective extra data, showing how the benefits
of each data augmentation scale as the model is trained on more and more data.


F                                  I MAGE N ET R ESULTS


We also investigate how well these power laws would fit ImageNet training runs (Russakovsky et al.,
2015). ImageNet is not an ideal setting for our analysis, given that the dataset is relatively small
compared to its complexity. Given unlimited compute one would rather train reference models on
larger splits, e.g. ImageNet-21k or JFT-300m (Sun et al., 2017) and compare the validation accuracy
of those reference models to ImageNet models trained with augmentations, as discussed in Section 3.
To train these models we follow the recently proposed training regime of Wightman et al. (2021).
We train for 65536 steps (about 100 epochs) using the LAMB optimizer with a peak learning rate of
8e − 3 and cosine decay after a warmup of 3125 steps. We additionally apply label smoothing with
0.1. We train a ResNet-50 model as described in He et al. (2019a). As unaugmented baseline, we
consider a pre-processing of centered crops of size 224. For the augmented variant, we augment with
random resized crops (with ratios between 3/4 and 4/3 as usual) of size 224 and random horizontal
flips. For TrivialAug, we use TrivialAug as described on top of these random resized crops and flips.
In all cases, we validate by resizing to 256 × 256 and center cropping to 224 × 224.


                                                                                                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Augmentation Strategy
                100k
                            Horiz. Flips r²=0.99
                            Cutout&Flips&Crops r²=0.65
                            Cutout r²=0.62                                                                        30
                            Flips&Crops r²=0.89                                                                   28 Augmentation Strategy
                 80k                                                                                              26    Cutout&Flips&Crops
                            Baseline (No Aug.) r²=0.04                                                            24
                            Perspective r²=0.66                                                                   22    Cutout
                            RandAug&Flips&Crops r²=0.26                                                           20    Horiz. Flips
                            TrivialAug&Flips&Crops r²=0.00                                                        18


                                                                                             Empirical Flatness
                 60k
Exchange Rate


                                                                                                                        Flips&Crops
                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                        Baseline (No Aug.)
                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                        Perspective
                 40k                                                                                              12    RandAug&Flips&Crops
                                                                                                                  10    TrivialAug&Flips&Crops

                 20k
                                                                                                                   8


                  0
                                                                                                                   6


                        5                    10                15                 20   25
                                                                                                                          0.3       0.4          0.5   0.6        0.7   0.8
                                                             Empirical Flatness                                                             Validation Accuracy

Figure 29: Dataset scaling and flatness on CINIC-10 Direct measurements of flatness plotted measures
of model performance on CINIC-10. Left: Flatness compared to effective exchange rates for a number of
augmentation strategies and dataset sizes. Trend lines are ordinary linear regression, r2 values are included in the
legend. Right: Same data, but plotted against raw CINIC-10 validation accuracy. Dataset size is inverse-square
proportional to marker size.


G                       R EMARK : W ELL -D EFINEDNESS OF E XCHANGE R ATES
The exchange rate defined in Equation (1) relies on the functional form of both fref and faug . To be
more precise, in this work we would ideally assume that both functions are strictly monotonically
increasing maps f : [0, ∞) → [0, 1) and surjective. However, both due to the simplicity of the chosen
power laws (which are potentially unbounded), and actual observed data, both bounded range and
surjectiveness can be violated in practice. As such, as f −1 is only defined on Im(f ) ⊂ [0, 1), this
can result in the exchange rate being only defined on a subset of sample sizes S ⊂ [0, ∞). We can
see this happening in Figure 4 (right), where we analyze an exchange on the out-of-domain dataset
CIFAR-10-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018). Here, the exchange rate for e.g. TrivialAug with flips
and crops is undefined for samples sizes greater than about 3000, with the exchange rate approaching
infinity as samples sizes approach this limit.
While this may be inconvenient to visualize, we believe it to be an interesting feature of the concept
of exchange rates. In the undefined range, there really is no exchange possible: Based on existing
experimental data, even an extrapolation to infinite additional in-domain CINIC data is not enough
to increase accuracy on out-of-domain CIFAR-10-C to the same value that is reached with the
augmentation broadening the data distribution.

H                       DATASET S CALING AND F LATNESS
In extension of Section 5.3, we provide additional data in Figure 29. As discussed in the main body,
we find a strong correlation in the number of samples gained through augmentation and flatness for
all augmentation strategies except TrivialAug. We hone in on this trend as a function of dataset size
on the right hand side of Figure 29. TrivialAug is possibly an outlier as it produces models that
remain relatively flat for all sample sizes considered, as discussed in Section 5.3, and may lead to
models that are "artificially" flat, but without correlation with accuracy or improved exchange rates.


                                                                                            31
