Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NDERSTANDING P URE CLIP G UIDANCE FOR VOXEL
G RID N E RF M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                                                                                                               "medieval people celebrating a festival
     "night city with vaporwave aesthetic."             "steampunk city; trending on artstation."             with many stalls; trending on artstation."


 "American muscle car palms and moon synthwave."   “an armoured knight with wings; trending on artstation."      “Tokyo city; trending on artstation."



Figure 1: Examples of multi-view images generated from the input prompts with our implicit VoxImp
model trained at resolution 2242 and various CLIP models. Our model produces highly detailed 3D
representations roughly matching the input text.

                                                                 A BSTRACT

            We explore the task of text to 3D object generation using CLIP. Specifically, we
            use CLIP for guidance without access to any datasets, a setting we refer to as pure
            CLIP guidance. While prior work has adopted this setting, there is no system-
            atic study of mechanics for preventing adversarial generations within CLIP. We
            illustrate how different image-based augmentations prevent the adversarial gener-
            ation problem, and how the generated results are impacted. We test different CLIP
            model architectures and show that ensembling different models for guidance can
            prevent adversarial generations within bigger models and generate sharper results.
            Furthermore, we implement an implicit voxel grid model to show how neural net-
            works provide an additional layer of regularization, resulting in better geometrical
            structure and coherency of generated objects. Compared to prior work, we achieve
            more coherent results with higher memory efficiency and faster training speeds.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Text to image generation has seen major recent advances with the release of DALLE (Ramesh et al.,
2021) and diffusion models such as DALLE2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), CogView2 (Ding et al., 2022)
and Latent Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). A natural next step is the task of generating 3D objects
from text input. However, supervised methods relying on paired image-text data are less suited to
text to 3D generation as large-scale paired text and 3D datasets are less available. Thus, the regime
of little to no 3D data training supervision is beneficial. While this might seem daunting, recent work
in text to 3D generation showed promising results without using large-scale datasets by bridging the
gap using guidance from pretrained vision-language models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021).
At the same time, advances in differentiable neural rendering and the development of NeRF (Milden-
hall et al., 2020) now allow for direct optimization of a 3D representation to match input images.
Combining these approaches with CLIP guidance, we can generate 3D representations from text

    Supplementary Website: https://isekaicoder.github.io/ICLR3801-Supplemental/


                                                                           1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


directly without paired text–3D data, by optimizing the similarity of the text to the rendered im-
ages. Work that leverages CLIP for text to 3D generation can be grouped by the amount of 3D
data required. The first set of methods train a generative model on a 3D dataset, and then optimize
a mapping network from text to the latent space of the generative model using CLIP guidance and
differentiable rendering. The second set of methods utilizes no 3D or text supervision and has access
to only the pretrained CLIP model. We refer to this latter regime as pure CLIP guidance. Given the
scarcity of text–3D pair datasets, we focus on this regime.
A prominent example of the pure CLIP guidance regime is Dream Fields (Jain et al., 2022) which
uses Mip-NeRF (Barron et al., 2021) and CLIP to guide the 3D optimization process for every new
input text prompt. Unfortunately, this approach requires significant computational resources and
exhibits poor quality generation with low-density artifacts when using direct voxel grid optimization
(see appendix of original paper). We also find that the quality of the results in Dream Fields is largely
attributable to the LiT (Zhai et al., 2022) guidance model. When using the vanilla CLIP models as in
our work, results are far worse. Optimizing the CLIP similarity is also prone to adversarial examples
where generated images with high similarity according to CLIP have little perceived resemblance
to the text description for a human (Liu et al., 2021). Recent text to 3D methods use image-based
augmentations as regularization to prevent these issues. However, there has been no systematic
study of which of these regularizations matters and how much. In addition, there are several possible
design choices for the NeRF and CLIP modules, including the use of explicit voxel grids without
any neural networks vs implicit neural representations. We systematically compare these and other
factors that impact generation quality, and show that it is possible to generate highly detailed 3D
representations with voxel grids alone.
Our main contributions are: 1) We conduct a systematic study of augmentations and their effect on
text to 3D generation results with pure CLIP guidance; 2) We compare different CLIP backbones for
guidance as well as model ensembles for finer 3D object detail; 3) We compare the regularization
effects on geometry of explicit vs implicit voxel grids; and 4) We demonstrate generation of high-
resolution grids using CLIP guidance only.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Text to Image. Recent text to image generation work has shown impressive results, from autoregres-
sive methods (Ramesh et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022) to diffusion methods (Nichol
et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2022).
However, these methods require significant computational resources, and data supervision which is
harder to obtain in large quantities in the case of 3D objects and corresponding text prompts. To
alleviate this problem, several works use CLIP and a pretrained image generator for image genera-
tion or manipulation without explicit supervision of corresponding pairs. VQGAN-CLIP (Crowson
et al., 2022) passes a randomly initialized image through a pretrained VQGAN encoder to get the
latent vector. The latent vector is then fed through the decoder, and after applying several augmen-
tations, CLIP similarity is calculated to use as a loss to optimize the latent vector. Fuse Dream (Liu
et al., 2021) shows that CLIP similarity scores are prone to adversarial attacks and that applying Diff
Augment (Zhao et al., 2020) results in more robust CLIP scores that can be used for optimization.
Text to 3D with CLIP Guidance. Initial work in text to 3D shape generation relied on paired 3D
shape and text data for supervised training of joint 3D-text embedding spaces (Chen et al., 2018;
Jahan et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022). Large pretrained image-text embeddings and differentiable ren-
dering led to recent work demonstrating that CLIP and NeRF enable 3D object generation (Sanghi
et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022), manipulation (Michel et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Youwang et al.,
2022), and even 3D human animation generation (Hong et al., 2022) without direct supervision of
text and 3D corresponding pairs. Here we distinguish between two different levels of supervision
in these works. Although there are no corresponding text and 3D examples in the first category, a
dataset of 3D objects is available. CLIP-Forge (Sanghi et al., 2022) first trains an implicit (occu-
pancy) autoencoder model on the ShapeNet dataset. Then in a second stage, a normalizing flow
model is trained with multi-view images and CLIP to project from the CLIP latent space onto the
latent space of the autoencoder. CLIP-NeRF (Wang et al., 2022) uses a similar approach by train-
ing a conditional NeRF model and a mapping network to predict updates for the conditional codes
according to the input text. Text2Mesh (Michel et al., 2022) takes an input base mesh matching


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the semantic class of the input text and trains color and displacement prediction for the base mesh
according to the text prompt using CLIP similarity as the primary loss. CLIP-Mesh (Khalid et al.,
2022) starts from a sphere mesh initialized with random normal and texture maps, and optimizes
mesh vertices and maps through differentiable rendering and CLIP similarity between text and cur-
rent object. Dream Fields (Jain et al., 2022) utilizes a NeRF representation instead to generate
views of the 3D object from a set of cameras and uses a similar optimization process. As shown
in FuseDream (Liu et al., 2021), CLIP is very prone to adversarial generations. In the first class
of methods using 3D dataset supervision, generations are constrained with a prior over 3D objects
making the adversarial generation problem less severe. Since no such datasets are present in the
second regime, augmentation techniques are utilized to prevent such adversarial generations in the
case of Dream Fields and CLIP-Mesh. CLIP-Forge, CLIP-Mesh, and Dream Fields are text-to-3D
generation methods, while CLIP-NeRF and Text2Mesh are text-to-3D manipulation methods. Also,
Text2Mesh, Dream Fields, and CLIP-Mesh require per-prompt training, while the other works do
not require training/tuning for new text prompts during inference. Compared to previous work with-
out 3D supervision, we systematically study different image augmentations, CLIP architectures, and
ensembling of CLIP models, and the corresponding impact on generation results.
Hybrid Representation NeRFs. In the original NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020), a coordinate-based
MLP continuously represents a 3D scene compared to traditional explicit representations such as
voxel grids. However, slow and memory-intensive computation is required to render even a single
image due to the number of forward passes required for sampled points along rays before plugging
into volumetric rendering. Other work (Liu et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021; Garbin et al., 2021; Hedman
et al., 2021; Reiser et al., 2021) have utilized a hybrid implicit-explicit representation to speed up
rendering. However, such methods still use coordinates and Fourier embeddings to represent the
input. More recent work propose learning the input features stored directly in voxel grid structures.
Due to learning better input representations, the MLPs used in these models can be smaller, and
density values can be used to prune calculations for voxels on the grid. DVGO (Sun et al., 2022)
represents the scene as an explicit density grid and learns feature grid along with a view-dependent
MLP to model color. TensoRF (Chen et al., 2022) factorizes the voxel grids as vectors and matrices,
allowing for a smaller memory footprint. InstantNGP (Müller et al., 2022) utilizes multiresolution
hierarchies of hash tables to represent the learned feature grids and another MLP to predict density
and color. Plenoxels (Fridovich-Keil et al., 2022) learns a sparse voxel grid of density values and
spherical harmonic coefficients for color. ReLU Fields (Karnewar et al., 2022) also utilizes explicit
density grids with spherical harmonics for color and shows that using ReLU activation after interpo-
lating query point in the grid result in competitive results. Our work builds on DVGO. In the explicit
voxel grid model, the density and color grids are optimized directly with no neural networks. This is
akin to learning alpha and RGB values in an image directly in the 2D case. For the implicit version,
we use neural networks to predict the density and color grids.

3   BACKGROUND

CLIP. Radford et al. (2021) implement CLIP as an image encoder EncI and text encoder EncT
trained using contrastive losses. The two encoders project image xI and text xT into vectors in an
aligned latent space vI = EncI (xI ) ∈ Rnz ×1 , vT = EncT (xT ) ∈ Rnz ×1 . Since the latent space
is aligned between two modalities, the similarity between the image and text is given by the cosine
similarity vI ·vT/∥vI ∥∥vT ∥. The model is pretrained on a large-scale dataset collected by OpenAI
consisting of more than 400 million image text pairs. We refer to different pretrained CLIP models
by the architecture of the image encoder such as “ViT-B/32”, “ViT-B/16” etc.
Dream Fields. Jain et al. (2022) introduced the use of pure CLIP guidance for 3D object gener-
ation. For the backbone 3D representation, they use an implicit NeRF representation, specifically
Mip-NeRF(Barron et al., 2021) which uses conical frustums over sampled points to calculate an in-
tegrated positional encoding (IPE) as opposed to the positional encoding (PE) in the original NeRF.
CLIP similarity between the rendered image and input text prompt is used to facilitate training. They
use a background augmentation scheme to prevent adversarial generations.
Direct Voxel Grid Optimization. In DVGO (Sun et al., 2022), voxel grids are used to represent the
density and color in NeRF. The density grid V (density) ∈ R1×Nx ×Ny ×Nz is modeled explicitly. The
color grid is either modeled explicitly as V (rgb) ∈ R3×Nx ×Ny ×Nz , or with a learnable feature grid


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Implicit Voxel Grid                 Explicit Voxel Grid                            traditional japanese buildings; trending on artstation.
                                           Raw Density
                                     𝑅𝑅 ∈ 1 × 𝑁𝑁𝑥𝑥 × 𝑁𝑁𝑦𝑦 × 𝑁𝑁𝑧𝑧
                                                                                         CLIP                                    CLIP
                      Density MLP                                                                            𝐿𝐿𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
                                                                                         Text                                   Image
                                                                         𝐿𝐿𝐾𝐾𝐾𝐾        Encoder                                 Encoder

 Grid Vertex                                                                                                  Diff
    Points                                                               𝐿𝐿 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
 (𝑋𝑋, 𝑌𝑌, 𝑍𝑍)                                           Activation

                                                                                                              Back



                      Color MLP                                                                              Perspective
                                      𝑅𝑅 ∈ 3 × 𝑁𝑁𝑥𝑥 × 𝑁𝑁𝑦𝑦 × 𝑁𝑁𝑧𝑧        𝐿𝐿 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
                                             Raw Color
                                                                                             𝐿𝐿 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇



Figure 2: We investigate the effect of different augmentations on text to 3D generation using pure
CLIP guidance. We study two radiance field representations: explicit voxel grid VoxExp with density
and color, and an implicit VoxImp model that uses MLPs to predict the density and color. We train our
model using CLIP guidance by optimizing the similarity of the CLIP encoded latent vectors of the
rendered image and the input text prompt. The rendered image is augmented before CLIP encoding
(with DiffAug, BackAug and PerspAug). We introduce KL divergence loss against a spherical prior
(red sphere) to enforce a compact scene - the box enclosing the red sphere shows the scene bounds.


V (feat) ∈ RD×Nx ×Ny ×Nz and shallow MLP to predict color for query points implicitly where D is
the feature length. The original DVGO had two stages: a coarse stage to locate the object in the grid,
and a fine detail stage. There is no ground truth surface in our task, so we do not require a coarse
stage. Volumetric rendering follows the quadrature rule (Max, 1995). Concretely, Eq. 1 is used to
render the color Ĉ(r) for a ray r where δi is the interval between adjacent samples, αi is the alpha
compositing value, K is the number of queried points along the ray, and Tri is the transmittance.
                K
                X                                                                                                 i−1
                                                                                                                  Y
    Ĉ(r) =           Tri αi ci , where αi = alpha(σi , δi ) = 1 − exp(−σi δi ), and Tri =                                (1 − αj ) (1)
                i=1                                                                                               j=1

The density σ and color c are interpolated from voxel grid values at the sample point coordinate and
passed through a shallow MLP for implicit feature grids. The sigmoid function is applied to the raw
color value. For the density, a post-activation scheme is used with the softplus function on the raw
density, α(post) = alpha(softplus(interp(x, V (density) )), δ).


4     M ETHOD

Model architecture. For our NeRF model, we implement two variations of the voxel grid repre-
sentation: VoxExp , an explicit voxel grid representation, and VoxImp , an implicit version that uses
MLPs to predict the density and color. VoxExp explicitly models the two voxel grids consisting of
the density V (density) ∈ R1×Nx ×Ny ×Nz and color V (rgb) ∈ R3×Nx ×Ny ×Nz . VoxImp is an implicit
coordinate-based MLP voxel grid representation with positional encodings (Mildenhall et al., 2020)
of the grid vertex coordinates formulated as V (PE) ∈ RL×Nx ×Ny ×Nz , where L is the channel size
after positional encoding of grid vertex coordinates. Separate density and color MLPs are applied on
the positional encodings to obtain the density and color predictions. We base our voxel grid model
implementations on DVGO. However, note that our positional encoding feature grid V (PE) is fixed
and not learnable like the DVGO feature grid V (feat) for color. Our overall model illustration can
be found in Fig. 2. The trainable parameters for the explicit model are the parameters of the explicit
grids and the bias term in the softplus activation of the density value. For the implicit voxel grid
the trainable parameters are the density and color MLPs and the bias term in the softplus function.
During training we also add progressive scaling of the voxel grid resolution as in DVGO.
Augmentations. We study the impact of combining three augmentation schemes: Background aug-
mentation (BackAug) from Dream Fields Jain et al. (2022), Diff augment (DiffAug) Zhao et al.
(2020), and perspective augmentations (PerspAug) from Text2Mesh Michel et al. (2022). BackAug
consists of alpha compositing checkerboard, textures or gaussian noise backgrounds to the image.
DiffAug contains several image augmentations, including color jittering, image translation, and


                                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cutout. Liu et al. (2021) used it for text to image generation and showed it prevents adversarial
generations. PerspAug denotes random perspective transformations applied to the image.
Losses. We combine the CLIP and transmittance losses introduced in Dream Fields, with losses
from DVGO to reduce noise and promote smoothness. In addition, we introduce a spherical prior
loss term to encourage a coherent object. For a model parameterized by θ, the CLIP loss (Eq. 2)
enforces the cosine similarity between the NeRF generated image I(θ, p) for a camera pose p and
the input caption xT to be high in CLIP space. The transmittance loss (Eq. 3) prevents the scene
from being overcrowded by applying a loss when the average transmittance is over the threshold τ
and Tr(θ, p) is the transmittance image.
                               LCLIP (θ, p, xT ) = −EncI (I(θ, p))⊤ EncT (xT )                     (2)
                                      LTr = − min(τ, mean(Tr(θ, p)))                               (3)
To encourage centered objects and uniform size, we introduce a spherical prior (Eq. 4) where the
probability is 1 for coordinates q within a sphere of radius 1. We calculate the KL divergence
between the spherical prior and the density voxel grid with the sampled point coordinates q from
grid vertices (Eq. 5). This loss serves the same purpose as ray shifting in Dream Fields. However, it
is not trivial to shift and scale the voxel grid directly. Therefore, we promote centering and uniform
size through this loss instead.
                                                      1, if ∥q∥22 ≤ 1

                                      Psphere (q) =                                                 (4)
                                                      0, otherwise

                                     X                         Psphere (q)
                            LKLs =       Psphere (q)log                                             (5)
                                      q
                                                          α(post) (q, V (density) )

In our model, we enable the ensembling of different CLIP models by adding a second similarity
loss using a different CLIP model as shown in Eq. 6, where EncI2 and EncT2 are the image and text
encoders for the second CLIP model respectively.
                              LCLIP2 (θ, p, xT ) = −EncI2 (I(θ, p))⊤ EncT2 (xT )                   (6)

Following DVGO, we also add a total variation loss LTV to reduce noise and promote smoothness
and a background entropy loss Lσ to encourage density values be either 0 or 1. Our complete loss
is shown in Eq. 7, where the λs are the weights for the different loss terms.
              LTotal = LCLIP + λTr LTr + λTV LTV + λKLs LKLs + λσ Lσ + λCLIP2 LCLIP2            (7)
We find that during optimization, it is important to schedule the LTV and LKLs loss terms so that
they are turned off toward the end of the optimization. Please see Appendix A.1 for more discussion
and details of other hyperparameter values.

5       E XPERIMENTS
5.1       I MPLEMENTATION

We sample camera poses following Dream Fields with a fixed elevation of 30◦ , azimuth of 360◦
around the scene, and a radius of 4 between the camera and origin. For the augmentations, unless
otherwise specified, we turn on all three of them. For DiffAug, we use the same settings as in
the original implementation1 . For BackAug, we use the same JAX implementation from Dream
Fields2 . For PerspAug, we set the distortion to 0.6 with a probability of being applied to 1.0. The
augmentations are applied in the order of (1) DiffAug, (2) BackAug, and (3) PerspAug. For most
experiments, eight variations are applied for each image with both DiffAug and BackAug and only
one for PerspAug, resulting in 64 images per optimization iteration. For larger models trained with
CLIP ViT-L/14 and VoxImp , only four variations of DiffAug is applied for a given image resulting
in 32 images after augmentation. Training is conducted with image resolution 2242 during training
using the VoxExp model with the CLIP ViT-B/32 model for 15k iterations unless otherwise specified.
The MLPs used in our implicit voxel grid are 3 layers deep with hidden layer dimensions of 128.
    1
        https://github.com/mit-han-lab/data-efficient-gans/blob/master/DiffAugment pytorch.py
    2
        https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/dreamfields


                                                        5
                                                              "Apples on tree ready to pick in garden area."

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                           "Bouquet of flowers sitting in a clear glass vase."


                                                         "A pork dish with onions and peppers on a white plate."


  Diff:                  Diff:                   Diff:                  Diff:                  Diff:           Diff:           D
  Back:
  Diff:             Diff: Back:
                                        Diff:  Back:  Diff:           Back: Diff:           Back:
                                                                                                     Diff: 
                                                                                                                   Back:           B
  Back: 
  Perspective:       Back:Perspective:
                                        Back:  Perspective:
                                                            Back:
                                                                                Back: 
                                                                           Perspective:              Back: 
                                                                                                   Perspective:    Perspective:    P
   Perspective:      Perspective:       Perspective      Perspective:         Perspective:     Perspective 
   KL:               KL:                KL:              KL:                  KL:              KL: 


Figure 3: Ablations showing how the prior KL divergence loss with different augmentations affect
the generation results of VoxExp . The chart below the images indicates the mean gradients with re-
spect to the losses for the training iterations. The blue and orange lines represent the mean gradients
for the density and color grids respectively. It can be seen that the LKLs loss is essential for the
appearance of densities when augmentations are turned on.
                         "Apples on tree ready to pick in garden area."


                    "A pork dish with onions and peppers on a white plate."


   Diff:                 Diff:                   Diff:                  Diff:                  Diff: 
   Back:                 Back:                   Back:                  Back:                  Back: 
   Perspective:          Perspective:            Perspective:           Perspective:           Perspective: 

Figure 4: Ablations showing how different augmentations affect the generation results of VoxExp . We
see that different augmentations can have distinct effects on the generation result and that combining
them can result in better coherency.


5.2   A BLATION

We compare the effect of different augmentations and the KL loss term on VoxExp . In Appendix A.3,
we show the augmentation ablation results on VoxImp .
Prior KL Loss Ablation. We show the effect of the LKLs loss term on the generation results in Fig.3.
Blank images indicate that the densities in the entire scene are near zero. When all augmentations
and the KL loss is turned off (first column) the generated scene contains floating clouds of non-
coherent artifacts. If augmentations are turned on without the KL loss (2nd, 3rd columns), the
voxel grid will fail to produce any densities. We hypothesize this is because the CLIP similarity
loss landscape is more discontinuous when we add augmentations, making it hard for densities to
emerge since there are no gradients in any direction. The gradients are near zero for these cases
shown in the plot below the images. When the KL loss is turned on (last 3 columns) the densities
are more concentrated and doesn’t disappear even when all augmentations are turned on. This could
mean that the KL loss term helps to force densities emerge in the beginning allowing for meaningful
gradients. Therefore, in addition to regularizing the size and centering of the object generated, the
KL loss term also plays a vital role in generating coherent results.
Augmentation Ablation. We show the effect of the augmentations: (1) DiffAug, (2) BackAug, and
PerspAug and their combinations in Fig. 4. When all three augmentations are turned off (first col-


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            "matte painting of a bonsai tree; trending on artstation."


                               "Bouquet of flowers sitting in a clear glass vase."


                                  "A pizza that is covered in a lot of toppings."


      RN50         RN50x4            ViT-B/32       ViT-B/16       ViT-L/14   ViT-B/32 + ViT-L/14   ViT-B/16 + ViT-L/14


Figure 5: Generation results using different CLIP image encoder architectures. The text below each
column indicates the pretrained CLIP architecture used for guidance during training. We see that
ensembled CLIP guidance can generate more detailed geometry than using one model.


umn), we can see the results are very noisy and incoherent for the text prompt. With only DiffAug
on (col 2), textures start appearing, but the densities are sparsely distributed like point clouds. For
results with only BackAug (col 3), the object is condensed and looks more like a contiguous ob-
ject. When both are turned on (col 4), the objects more clearly match the input prompt. Turning
on PerspAug (col 5) helps to get rid of unwanted background textures in the apple tree prompt.
However, it may create an overly smooth image or almost cartoonish effect in the plate of food.
While we observe that turning off PerspAug has better qualitative results for many prompts, it is
infeasible to perform per-prompt tuning, so we leave PerspAug on for following experiments. For
the VoxImp model, we observe that the model can produce clean results without background textures
even without PerspAug (see Appendix A.3).

5.3   D IFFERENT CLIP M ODEL E XPERIMENTS

Backbone Networks. We compare generation results from 5 pretrained CLIP models with different
backbone networks in Fig. 5. Overall the ResNet (He et al., 2016) models (ResNet50, RN50x4) are
very noisy, but some features within the generations vaguely resemble the text prompt. It seems that
these models have a hard time separating the main subject of the text prompts from other textures.
For ViT-B/32 and ViT-B/16 the generations are more coherent and have good separation from un-
wanted textures compared to the ResNet models. It can also be seen that ViT-B/16 can generate more
details, as seen in the bonsai plant and pizza. This has also been shown in the Dream Fields paper.
However, when we use the biggest model, ViT-L/14, the results are very noisy and non-coherent.
We hypothesize that as the models increase to a certain point, it becomes easier to find adversarial
images within the CLIP space. This could suggest that ViT-L/14 is overfit on the texture features
for images, not the objects’ overall structure. Discounting the ViT-L/14 model, vision transform-
ers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) show much better results than traditional convolutional architectures.
We attribute this to the tokenization of image patches, which discretizes the image into regions and
may help to disentangle the overall structure and textures of the image.
CLIP Model Ensemble. Fig. 5 (last two columns) shows the results of different CLIP ensembles,
namely ViT-B/32+ViT-L/14 and ViT-B/16+ViT-L/14. We see that for both ensemble models, we
can generate much finer details than using one guidance model alone (see example for the flowers
and bonsai plant). This suggests that using a smaller CLIP model to initialize the generation process
helps prevent the bigger model ViT-L/14 from adversarial generations and may even help to generate


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


VoxExp


VoxImp


Dream
Fields



         “A bag full of   “A stuffed        “A plastic jar of   “an orange bike     “The side of an      “A white cat       "A zebra is
         trash sitting    animal in a bag   honey glowing in    leaning on a pole   American aircraft    curled up on a   eating grass on
         on a old park    in a room.”       the middle of the   in the snow.”       showing the door.”   wooden chair.”    the ground."
         bench.”                            dark.”



Figure 6: Our method compared with Dream Fields. All models shown here was trained at resolu-
tion 1682 for 10k iterations and uses CLIP ViT-B/16 for guidance. We see that the VoxImp model
generally has the best coherency in terms of both both object texture and geometric structure.
Table 1: We compare the accuracy for R-Precision@1 for our models to that of Dream Fields using
different guidance models. R-Precision values in parenthesis (right column) indicate when the CLIP
model used to evaluate retrieval is the same as the CLIP model used for optimization.
                                                  Retrieval model R-Precision
                                       Method      ViT-B/32           ViT-B/16
                          Dream Fields (ViT-B/16)                 59.8 ± 2.8                 (93.5 ± 1.4)
                                  VoxExp (ViT-B/16)                      83.01                      (90.85)
                                  VoxImp (ViT-B/16)                     88.24                      (98.69)


more fine grain details. This is likely due to the bigger model size of ViT-L/14 as well as the smaller
patch sizes it takes in as tokens. However, we also observe that some generation results are worse,
such as the pizza having fewer details than just using ViT-B/32 or ViT-B/16. We attribute this to the
two CLIP models having different maximums for the pizza, which may cause conflicting similarity
losses and generate less sharp objects.
Explicit vs Implicit Voxel Grids vs Dream Fields. We show the results of VoxExp , VoxImp and
Dream Fields in Fig. 6. All three models were trained with image resolution 1682 and 10k iterations
using the CLIP ViT-B/16 model. Note that we turn off PerspAug for VoxImp as it is unnecessary
for the implicit model (see Appendix A.3). The VoxExp model is able to generate textures that
corresponds with the text prompt. However, the geometry does not conform with objects in the real
world. The VoxImp model in comparison produces objects with better geometrical structure. We
see this with the honey jar, where the VoxImp model generates a cohesive 3D object whereas we see
an incomplete jar in the VoxExp model. The coherency for VoxImp is also better with respect to the
text prompt. For example, in the text prompt involving a bag of trash and a park bench, the VoxImp
model successfully generates both items whereas there is only a trash bag for VoxExp . However,
we notice that for complex objects like animals (cat, zebra) all models fail at producing correct
geometry. This is likely due to the limitation of the guidance model used. This failure mode was
described as “repeated patterns on multiple sides of the object” by Dream Fields. Overall this is still
a very hard task and we find several prompts where the models failed to generate cohesive results as
can be seen in the example with the orange bike and aircraft door. Dream Fields had poor results
overall and many generations are unrecognizable with respect to the text prompt. This is in contrast
to results shown in their paper using the LiT ViT-B/32 (Zhai et al., 2022) model trained on billions
of higher resolutions (2882 ) captioned images.
For quantitative comparison, we follow Jain et al. (2022) and report the R-Precision@1 retrieval
scores for the three models in Tab. 1. We calculate R-Precision@1 retrieval scores for the text and
images of the objects on a validation set of 153 text prompts used in the Dream Fields paper. The


                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


images are rendered at held-out poses of elevation 45◦ following Dream Fields. We report the re-
trieval scores for both ViT-B/16, which the models were optimized on, and a different CLIP model,
ViT-B/32. All models are able to achieve high retrieval scores when evaluated on the CLIP model
that they were trained on. Overall, we see that the VoxImp model achieves the best quantitative re-
sults. The VoxExp model outperforms Dream Fields considerably when evaluated with a different
CLIP-model. We note that training at lower resolutions (1682 ) result in quality degradation com-
pared to models trained at higher resolutions in Fig. 1 and that training at higher resolutions (2242 )
may result in even better results while still using less memory (see Appendix A.5) compared to
Dream Fields.


6   D ISCUSSION

3D Representation. In this paper we mainly explored how pure CLIP guidance affects NeRF mod-
els. However, it would be interesting to see if findings here also apply to methods based on explicit
representations such as CLIP-Mesh (Khalid et al., 2022). Since they start with a primitive mesh for
optimization the possible topology and complexity of possible generations are limited compared to
NeRFs. It would be worth exploring whether this helps to regularize CLIP guidance.
Augmentations. Augmentations are essential for preventing adversarial generations from CLIP
guidance. We showed how different augmentations affect the generation results and that sometimes
it can even be harmful to the coherency of the results. This was shown with perspective augmen-
tation. It can help eliminate unwanted textures in the background for some prompts, but can also
overly smooth the textures for others. While prior work in this task has not put as much emphasis on
testing different augmentations, we think it is important to explore more variations to find the best
augmentations for different use cases.
Guidance Models. While we may try all sorts of augmentations to improve coherency, the main
constricting factor lies within the guidance model such as CLIP. If the guidance model is not able
to learn the correct structure and geometry of objects, no augmentations will help bring those out in
the results. Therefore, it is important to also improve the guidance models. We see that while Dream
Fields had worse results when using vanilla CLIP models for guidance, the LiT (Zhai et al., 2022)
model used in their paper had a huge impact on making their results coherent. This suggests the
fine-tuning process in LiT can be helpful in learning better features for guidance. We also find using
alternative CLIP models such as OpenCLIP Ilharco et al. (2021) can result in high quality generation
(see Appendix A.4). It may also be helpful to look into more recent text-image contrastive models
such as SLIP (Mu et al., 2021) and UniCL (Yang et al., 2022). Our model can serve as a proxy
qualitative measure for text-image similarity models to see how robust the features learned are and
whether the models have learned underlying structures for objects that can be used to construct
geometry that conforms with the real world.
Dataset Supervision. Another avenue to help with adversarial generations is to have a 3D dataset
to help provide a good geometric prior for generators. Many current text to 3D works leverages this
to generate higher quality results, albeit at the cost of text prompt freedom. Our work is orthogonal
to theirs, and the techniques proposed in this paper can also be applied to their works.
Resource Usage. Overall, our models take less memory and are faster to train than Dream Fields
(see Appendix A.5 for details). Our smallest model (VoxExp with CLIP ViT-B/32) uses 7GB and can
be optimized on a RTX 2080 Ti in roughly 20 minutes.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this paper we have showed that it is possible to train an explicit voxel grid NeRF model with pure
CLIP guidance to generate coherent results with a combination of image-based augmentations. We
also provide empirical evaluations for how different augmentations as well as implicit voxel grids
prevent adversarial examples within CLIP. Our model performs better than prior work when using
the same CLIP model for guidance. It is also less compute and memory intensive while also being
faster to train.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   E THICS S TATEMENT

We acknowledge there are potential risks with using the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and Open-
CLIP (Ilharco et al., 2021) models for guidance pertaining to deceptive and discriminatory content.
CLIP was trained by OpenAI with an in-house dataset of 400 million text-image pairs. While the
dataset is not publicly released, models that leverage CLIP for learning have demonstrated biases
for applications like text-to-image generation (Struppek et al., 2022). OpenCLIP was trained on the
LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2021) dataset which contains offensive and explicit images as shown
by Birhane et al. (2021). Our model inherits these biases as we use these models as priors to gen-
erate 3D objects. On the one hand, text-to-3D models provide more accessible tools for the general
public. On the other hand, they can also be used to produce harmful content by malicious actors
to spread deceptive and hateful information. In addition, other potential ethical concerns raised by
text-to-image (Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022)
models also apply. More systematic studies are needed in the space of text-to-3D models as higher
quality generations are becoming possible and the potential risks need to be assessed and safeguards
put in place to prevent misuse.

R EFERENCES
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-NeRF: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance
  fields. In Proc. of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5855–5864, 2021.

Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.

Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. TensoRF: Tensorial radiance
  fields. In Proc. of European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

Kevin Chen, Christopher B Choy, Manolis Savva, Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, and Silvio
  Savarese. Text2shape: Generating shapes from natural language by learning joint embeddings. In
  Proc. of Asian Conference on Computer Vision (ACCV), 2018.

Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Castri-
  cato, and Edward Raff. VQGAN-CLIP: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. In Proc. of European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, and Jie Tang. CogView: Mastering text-to-image generation via
 transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19822–19835, 2021.

Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang. CogView2: Faster and better text-to-image
 generation via hierarchical transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14217, 2022.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In Proc. of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. In Proc. of Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5501–5510, 2022.

Stephan J Garbin, Marek Kowalski, Matthew Johnson, Jamie Shotton, and Julien Valentin. Fast-
  NeRF: High-fidelity neural rendering at 200fps. In Proc. of International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision (ICCV), pp. 14346–14355, 2021.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778,
  2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Peter Hedman, Pratul P Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, and Paul Debevec. Bak-
  ing neural radiance fields for real-time view synthesis. In Proc. of International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5875–5884, 2021.
Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
  AvatarCLIP: Zero-shot text-driven generation and animation of 3D avatars. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.08535, 2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. OpenCLIP, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773.
Tansin Jahan, Yanran Guan, and Oliver van Kaick. Semantics-guided latent space exploration for
  shape generation. In Computer Graphics Forum. Wiley Online Library, 2021.
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T. Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Animesh Karnewar, Tobias Ritschel, Oliver Wang, and Niloy Mitra. ReLU fields: The little non-
  linearity that could. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–9, 2022.
Nasir Khalid, Tianhao Xie, Eugene Belilovsky, and Tiberiu Popa. CLIP-mesh: Generating textured
  meshes from text using pretrained image-text models. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
  Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia, 2022.
Lingjie Liu, Jiatao Gu, Kyaw Zaw Lin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Christian Theobalt. Neural sparse voxel
  fields. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15651–15663, 2020.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, Lemeng Wu, Shujian Zhang, Hao Su, and Qiang Liu. FuseDream:
  Training-free text-to-image generation with improved CLIP+GAN space optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.01573, 2021.
Zhengzhe Liu, Yi Wang, Xiaojuan Qi, and Chi-Wing Fu. Towards implicit text-guided 3D shape
  generation. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Nelson Max. Optical models for direct volume rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
  Computer Graphics, 1(2):99–108, 1995.
Oscar Michel, Roi Bar-On, Richard Liu, Sagie Benaim, and Rana Hanocka. Text2mesh: Text-driven
  neural stylization for meshes. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 13492–13502, 2022.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proc. of
  European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 405–421, 2020.
Norman Mu, Alexander Kirillov, David Wagner, and Saining Xie. SLIP: Self-supervision meets
  language-image pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12750, 2021.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), Proc. SIG-
  GRAPH, 2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing
  with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Proc. of International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), pp. 8821–8831, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Christian Reiser, Songyou Peng, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas Geiger. KiloNeRF: Speeding up neural
  radiance fields with thousands of tiny MLPs. In Proc. of International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 14335–14345, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proc. of Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sali-
  mans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffu-
  sion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Aditya Sanghi, Hang Chu, Joseph G Lambourne, Ye Wang, Chin-Yi Cheng, Marco Fumero, and
  Kamal Rahimi Malekshan. CLIP-forge: Towards zero-shot text-to-shape generation. In Proc. of
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 18603–18613, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. LAION-400M: Open dataset
  of CLIP-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Lukas Struppek, Dominik Hintersdorf, and Kristian Kersting. The biased artist: Exploiting cultural
  biases via homoglyphs in text-guided image generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.08891,
  2022.
Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel grid optimization: Super-fast conver-
  gence for radiance fields reconstruction. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5459–5469, 2022.
Can Wang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao. CLIP-NeRF: Text-and-
  image driven manipulation of neural radiance fields. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3835–3844, 2022.
Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Bin Xiao, Ce Liu, Lu Yuan, and Jianfeng Gao.
   Unified contrastive learning in image-text-label space. In Proc. of Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 19163–19173, 2022.
Kim Youwang, Kim Ji-Yeon, and Tae-Hyun Oh. Clip-actor: Text-driven recommendation and styl-
  ization for animating human meshes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04382, 2022.
Alex Yu, Ruilong Li, Matthew Tancik, Hao Li, Ren Ng, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoctrees for
  real-time rendering of neural radiance fields. In Proc. of International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 5752–5761, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Ben Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana Parekh, Xin
   Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling autoregressive models for content-rich
   text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Xiao Wang, Basil Mustafa, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Alexander Kolesnikov,
  and Lucas Beyer. LiT: Zero-shot transfer with locked-image text tuning. In Proc. of Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 18123–18133, 2022.
Shengyu Zhao, Zhijian Liu, Ji Lin, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Song Han. Differentiable augmentation for
  data-efficient GAN training. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   H YPERPARAMETERS AND S CHEDULING

Our density and color MLPs are both 3-layer MLPs. The input dimension for both are 63 which
includes the raw coordinates and fourier features. The hidden feature size is 128 for all layers and
the output size is 1 and 3 for density and color MLPs respectively. The loss weight λs for each of the
terms can be found in Tab. 2. λCLIP2 is only set for models trained with two CLIP guidance models,
otherwise it is set to 0.

                          Table 2: Hyperparameters for the loss weights.
                         Loss Weights Value (VoxExp ) Value (VoxImp )
                                    λσ                  0.01            0.01
                                   λTV                   0.1             0.2
                                    λTr                  0.5             0.5
                                   λKL                  0.05             0.2
                                λCLIP2                   0.5               -

The other important hyperparameters can be found in Tab. 3. Here the number of voxels decides the
resolution of both the density and color grids. The grids are rectangular shapes with the proportions
decided by the camera frustums and each side has integer number of voxels scaled so that the volume
roughly has the amount of voxels as shown in the table. We also employ progressive scaling as in the
original DVGO. For each scaling iteration the number of voxels is doubled with the starting number
           N ×N ×N
of voxels ⌊ x 2Nypg z ⌋, where Npg is the number of progressive scaling iterations.
We find that it is important to schedule the LTV and LKLs so that they are only turned on for some
iterations. The TV loss LTV is applied only during the iterations defined in the table and turned
off otherwise. Since the density values are near zero in the beginning, we find that the TV loss
that encourages smoothness will prevent any densities from appearing. Also TV loss will make the
object too smooth so we also turn it off towards the end to help the formation of sharp textures. For
the KL loss LKL , we turn it on only in the beginning iterations. This is because the KL loss term
helps to make the densities emerge, but may also encourage noisy densities appear outside the object
within the sphere prior. For the ‘CLIP ensemble iterations’, it is only applied to the second CLIP
guidance model LCLIP2 for ensembled guidance models.


                            Table 3: Hyperparameters for other values.
                                                          Image Resolution
Other Hyperparameters                                          1682                             2242
Training Iterations                                                 10k                           15k
Number of Voxels (Nx × Ny × Nz )          1403 (VoxExp ) / 1603 (VoxImp )                        1603
Progressive Scaling Scheduling                      [4000, 6000, 8000]      [5000, 7000, 9000, 11000]
TV Loss Iterations                                          4000 ∼ 9000                5000 ∼ 13000
KL Loss Iterations                                             0 ∼ 7000                     0 ∼ 8000
CLIP Ensemble Iterations                                  4000 ∼ 10000                 5000 ∼ 15000


In Fig. 7 we illustrate the effects of both KL and TV losses. For KL loss we see a very clear
circular hue around the generated object where the sphere prior locates. We turn this off in the later
iterations to eliminate some noise densities around the object. For TV loss when it is turned on it
helps to smooth the object. Again we turn it off towards the end of training. It can be seen that when
it is turned off textures and edges appear more clearly to make the object look sharper.

A.2   AUGMENTATION , A RCHITECTURE R-P RECISION

Augmentation Ablation The R-Precision for augmentation ablations can be found in Tab. 4. Here
VoxExp is trained using the ViT-B/16 CLIP model. Note that we add a variant of ViT-B/32 that was


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       1000             2000               3000            4000             5000               6000


 KL Loss On                                                                              TV Loss On
       7000              8000             9000             10000             11000            12000


                                    KL Loss Off
      13000              14000            15000


                  TV Loss Off


Figure 7: We show the rendered images from a random pose during the training process of our
model with the prompt Bouquet of flowers sitting in a clear glass vase. and VoxExp using ensemble
ViT-B/32 + ViT-L/14 CLIP model as guidance. The number above image represents the training
iterations. The orange bar and blue bar shows the duration LKLs and LTV was turned on.


Table 4: We compare the R-Precision score for various augmentation configurations using different
guidance models. The checks and crosses indicate which augmentations are turned on or off. R-
Precision values in parentheses (middle column) indicate when the CLIP model used to evaluate
retrieval is the same as the CLIP model used for optimization. We see that the DiffAug augmentation
is important for high R-Precision and that PerspAug can hurt performance. Note that R-Precision is
a fairly crude metric that only measures whether the text prompt can be retrieved from the generation
and does not directly measure the quality of the generation.
                                                     Retrieval model R-Precision
          Method (Diff/Back/Perspective) ViT-B/32 ViT-B/16 ViT-B/32(OpenCLIP)
                        VoxExp (×/×/×)            49.02   (95.42)                    39.22
                        VoxExp (✓/×/×)            83.01   (98.69)                    80.39
                        VoxExp (×/✓/×)            49.67   (91.50)                    45.10
                        VoxExp (✓/✓/×)            84.97   (98.69)                    92.16
                        VoxExp (✓/✓/✓)            83.01   (90.85)                    84.97


trained on the LAION-2B (Schuhmann et al., 2021) dataset to the evaluation, we indicate this model
as ViT-B/32(OpenCLIP). We see from the results when we add DiffAug, the R-Precision value goes
up significantly. This indicates the texture of the object plays a large role in the coherency of the
object according to CLIP. When just adding BackAug, the scores do not go up by much. However,
when we add both DiffAug and BackAug the R-Precision scores are the best. PerspAug decreases
the R-Precision score when added, this is probably due to the reduction in texture sharpness we
saw in Fig. 4. However, qualitatively for some text prompts it helps to remove noise and unwanted
background textures making the object have better geometric coherency. We notice that for many
objects with broken geometry as long as the texture resembles the text, the R-Precision will still be
high. This is a big limitation of CLIP R-Precision as it is not a good metric for whether or not the
generated object has good geometric structure.

Architecture Ablation The R-Precision for VoxExp and VoxImp trained with different CLIP archi-
tectures can be found in Tab. 5. For VoxExp all augmentations are turned on, for VoxImp DiffAug
and BackAug are turned on. We refer to the ViT-B/32(OpenCLIP) column to compare methods as
the models are trained either using ViT-B/32 or ViT-B/16. The VoxExp model trained with ViT-B/16


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Here we calculate the R-Precision for different guidance models that were used to train
VoxExp and VoxImp . R-Precision values in parentheses indicate when the CLIP model used to evalu-
ate retrieval is the same as the CLIP model used for optimization.
                                                    Retrieval model R-Precision
                          Method (CLIP) ViT-B/32 ViT-B/16 ViT-B/32(OpenCLIP)
                    VoxExp (ViT-B/32)         (87.58)          73.20                   80.39
                    VoxExp (ViT-B/16)           83.01        (90.85)                   84.97
         VoxExp (ViT-B/32 + ViT-L/14)         (71.90)          61.44                   61.44
                      VoxImp (ViT-B/32)       (99.34)          90.20                   94.12
                      VoxImp (ViT-B/16)         88.24        (98.69)                   85.62

                      "Apples on tree ready to pick in garden area."


                 "A pork dish with onions and peppers on a white plate."


Diff:                Diff:                Diff:                 Diff:                Diff: 
Back:                Back:                Back:                 Back:                Back: 
Perspective:         Perspective:         Perspective:          Perspective:         Perspective: 

Figure 8: Augmentation ablation for the VoxImp model. The implicit model is able to produce results
without unwanted background textures even without perspective augmentation.


has the highest score for explicit models. We see that the ensemble model (ViT-B/32+ViT-L/14) has
much lower scores compared to the other explicit models. Qualitatively, the ensemble models have
higher texture details for most objects. However, we also notice that for some prompts, subjects
mentioned in the input text are not present in the generated object of the ensemble model that was
otherwise present when just using ViT-B/32 or ViT-B/16 for guidance. For VoxImp , the model trained
with ViT-B/32 had the highest performance. Qualitatively, objects generated by VoxImp trained with
ViT-B/16 can generate more detailed geometry. In Dream Fields, their ViT-B/32 model also outper-
formed their ViT-B/16 model in terms of R-Precision.

CLIP R-Precision While the R-Precision is correlated with the faithfulness of the generated object
with respect to the prompt, higher scores do not always yield the best qualitative results. The R-
Precision score itself is also prone to adversarial examples. This suggests that quantitative evaluation
for Text-to-3D models is still very challenging and better metrics are required.

A.3   VOX I MP AUGMENTATION A BLATION

We show the augmentation ablation for the VoxImp model with KL loss on in Fig. 8. Overall we find
that compared to VoxExp , the VoxImp model is less noisy even in cases where less augmentations are
on. There seem to be no unwanted background textures even when just Diff and Back augmentations
are on. Since the perspective augmentation can sometimes hurt the texture sharpness we turn it off
for VoxImp as it seems unnecessary.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4   O PEN CLIP M ODEL R ESULTS


OpenCLIP
ViT-B/32


OpenCLIP
ViT-B/16


  CLIP
ViT-B/16


                               "medieval people         “a fantasy      “a souls like
             "steampunk     celebrating a festival   castle; trending   dark fantasy    “Tokyo city; trending
           city; trending     with many stalls;       on artstation."     cityscape;       on artstation."
                 on               trending on                            trending on
            artstation."         artstation."                           artstation."


Figure 9: In this figure we test out OpenCLIP’s model trained on the LAION dataset as guidance
with the VoxImp model. We can see that there is not one model that performs the best across all the
prompts.

In this section we tested out another implementation of CLIP, namely OpenCLIP Ilharco et al.
(2021) which was trained on the LAION Schuhmann et al. (2021) dataset. Particularly we use the
ViT-B/32 variant trained on LAION-2B and the ViT-B/16 variant trained on LAION-400M. We use
the VoxImp model and the image resolution is set to 2242 during training. Our results are shown in
Fig. 9. Overall, we see that there is not one model that performed the best across the board. For
some prompts, all three models generated coherent results and the variation between them can be
desirable for creative applications. It would be interesting to explore further how varying datasets as
well as size can have an impact on the quality and diversity of the generated results.

A.5   R ESOURCE U SAGE

In Tab. 6 the memory usage and time consumption is shown across the devices we conducted training
on. All of our model variations consumed less memory compared to Dream Fields and was faster to
train. Their model takes a lot of memory because of the 8-layer MLP with residual connection used
for the NeRF model. Since we mostly used RTX A6000s with 48 GB of VRAM we didn’t optimize
hyperparameters such as voxel grid resolution much unless we ran out of memory. For code release
we will provide both VoxExp and VoxImp model settings that will run on more commodity GPUs. It
is worth noting that the VoxImp model trained at image resolutions 1682 and 2242 consumes about
the same amount of memory. This is because we evaluate the forward pass on the entire V (PE) grid
and since both variations has the same voxel grid resolution their memory consumption is about the
same. We plan to update this in the future so that regions of the voxels that are not hit by rays will
be masked out from the calculation of the forward pass. We were also not able to run Dream Fields
at higher resolutions in their paper because of availability issues with TPU v3-8.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: In this table we show the memory consumption as well as training time per prompt for
various resolution and training iteration settings in comparison with Dream Fields across the devices
that we used.
                      Method        Res + Iter          Device            Memory               Time
          VoxExp (ViT-B/32)      1682 + 10k    RTX 2080 Ti               7.01 GB         ∼ 21 min
          VoxExp (ViT-B/32)      2242 + 15k    RTX 2080 Ti               9.76 GB         ∼ 35 min
          VoxExp (ViT-B/16)      1682 + 10k     RTX A6000               12.39 GB         ∼ 42 min
          VoxExp (ViT-B/16)      2242 + 15k     RTX A6000               14.92 GB      ∼1 hr 6 min
          VoxExp (ViT-L/14)      2242 + 15k     RTX A6000               21.48 GB     ∼ 1 hr 54 min
VoxExp (ViT-B/32+ViT-L/14)       2242 + 15k     RTX A6000               33.06 GB     ∼1 hr 40 min
VoxExp (ViT-B/16+ViT-L/14)       2242 + 15k     RTX A6000               35.37 GB     ∼ 1 hr 54 min
           VoxImp (ViT-B/16)     1682 + 10k     RTX A6000               41.39 GB         ∼ 40 min
           VoxImp (ViT-B/16)     2242 + 15k     RTX A6000               40.75 GB      ∼ 1 hr 4 min
    Dream Fields (ViT-B/16)      1682 + 10k     RTX A6000       OOM (> 48 GB)                   -
    Dream Fields (ViT-B/16)      1682 + 10k       TPU v2-8                  -        ∼2 hr 17 min


                                                 17
