A LGORITHMIC D ETERMINATION OF THE C OMBINATO -
RIAL S TRUCTURE OF THE L INEAR R EGIONS OF R E LU
N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                   A BSTRACT

             We algorithmically determine the regions and facets of the canonical polyhedral
             complex, the universal object into which a ReLU network decomposes its input
             space. We show that the locations of the vertices of the canonical polyhedral com-
             plex along with their signs with respect to layer maps determine the full facet
             structure across all dimensions. Our algorithm which implements this approach
             makes use of our theorems that the dual complex to the canonical polyhedral com-
             plex is cubical, and it possesses a multiplication compatible with its facet struc-
             ture. The resulting algorithm is numerically stable, polynomial time in the number
             of intermediate neurons, and obtains accurate information across all dimensions.
             This permits us to obtain, for example, the true topology of the decision bound-
             aries of networks with low-dimensional inputs for binary classification tasks. We
             run empirics on such networks at initialization, finding that width alone does not
             increease observed topology, but width in the presence of depth does.


1       I NTRODUCTION
For fully-connected ReLU networks (Nair & Hinton, 2010), the canonical polyhedral complex of
the network, as defined by Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), encodes its decomposition of input space
into linear regions and determines key structures such as the decision boundary for a binary classi-
fication task. Investigation of properties and characterizations of this decomposition of input space
are ongoing, in particular with respect to counting the top-dimensional linear regions (Serra et al.,
2018; Hanin & Rolnick, 2019a; Montufar et al., 2014; Serra & Ramalingam, 2020; Xiong et al.,
2020), since these bounds give one measure of the expressivity of the associated network archi-
tecture. However, a theoretical understanding of adjacency between regions and more generally
the connectivity of lower-dimensional facets are to our knowledge generally undocumented. Un-
derstanding the face relations in the canonical polyhedral complex–for example, for tiled surfaces,
understanding all inclusions between vertices (0-faces), edges (1-faces) and polygons (2-faces) –is
necessary to relate combinatorial properties of the polyhedral complex of a network to the topology
of regions into which the decision boundary partitions input space, geometric measurements such as
the presence of critical points (Grigsby et al., 2022), or other notions of topological expressivity, as
explored by Guss & Salakhutdinov (2018); Bianchini & Scarselli (2014).
It is common to describe linear regions of the input space, Rn0 , using “activation patterns” or “neural
codes” recorded as vectors in {0, 1}N (Itskov et al., 2020). Unfortunately, having a list of which
activation patterns are present in the interiors of the linear regions does not determine their pairwise
intersection properties (Theorem 15), and computing the intersections of these regions directly is not
numerically stable. Furthermore, the polyhedra comprising the linear regions appear, at first glance,
arbitrarily complicated. In this work, we establish a simpler representation by proving the theorem
that the geometric dual1 of any network’s canonical polyhedral complex is a union of n0 -dimensional
cubes (see Figure 1). Inspired by the theory of oriented matroids and hyperplane arrangements
(Anders et al., 2000; Aguiar & Mahajan, 2017), we demonstrate how the notion of “sign vectors”
from oriented matroids, which are vectors with entries in {−1, 0, 1}, can serve as a labeling scheme
for vertices, edges, and higher-dimensional regions. These sign vectors have properties that track
    1
        Recall, for example, that the dual of the icosahedron is the dodecahedron.


                                                          1
Figure 1: An illustration of a canonical polyhedral complex and its geometric dual. Left: C(F )
for a specific neural network function F : R2 → R3 → R. The three straight lines and the solid
colored regions together form R(1) , which is also C(F1 ). Middle: F1 : R2 → R3 is piecewise
linear on cells of C(F1 ). The hyperplane in R3 is the hyperplane associated with A2 : R3 → R,
and this hyperplane together with the two halfspaces on either side of it form R(2) . The cells of
C(F ) on the left are mathematically determined by taking one region R of R(2) , considering its
preimage F1−1 (R), and taking the intersection of this preimage with a cell of C(F1 ). Right: The
geometric dual sign sequence complex S(F ) is superimposed in white over C(F ), with one vertex
for each region of C(F ). As we prove in general, S(F ) is cubical, with each two-cube (quadrilateral)
containing a unique vertex of C(F ).


face relations and intersections between all linear regions in input space. We show that with full
probability, computing only the vertices present in the polyhedral complex and recording their sign
vectors gives enough information to determine all face relations in the polyhedral complex. The
ability to compute the explicit decision boundary of a network provides a new means to evaluate
topological expressivity of network functions.
Our main contributions are:

       • Mathematically, we prove the existence of a combinatorial description of the geometric
         dual of the canonical polyhedral complex of a ReLU neural network which consists of a
         generalization of activation patterns, which we call the sign sequence complex. Further-
         more, using a product structure adapted from the theory of oriented matroids which we
         prove to be well-defined, we show that the only information needed to determine the face
         poset structure of the sign sequence complex is the sign sequences corresponding to the
         vertices of the polyhedral complex.
       • We implement an algorithm for obtaining these sign sequences which is numerically stable
         and, on average at initialization, runs in polynomial time in the total number of neurons,
         and exponential time in the input dimension.
       • We show that the sign sequence complex can be naturally restricted to particular substruc-
         tures of the polyhedral complex of a ReLU network. In particular, a chain complex com-
         puting the homology of the decision boundary can be obtained with simple operations on a
         subset of the vertices of the polyhedral complex, together with their sign sequences.
       • We demonstrate the usefulness of this characterization of a network by obtaining the statis-
         tics of ReLU networks’ binary decision boundaries’ topological properties at initialization,
         dependent on architecture. These experiments provide empirics suggesting that depth of a
         network plays a stronger role in topological expressivity, at least at initialization, than the
         number of intermediate neurons.

In this work, our primary aim is to understand C(F ) more completely. We do this by demonstrating
how to use sign sequences to record all information about the adjacency of linear regions without
needing to separately list all edges, faces, and higher-dimensional cells. Sign sequences have a geo-
metric interpretation as a cubical complex, and an algebraic structure which is useful in proofs. It is
also computationally tractable to treat these sign sequences as a data structure which provides a key
for translating between local geometric and analytic information about C(F ) (vertex locations and
function behavior at those locations) and global topological and combinatorial information about
the linear regions, including the previously-inaccessible topology of binary decision boundaries.


                                                   2
Figure 2: Left: C(F) for a a randomly-initialized neural network F with architecture (2,15,15,1).
Its decision boundary is in solid red and has nontrivial β1 . Middle: The graph of the function
F : R2 → R, with the decision boundary as its zero level set. Right: In red, the decision boundary
of a neural network with architecture (3, 15, 8, 1). The network was trained using stochastic gradient
descent to distinguish a points sampled from a torus from points sampled from an annulus at its
center.


2   R ELATED WORK

The seminal paper by Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) establishes a high-level view of the cellular struc-
ture of the canonical polyhedral complex, but does not establish explicit low-dimensional informa-
tion. Under weak assumptions, they show the canonical polyhedral complex’s (n0 −1)-skeleton (the
set of n0 − 1-dimensional polyhedra) may be described as the preimages of hyperplanes from each
layer map, but arbitrary k-skeletons are unexamined for k < (n0 − 1), as are general face relations.
The subsequent work (Grigsby et al., 2022) establishes local models for the polyhedral structure at
the intersection of hyperplanes, but does not address deeper network structures as we do here.
Hyperplane arrangements are used by Hanin & Rolnick (2019a;b) to study linear regions, but pri-
marily for computing volumes and counting top-dimensional regions, and not obtaining adjacency
relations. In particular, in these works properties of hyperplane arrangements are used to establish
statistical properties of the canonical polyhedral complex. While our work does rely on properties
of hyperplane arrangements in a similar way, we focus on encoding the full face poset. In addition,
others who approach explicit computation of linear regions as in (Zhang & Wu, 2020) do so using
halfspace intersections, and we use vertices. While in theory one could intersect top-dimensional
regions pairwise to obtain their shared faces, this is not numerically stable, especially when the lin-
ear equations involved arise from matrix multiplication. Our algorithm tracks known equalities and
uses discrete signs to track face relations, avoiding issues potentially arising from numerical error
in polyhedral intersection. Furthermore, in contrast to approaches by Curto et al. (2019) and other
neuroscientific and biological applications where boundary structure is not clearly defined, in the
context of artificial networks the boundary intersections are in fact computable.
Other characterizations of the combinatorics of ReLU networks’ polyhedral complexes exist, but
lack explicit implementation or applicability to deeper networks. Balestriero et al. (2019) describe
the regions of the canonical polyhedral complex according to the roots of a polynomial, but no
algorithm is presented on how to obtain these roots, nor how to explicitly determine whether two
polyhedra are connected by a shared face. Zhang et al. (2018) provide a tropical characterization of
the polyhedral complex including its face relations, but rely on the translation of network functions to
tropical rational functions with integer coefficients, which is a discontinuous operation. In contrast,
we conjecture that the signs of vertices present in the sign sequence cubical complex are stable
in open sets of parameter space and could therefore be recorded to track changes in a network’s
topology during training. The subsequent application of tropical geometry by Alfarra et al. (2020)
appears limited to networks with single hidden layers. Additionally, Itskov et al. (2020) establish
a characterization of the regions of single-layer hyperplane networks which relies on similar sign
labelings, but the methods do not apply to deeper networks.
Some reachability analysis algorithms using polyhedral methods such as those by Yang et al. (2020;
2021) use signs to determine how polyhedra have been “split” by a layer map, tracking the face
lattices of the output polyhedra of each layer. In theory, this approach could plausibly record which


                                                   3
polytopes in the input space intersect in shared regions, but these papers consider polytopes inde-
pendently from another in the next layer for purposes of parallelization. It is unclear whether enough
information is retained to store which “splits” line up between polytopes, as this is not needed in
their applications. Additionally, this approach requires storing all faces for the face lattice in each
polytope, whereas we show this information is fully contained in the sign sequences of the vertices.

3     T HE SIGN SEQUENCE CUBICAL COMPLEX
We define the sign sequence cubical complex and justify its importance before describing an algo-
rithm for its computation in section 4.1. For readability, most terms are defined in prose, with fully
precise definitions available in Appendix A.1.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

We work with fully-connected, feedforward ReLU networks, following the framework by Grigsby
& Lindsey (2020). In this framework, a network F is expressed as Am ◦ Fm−1 ◦ ... ◦ F2 ◦ F1 ,
where each Fi = ReLU ◦ Ai for an affine map Ai : Rni−1 → Rni , and the last affine map Am has
image in R and is not followed by the ReLU function (Definition 3). We refer to the activity of each
individual neuron of the network before the ReLU function is applied as the (i, j)th node map:
Definition 5 (Fij Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 8.1 ). If F is a ReLU neural network, the
node map Fij is defined by:
                               πj ◦ Ai ◦ Fi−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 : Rn0 → R

Note that πj is projection on to the jth coordinate, i indexes layers, and j indexes neurons.
For fixed i, the solutions to πj ◦ Ai = 0 are hyperplanes in Rni−1 , which together form a hyperplane
arrangement (Aguiar & Mahajan, 2017). These hyperplane arrangements are equipped naturally
with the structure of a polyhedral complex, which is an arrangement of vertices, edges, polygons,
and generally k-dimensional polyhedra for 0 ≤ k ≤ ni−1 (Definition 1). We denote the polyhedral
complex associated to Ai by R(i) (Definition 3). The canonical polyhedral complex C(F ) consists
precisely of the polyhedra in Rn0 which may be described by selecting one polyhedron Ri ⊂ Rni
from each hyperplane arrangement R(i) , considering the preimages (Fi−1 ◦ .. ◦ F0 )−1 (Ri ) in Rn0 ,
and then taking the intersection of the resulting polyhedra (Definition 7, or see Figure 8). How-
ever, while this defines C(F ) mathematically, this does not describe a tractable algorithm for its
computation.
It is established by Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) and Grunert (2017) that each intermediate complex
C(Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1 ) is a polyhedral complex which subdivides the previous one, and resultingly F is
affine linear on each cell of C(F ).
Our results apply to certain subsets of ReLU neural networks, called generic (Definition 10) and
supertransversal (Definition 11), additional technical conditions which are nonrestrictive in light of
the following lemma that almost all networks are supertransversal.
Lemma 12. Supertransversality is full measure in RP , where P is the set of network parameters.
Additionally, it is fiberwise generic. That is, with fixed network weights, the set of biases corre-
sponding to supertransversal networks is open and full measure.
That almost all networks are, additionally, generic, was established by Grigsby & Lindsey (2020).
As a result, in all but a measure-zero subset of networks, the theory developed below will hold.

3.2   T HE SIGN SEQUENCE CUBICAL COMPLEX IS GEOMETRICALLY DUAL TO C(F )

For networks with N neurons, binary strings of length N (which we will denote using -1 and 1) may
serve as a labeling scheme to describe which neurons are active at a point in a ReLU network’s input
space (Itskov et al., 2020) on the interior of cells of C(F ). However, this binary labeling is insuffi-
cient to encode all face relationships and the topology of a network’s canonical polyhedral complex,
which we prove in the appendix in Theorem 15. We propose instead to use sign sequences, defined
below, as a means to label all polyhedral faces of C(F ) and thereby fully encode the combinatorial
properties of a network’s canonical polyhedral complex.


                                                   4
Definition 13. Define s : C(F ) → {−1, 0, 1}N by sij (C) = sign(Fij (C ◦ )). We call s(C) the sign
sequence of the cell C.

Sign sequences are sufficent to list the cells of C(F ). Though this is proven in various forms else-
where (Jordan et al., 2019), we provide a different proof.
Theorem 14. The function s is well-defined and injective.

Furthermore, the sign sequence of a cell is determinative under conditions of supertransversality and
genericity. For example, it encodes the dimension of the cell.
Lemma 16. Let F be generic and supertransversal. Let C be a k-cell of C(F ). Then s(C) has
exactly n0 − k entries which are zero.

This leads to a key geometrically dual relationship between the canonical polyhedral complex of a
supertransversal network and a subcomplex of [−1, 1]N , sending k-cells in C(F ) to (n0 − k)-faces
of the cube. We will call this subcomplex S(F ). Recall that a pure (sub)complex is a complex where
every face is contained in some polytope of uniform top dimension.
Theorem 20. For each generic, supertransversal neural network F , the image of the map S :
C(F ) → {−1, 0, 1}N gives a geometric duality between C(F ) and a pure subcomplex S(F ) of the
hypercube [−1, 1]N endowed with the product CW structure.

In particular, vertices of C(F ) correspond to n0 -cells of S(F ). Since the complex S(F ) is pure and
n0 -dimensional, knowing which n0 -cells are present is sufficient to determine all face relations in
the subcomplex of the hypercube. A corollary is:
Corollary. The sign sequences of the vertices of C(F ) determine the face poset of the polyhedral
complex C(F ).

3.3   A BINARY OPERATION ON SIGN SEQUENCES ENCODES THE FACE RELATIONS OF C(F )

The sign sequence complex has only one combinatorial type, cubes. This uniformity is related to a
package of formal properties which will be crucial in algorithmic implementation, with the existence
of a multiplicative “composition” derived from oriented matroid theory (Anders et al., 2000) being
particularly helpful.
Lemma 18. If C and D are two polyhedra in C(F ), the product S(C) · S(D) given by:


                                                   S(C)ij   if S(C)ij ̸= 0
                           (S(C) · S(D))ij =
                                                   S(D)ij   otherwise

is well-defined as a binary operation between sign sequences of C(F ). That is, there exists a cell E
in C(F ) such that S(C) · S(D) = S(E) for all cells C and D. Thus, sign sequences of C(F ) form
a semigroup.

Following from similar constructions in hyperplane arrangements (Aguiar & Mahajan, 2017) we
obtain the following:
Lemma 19. For all supertransversal networks, the following relations hold for all C and D in
C(F ), where ≤ is the relation “is a face of”:

       • C ≤ D if and only if S(C) · S(D) = S(D)
       • S(C) · S(D) = S(D) · S(C) if and only if there is a cell E with D ≤ E and C ≤ E.
       • S(C) · S(D) = S(C) if and only if C is contained in the intersection of the maximal set of
         bent hyperplanes which contain D.

These characterizations are primarily useful for using code to track face relations via a discrete
structure. As implemented in Section 4.2, we can use these to compute the topological properties of
the decision boundary of a network using sign sequences. These properties can be seen illustrated
in Figure 3.


                                                   5
Figure 3: “Multiplication” of polyhedra on the sign sequence cubical complex, pictured geometri-
cally. Under one possible co-orientation of hyperplanes, these cells have the sign sequences indicted
in Table 1. The product is computed and pictured for certain pairs of cells.


      Table 1: The sign sequence of the cells in Figure 3, together with some computed products.
                                       Cell      Sign Sequence
                                        v       (1,1, 0, 0)
                                        E       (1,1,-1, 0)
                                        C       (1,1, 1,-1)
                                       v·C      (1,1, 1,-1)
                                       v·E      (1,1,-1, 0)


4     U SING PROPERTIES OF S(F ) TO COMPUTE C(F ) AND ITS TOPOLOGY

The properties of the sign sequence complex make it straightforward to compute the combinatorial
properties of the polyhedral complex of a network across all dimensions upon obtaining the sign
sequences of the vertices of C(F ). Moreover, these sign sequences follow from locating potential
vertices, thus knowing locations of the 0 entries in its sign sequence, and then evaluating the network
to obtain its remaining signs. We summarize the process here, and provide the locations in the
appendix for more precise statements of each lemma.

4.1    O BTAINING THE VERTICES OF C(F ) BY CONSIDERING SIGN SEQUENCES

Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) define the canonical polyhedral complex C(F ) iteratively through layers.
Letting R(k) be the polyhedral complex associated with the hyperplane arrangement in layer k, the
complex C(Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1 ) is given precisely by the intersection complex of C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ) and
(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 )−1 (R(k) ). (See Definition 7). To obtain the vertices of a particular network’s
canonical polyhedral complex, we may therefore begin by obtaining the vertices corresponding to
C(F1 ), its first layer’s canonical polyhedral complex. The exact computations needed are provided
in Lemma 22.
The sign sequences of the top-dimensional regions which are present in C(F1 ) can be determined by
the sign sequences of the vertices of C(F1 ), ignoring signs corresponding to neurons in later layers.
The exact coboundary operation defining how to obtain these sign sequences is described by Lemma
21.
Following the computation of the first layer, subsequent layers’ vertices may be found by analyzing
the preimage of each bent hyperplane for additional intersections of k bent hyperplanes from the
new layer together with n0 − k bent hyperplanes from the previous layers. Since Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 is
affine on each region of C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ), restricted to each region, Fij (x) is affine. For details on
this recursive step, see Lemma 23.
We may therefore proceed iteratively through layers in order to obtain the full polyhedral complex.
In summary,


                                                    6
Computing Sign Sequences. To obtain the vertices of C(F ), and thus the n0 -cells of S(F ):

      1. Compute the intersections of the hyperplanes from the first layer, as in Lemma 22. Ob-
         tain their sign sequences by evaluating Fij on each intersection. Restricting these sign
         sequences to the signs of F1j obtains C(F1 ).

      2. To compute C(Fi ), loop through regions C in C(Fi−1 ). On each region C,

          (a) For 1 ≤ k ≤ n0 , compute the intersections of k bent hyperplanes from the new layer
              with n0 − k bent hyperplanes from previous layers, the latter of which are selected so
              that their intersection forms an n0 − k-face of C.
          (b) Evaluate Fij (x) for each computed intersection x. Then keep x as a vertex of C(F ) if
              and only if Fij (x) = Fij (C) for i ≤ k − 1, following Lemma 23.

4.2   O BTAINING DECISION BOUNDARY TOPOLOGY FROM THE SIGN SEQUENCE COMPLEX

We next produce a chain complex enabling us to compute Betti numbers of the decision boundary.
Readers unfamiliar with algebraic topology may appreciate the overview by Ghrist (2014), sections
4-6. The characterization of C(F ) as dual to a cubical complex permits us to define a straightfor-
ward mod-two cellular coboundary, which is the transpose of the boundary operation on the cubical
complex.
Lemma 21. The face poset of C(F ) is the opposite poset of the face poset of S(F ), and the (mod-
two) cellular boundary map of S(F ) is dual to the (mod-two) cellular boundary map of C(F ).

In other words, if C is a polyhedron in C(F ), then replacing one location for which S(C)ij = 0 with
±1 gives the sign sequence of a polyhedron containing C, and doing this operation for all locations
computes all terms in the cellular coboundary of C (ignoring orientation). We recover the decision
boundary of a network by noting that the decision boundary is the subcomplex of cells C in C(F )
whose faces D, including vertices, all satisfy F (D) = 0. By locating the vertices in S(F ) which
have a 0 as the last entry in their sign sequence, this coboundary operation, with image restricted to
those cells whose last sign sequence entry is zero, gives a cochain complex of cells of the decision
boundary, for example as pictured in Figure 2.
In general, the presence of unbounded cells makes this map not quite correspond to a cellular chain
complex. In particular, not every edge has two vertices. By adding a single ‘vertex at infinity’ to
unbounded edges, the corresponding cochain complex has a straightforward interpretation as the
cochain complex of the one-point compactification of the decision boundary.

4.3   N UMERICAL STABILITY AND ALGORITHMIC COMPLEXITY

Naively, if we compute a solution x to Fij (x) = 0, and then numerically evaluate the node map
Fij (x), the result may not be exactly zero due to floating point error. However, we show in Lemma
23 (and the subsequent discussion) that machine epsilon-level errors obtained when solving for the
location of a vertex will not generally lead to errors in computing the sign sequence of a vertex.
When determining the sign sequence of a vertex, which of its signs are zero is determined by which
hyperplanes were intersected, and the remaining signs are stable to small perturbations, since the sets
Fij > 0 and Fij < 0 are open sets. As long as the error in computing solutions to linear equations is
small compared to the size of the cells in the polyhedral complex, the proposed algorithm will find
the correct sign sequence of each vertex, and as a result the correct combinatorics of the polyhedral
complex.
Furthermore, as deep ReLU networks only have polynomially many regions in the number of hid-
den units, at least on average at initialization (Hanin & Rolnick, 2019a), and the number of possible
combinations of k neurons from ni neurons together with n0 − k neurons from n0 + ... + nk−1
neurons is also polynomial in the total number of hidden units, it is possible to obtain the canoni-
cal polyhedral complex C(F ) in polynomial expected time in the number of hidden units (Lemma
24). Further discussion of our algorithm’s expected performance related to algorithms discussed in
section 2 can be found in the appendix, in the discussion following this lemma.


                                                  7
5     A PPLICATIONS TO NETWORK DECISION BOUNDARIES AT INITIALIZATION
We use this theoretical framework to make experimental observations. We obtain statistics about
the decision boundaries of binary classification networks, and find stark differences in the behaviors
of shallow and deeper network architectures. To our knowledge, this is the first experimental de-
termination of the exact topology of a large collection of decision boundaries with input dimension
greater than two while having more than one hidden layer.


Figure 4: Average Betti numbers of the network decision boundary at initialization for a range of
networks of shallow architecture (top) with deep architecture (bottom), together with standard error.
The distribution of topological properties of the decision boundaries at initialization is surprisingly
constant for shallow networks, and more variable for deeper networks.


5.1   E XPERIMENTAL DESIGN

We randomly initialize 50 networks of fully-connected architectures (k, n, 1) and (k, n, n, 1) for
2 ≤ k ≤ 4 with standard normal weights and biases (See Figure 2). We will call the networks
of architecture (k, n, 1) “shallow” and those of architecture (k, n, n, 1) “deep” for the purposes of
comparison in this section. We compute the canonical polyhedral complex C(F ) for each network
using an implementation of the algorithm described in Section 4.1 using Pytorch linear algebra
solver (Paszke et al., 2019). We then obtain the Betti numbers βi for 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1 of the decision
boundary of the network at initialization, by constructing the boundary map determined in Lemma
21, with additional point at infinity. The Betti numbers were obtained using a Sage implementation
of general chain complexes (The Sage Developers, 2018). The resulting Betti numbers provide a
measure of topological complexity of the decision boundary at initialization.

5.2   R ESULTS

We observe that the topology of the decision boundary for shallow networks, regardless of input
dimension, remains constant over the range of dimensions investigated. (See Figure 4). In contrast,
for deep networks, there is both greater variability in the distribution of the topology of the decision
boundary, and increasing width seems to, at least for n0 > 2, lead to the the topological properties
of the decision boundary appearing to change in distribution as the width n increases. We conjec-
ture that a plausible explanation is that deep networks appear to require greater width before their
network functions converge to Gaussian processes in distribution (de G. Matthews et al., 2018).
The Betti numbers of the decision boundary, compactified with distinguished point at infinity, mea-
sures the number of bounded and unbounded components of the decision boundary. Since all un-


                                                   8
bounded components are compactified by attaching them to the same point, in the compactification
they correspond to (n0 − 1)-cycles belonging to the same connected component, which are counted
by βn0 −1 . So the number of bounded and unbounded components can be computed by β0 − 1 and
βn0 −1 − β0 + 1, respectively.
We observe that bounded connected components of the decision boundary at initialization are rare,
with frequency decreasing with input dimension in both shallow and deep networks: For exam-
ple, 8.1% of networks of the form (2, n, 1) contain at least one bounded component, whereas only
0.05% of networks of the form (4, n, 1) contain as much at initialization. Furthermore, regarding
the number of unbounded components, across all shallow networks investigated, the largest number
of unbounded components observed at initialization was 3, with a mode of 1 (average 1.0, 1.03 and
1.04, for n0 = 2, 3, and 4 respectively). In deeper networks, in contrast, the number of unbounded
components at initialization appears to be on average greater (1.1, 1.4, 1.4, respectively) reaching
maximum observed values of 5, 7 and 12 for n0 = 2, 3, and 4 respectively. However, the most com-
mon observation is still that a network at initialization has one unbounded connected component,
and whether there is any trend associated with width is unclear. These observations lend additional
credence to the notion that depth has a stronger influence than width on the topological complexity
that a network can be easily trained to express.

6   C ONCLUSION AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS
We have presented a new combinatorial characterization of ReLU network functions, and demon-
strate its usefulness for obtaining topological information about networks which was previously
difficult to access. The experiments illustrate the utility of this characterization for driving further
experimental research on the properties of ReLU networks in different conditions. Furthermore, we
believe this framework proposed could be used to derive additional properties of ReLU networks,
as theoretically, we have provided a foundation to study the structure of the canonical polyhedral
complex across all dimensions. In practice, a drawback to using this algorithm in empirical work
is that the algorithm is still an exponential process in the input dimension, so realistically only low-
dimensional slices of the true decision boundary of a network can be investigated empirically.
We primarily believe that this tool can be useful to theoreticians by providing a local characterization
of vertices of C(F ) which can be used to obtain geometric properties of ReLU functions. For exam-
ple, access to solid angles would allow for extensions to work such as Balestriero et al. (2019) on
distributional properties of local curvature of decision boundaries. This local characterization addi-
tionally makes piecewise linear Morse theory as in Grigsby et al. (2022); Grunert (2017) applicable
to C(F ). Morse theory describes local extrema and saddle points by diagonalizing a second deriva-
tive matrix. Replacing a 0 with ±1 in a vertex’s sign sequence identifies opposite edges incident to
a vertex, giving axes for a ”piecewise linear second derivative.”
Another possible future application of this work is to analyze topological generalization of networks.
A key indicator of a network’s generalizability is whether its sublevel sets have the appropriate
topological properties (Bianchini & Scarselli, 2014). In addition, the architecture of a classifica-
tion network influences the topology of the expressible decision boundaries of that network (Guss
& Salakhutdinov, 2018). Empirically, topological data analysis provides practical approximation
for low-dimensional features of high dimensional data. While approximations exist to obtain the
topological properties of a network’s decision boundaries using topological data analysis (Li et al.,
2020), these properties are dependent on the geometry of the network function. In places where the
network’s decision boundary has high curvature, the approximation methods may lead to inaccuracy
between the true topology of a network’s decision boundary and the topology which is approximated
by persistent homology methods, but it is precisely those locations where a network is vulnerable to
adversarial examples (Fawzi et al., 2018). A measure of the true topology of the decision boundary
could provide a metric for comparison.
We lastly believe it is possible to obtain an explicit understanding of the evolution of a network’s
decision boundary through a training path. We conjecture that the changes in the facet structure of
C(F ) should be “discrete” in that they would only change at finitely many locations in a general
training path, which would thus open an avenue for tracking the vertices of C(F ) as the network
trains in parameter space, and establishing theoretical limits on the possible discrete changes that
may occur to the set of vertices of C(F ) during training.


                                                   9
R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have provided source code and examples in the supplementary materials which can be used to
reproduce our computational algorithms. The proofs of all numbered claims in the body of the paper
may be found in the appendix.

R EFERENCES
Marcelo Aguiar and Swapneel Mahajan. Topics in Hyperplane Arrangements. American Mathe-
 matical Society, Providence, RI, 2017.

Motasem Alfarra, Adel Bibi, Hasan Hammoud, Mohamed Gaafar, and Bernard Ghanem. On
 the decision boundaries of deep neural networks: A tropical geometry perspective. CoRR,
 abs/2002.08838, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.08838.

Björner Anders, Michel Las Vergnas, Bernd Sturmfels, Neil White, and Gunter M. Ziegler. Oriented
  Matroids (Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, Series Number 46). Cambridge
  University Press, paperback edition, 1 2000. ISBN 978-0521777506. URL https://lead.
  to/amazon/com/?op=bt&la=en&cu=usd&key=052177750X.

Randall Balestriero, Romain Cosentino, Behnaam Aazhang, and Richard Baraniuk. The geometry
  of deep networks: Power diagram subdivision. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
  F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2019/file/0801b20e08c3242125d512808cd74302-Paper.pdf.

Monica Bianchini and Franco Scarselli. On the complexity of neural network classifiers: A com-
 parison between shallow and deep architectures. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
 Learning Systems, 25(8):1553–1565, August 2014. doi: 10.1109/tnnls.2013.2293637. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2013.2293637.

Carina Curto, Alan Veliz-Cuba, and Nora Youngs. Analysis of Combinatorial Neural Codes:
  An Algebraic Approach, pp. 213–240. 01 2019. ISBN 9780128140666. doi: 10.1016/
  B978-0-12-814066-6.00007-6.

Alexander G. de G. Matthews, Jiri Hron, Mark Rowland, Richard E. Turner, and Zoubin Ghahra-
  mani. Gaussian process behaviour in wide deep neural networks. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  H1-nGgWC-.

Alhussein Fawzi, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Pascal Frossard, and Stefano Soatto. Empirical
  study of the topology and geometry of deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.

Robert Ghrist. Elementary applied topology. Createspace Independent Publishing Platform, North
  Charleston, SC, September 2014.

J. Elisenda Grigsby and Kathryn Lindsey. On transversality of bent hyperplane arrangements and
   the topological expressiveness of relu neural networks, 2020. Available at https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2008.09052.

J. Elisenda Grigsby, Kathryn Lindsey, and Marissa Masden. Local and global topological complexity
   measures of relu neural network functions. arXiv, 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2204.06062. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06062.

Romain Grunert. Piecewise Linear Morse Theory. PhD thesis, 2017. URL https://refubium.
  fu-berlin.de/handle/fub188/12531.

V. Guillemin, V.W. Guillemin, A. Pollack, V.A. GUILLERMIN, and P. Alan. Differential Topology.
   Mathematics Series. Prentice-Hall, 1974. ISBN 9780132126052.


                                               10
William H. Guss and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. On characterizing the capacity of neural networks using
 algebraic topology. CoRR, abs/1802.04443, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.
 04443.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. Deep relu networks have surprisingly few activation pat-
  terns. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  9766527f2b5d3e95d4a733fcfb77bd7e-Paper.pdf.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick.       Complexity of linear regions in deep networks.       ArXiv,
  abs/1901.09021, 2019b.
Vladimir Itskov, Alexander Kunin, and Zvi Rosen. Hyperplane neural codes and the polar complex.
  In Nils A. Baas, Gunnar E. Carlsson, Gereon Quick, Markus Szymik, and Marius Thaule (eds.),
  Topological Data Analysis, pp. 343–369, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing. ISBN
  978-3-030-43408-3.
Matt Jordan, Justin Lewis, and Alexandros G Dimakis. Provable certificates for adversarial exam-
 ples: Fitting a ball in the union of polytopes. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
 F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
 tems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
 cc/paper/2019/file/ae3f4c649fb55c2ee3ef4d1abdb79ce5-Paper.pdf.
Weizhi Li, Gautam Dasarathy, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Visar Berisha. Finding the
 homology of decision boundaries with active learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
 M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
 pp. 8355–8365. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
 cc/paper/2020/file/5f14615696649541a025d3d0f8e0447f-Paper.pdf.
Guido F Montufar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of linear
  regions of deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines.
  In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML’10, pp. 807–814, Madison, WI, USA, 2010. Omnipress. ISBN 9781605589077.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
  Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
  Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp.
  8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
  9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.
  pdf.
Thiago Serra and Srikumar Ramalingam. Empirical bounds on linear regions of deep rectifier net-
  works. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 5628–
  5635, 2020.
Thiago Serra, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Srikumar Ramalingam. Bounding and counting linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In ICML, 2018.
The Sage Developers. SageMath, the Sage Mathematics Software System (Version 9.0), 2018.
  https://www.sagemath.org.
Huan Xiong, Lei Huang, Mengyang Yu, Li Liu, Fan Zhu, and Ling Shao. On the number of linear
  regions of convolutional neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  10514–10523. PMLR, 2020.
Xiaodong Yang, Hoang-Dung Tran, Weiming Xiang, and Taylor Johnson. Reachability analysis for
  feed-forward neural networks using face lattices. 2020.


                                               11
Xiaodong Yang, Tomoya Yamaguchi, Hoang-Dung Tran, Bardh Hoxha, Taylor T Johnson, and Danil
  Prokhorov. Reachability analysis of convolutional neural networks. 2021.
Liwen Zhang, Gregory Naitzat, and Lek-Heng Lim. Tropical geometry of deep neural networks.
  In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5824–5832.
  PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/zhang18i.
  html.
Xiao Zhang and Dongrui Wu. Empirical studies on the properties of linear regions in deep neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=SkeFl1HKwr.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   M ATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND

A summary of relevant results and definitions about polyhedral complexes and complexes arising
from affine hyperplane arrangements found in Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Sections 2-3, and Grunert
(2017), Sections 1-2, with the most relevant information repeated below. Namely, we make repeated
use of polyhedral geometry:
Definition 1 (Polyhedra, Polyhedral Complex, cf. Grigsby & Lindsey (2020)).

       • A polyhedron is an intersection of the form 1≤i≤m Hi+ for some set of (codimension 1)
                                                     T

         hyperplanes H1 , ..., Hm ⊂ Rn . Here Hi+ is the half-space of Rn consisting of the union of
         the hyperplane Hi and one of the connected components of Rn \ Hi .
       • We will say a point is on the interior of a polyhedron P if it is on the interior of P with
         respect to the subspace topology of the affine span of P , except when P is a point, in which
         case by convention its interior is nonempty. We use the notation P ◦ to denote the interior
         of P .
       • A face of a polyhedron P embedded in Rn is a set of the form H ∩ P , where H is a
         codimension 1 hyperplane in Rn and H ∩ P does not contain any interior point of P . (The
         empty set is a face of any polyhedron.) A hyperplane which intersects P in a nonempty
         face is called a supporting hyperplane of P . All other hyperplanes which intersect P are
         called cutting hyperplanes of P . We denote the relation ”C is a face of D” with C ≤ D.
       • A polyhedral complex embedded in Rn is a set of polyhedra contained in Rn which is (a)
         closed under taking faces, (b) closed under intersection, in that the intersection P1 ∩ P2 is
         the (unique) maximal common face of P1 and P2 , which may be empty.

Under this definition, polyhedra may not be bounded, but they are always closed. As a result, an
affine hyperplane arrangement induces a natural polyhedral decomposition on its ambient space.
We use the following notation for consistency with previous work, providing a notation for affine
hyperplane arrangement R(i) associated to an affine map Ai .
Definition 2 (πj , R(i) , cf. Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 6.7). Let Ai : Rni−1 → Rni be an
affine function for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then, we define:

       • πj is the linear projection onto the jth coordinate in Rni .

       • R(i) is the polyhedral complex associated to the hyperplane arrangement in Rni−1 , induced
         by the hyperplanes given by the solution set to Hij = {x ∈ Rn : πj ◦ Ai (x) = 0}.

Continuing to the framework in Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), we investigate the following class of
neural network functions.
Definition 3 (Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 2.1). Let n0 , ..., nm ∈ N. A fully-connected
ReLU neural network with architecture (n0 , ..., nm , 1) is a collection N = {Ai } of affine maps


                                                  12
Ai : Rni → Rni+1 for i = 0, ..., m. Such a collection determines a function FN : Rn0 → R, the
associated neural network map, given by the composite

         F =ReLU◦A          F =ReLU◦A          F =ReLU◦A          F =ReLU◦A          G=Am+1
   Rn0 −−1−−−−−−→
                1
                  Rn1 −−2−−−−−−→
                               2
                                 Rn2 −−3−−−−−−→
                                              3
                                                              → Rnm −−−−−−→ R1
                                                ... −−m−−−−−−−m

where ReLU refers to the function max{0, x} applied pointwise (Nair & Hinton, 2010). We say that
this network has depth m + 1 and width max{n1 , ..., nm , 1}. The maps Fk are called the kth layer
maps.

As a piecewise-affine linear function, FN , which we simplify to F , defines an obvious polyhedral
decomposition of input space, namely into the (largest) polyhedra on which it is affine-linear. How-
ever Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) show the utility of considering not only the decomposition which F
itself defines, but the common refinement of decompositions by intermediate composites.
Definition 4. If F = G ◦ Fm ◦ ... ◦ F1 is a ReLU neural network with F : Rn0 → R , then we
denote:

                                         F(k) = Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1
and write that this is F ending at the kth layer.
Likewise, we denote

                                      F (k) = G ◦ Fm ◦ ... ◦ Fk
and call F (k) : Rnk−1 → R by F starting at the kth layer.

Thus F = F (k) ◦ F(k−1) for any k. A definition for the canonical polyhedral complex C(F ) through
a universal property can be given as the common refinement of the polyhedral decomposition of input
space such that all F(i) are affine linear on cells. For implementation, we prefer a definition through
explicit identification of cells, using further language from Grigsby & Lindsey (2020):
Definition 5 (Fij Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 8.1 ). If F is a ReLU neural network, the
node map Fij is defined by:

                                πj ◦ Ai ◦ Fi−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 : Rn0 → R
In particular, the locus in input space where Fij = 0 is of particular interest, and to draw analogies
to hyperplane arrangements, we use the phrase ”bent hyperplane.”
Definition 6 (Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 6.1 ). A bent hyperplane of C(F ) is the preim-
age of 0 under a node map, that is, Fij−1 (0) for fixed i, j.

A bent hyperplane can contain polyhedral regions with codimension less than one, but this occurs
with zero probability. The conditions under which the bent hyperplanes’ maximal cells are always
codimension 1 are listed by Grigsby & Lindsey (2020).
The original definition of the canonical polyhedral complex C(F ) uses the notion of a “level set
complex,” defined by Grunert (2017). We streamline the definition, working more directly in two
ways, as needed below.
Definition 7 (Canonical Polyhedral Complex C(F ), cf. Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 6.7).
Let F : Rn0 → R be a ReLU neural network with m layers. Define C(F ) as follows:

      1. (Forward Construction) Define C(F(1) ) by R(1) (Definition 2). Then let C(F(k) ) be defined
         in terms of C(F(k−1) ) as the polyhedral complex consisting of the following cells:
                                   n                                          o
                                         −1
                         C(F(k) ) = C ∩ F(k−1) (R) : C ∈ C(F(k−1) ), R ∈ R(k)

         Then C(F ) is given by C(F(m) ).


                                                    13
      2. (Backwards Construction) Define C(F (m) ) by R(m) . Then C(F (k−1) ) can be defined from
         C(F (k) ) as the polyhedral complex consisting of the following cells:
                                      n                                          o
                                            −1
                         C(F (k−1) ) = R ∩ Fk−1 (C) : R ∈ R(k−1) , C ∈ C(F (k) )

         Then C(F ) is given by C(F (1) ).

That the two are equivalent follows from the distributivity of function preimage over set intersection
(or, more generally, associativity of pullbacks). That the resulting construction is indeed a polyhedral
complex is discussed thoroughly by Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) and Grunert (2017). In particular,
we make use of the following lemma regarding boundary relations, rewritten so as to not require
additional notation.
Lemma 8 (cf. Grunert (2017), Lemma 2.4). Let M ⊆ Rm and N ⊆ Rn be polyhedral complexes
and f : |M | → Rn be continuous and affine on cells of M . Let ≤ denote face relations in the
respective polyhedral complexes. If C ≤ C ′ are polyhedra in M , and D ≤ D′ are polyhedra in N ,
then

                                    C ∩ f −1 (D) ≤ C ′ ∩ f −1 (D′ )

is a face relation in the polyhedral complex consisting of the cells {C ∩F −1 (D) : D ∈ N, C ∈ M }.

The notion of transversality on cells will be critical for the next section. Function transversality is
discussed in textbooks such as Guillemin et al. (1974).
Definition 9 (Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), Definition 4.5 ). Let X be a polyhedral complex of dimen-
sion d in Rn , let f : |X| → Rr be a map which is smooth on all cells of X and let Z be a smoothly
embedded submanifold (without boundary) of Rr . We say f is transverse on cells of X to Z and
write f ⋔X Z if the restriction of f to the interior C ◦ of every k-cell C of X is transverse to Z
when 0 ≤ k ≤ d

Lastly, we will need the following notions of generic regarding hyperplane arrangements and neural
networks, respectively.
Definition 10 (Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) Definitions 2.7, 2.9). A hyperplane arrangement in Rn is
called generic if each all sets of k hyperplanes intersect in an affine space of dimension n − k. A
neural network is called generic if all of its affine maps Ai have generic corresponding hyperplane
arrangements, R(i) .

Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) also established that the union of bent hyperplanes of C(F ) form the
(n0 − 1)-faces of C(F ) with probability 1. In the next section we expand on this characterization
for lower-dimensional subcomplexes.
The reader is referred to Ghrist (2014) for a brief background in algebraic topology, especially the
notions of homology and cohomology, chain complexes, and duality (sections 4-6).

A.2    N EW D EFINITIONS AND P ROOFS

We begin by defining a key additional condition on neural networks, which is necessary for many of
the results in this section to hold.
Definition 11. Let F be a ReLU neural network of depth m. Let F(i+1) : Rni → R be the neural
network defined by the last m − i layers of F as in definition 4. Suppose, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Fi is
transverse on cells of R(i) to the interior of all cells of C(F (i+1) ). Then we call F a supertransversal
neural network.

The condition of network supertransversality is stronger than the notion of network transversality in
Grigsby & Lindsey (2020) (Definition 8.2), but it still holds on a full-measure subset of parameter
space, as we show here.
Lemma 12. Supertransversality is full measure in RP , where P is the set of network parameters.

                                                   14
Proof. First, a single-layer neural network F (m) : Rnm → R is trivially supertransversal; R has one
cell which is already full dimension.
Next suppose that F (k) is supertransversal, and let Fk−1 : Rnk−1 → Rnk be a network layer.
Suppose it is the case that Fk−1 is nontransverse on some cell R of R(i−1) to some cell C of C(F(k) ).
If so, it must be the case that Fk−1 (R) ∩ C is nonempty and T (Fk−1 (R)) ⊕ T (C) ̸= Rnk . Call
T (Fk−1 (R)) ⊕ T (C) by TR,C . If TR,C ̸= Rnk−1 , then it is instead a vector subspace of less than
full rank, and an affine translation of C(F (k) ) by any vector in Rnk − TR,C will ensure Fk−1 (R) ∩ C
is subsequently empty, since F is affine on R and C contained in an affine subspace of Rnk .
Let δR,C be the minimum distance between pairs of points in Fk−1 (R) and C. Since these cells are
closed (though not necessarily compact), this is well defined, and furthermore if R ∩ C = ∅, then
δR,C > 0. Let δ = {min δR,C : Fk−1 (R) ∩ C = ∅}. Then δ > 0.
Since there are finitely many cells R and C, the set
                                                   [
                                         Rnk−1 −     TR,C
                                                   R,C
               nk−1
is generic in R      , where the union is taken over only those cells where TR,C is not full rank. An
affine translation of C(F (k) ) by any vector in this set with magnitude greater than 0 but less than δ
yields a supertransversal network.
Since this can be performed regardless of the weights and biases of Fk , and an affine translation of
the input space of F (k) does not change its supertransversality properties, the network Fk−1 ◦ F (k)
is supertransversal on a full-measure subset of parameter space, which completes our inductive
step.

The combinatorial characterization of C(F ) is through the following combinatorial construction
called sign sequences. The primary use of these sign sequences is to track face relations.
Definition 13. Define s : C(F ) → {−1, 0, 1}N by sij (C) = sgn(Fij (C ◦ )). We call s(C) the sign
sequence of the cell C.

This refers to the sign of the function Fij when restricted to the interior of C. To see that this is
actually a function on cells, we will see that for any points x, y on the interior of C, sgn(Fij (x)) =
sgn(Fij (y)).
This construction is used in the theory of oriented matroids and hyperplane arrangements, cf. Aguiar
& Mahajan (2017), and in particular the construction may be used to identify polyhedra in an affine
hyperplane arrangement by denoting which halfspaces and hyperplanes were intersected to form
that region. However, any analogous properties for ReLU networks must be proven, as many of
the properties below fail to hold for arbitrary PL manifold arrangements. We must show that the
construction still provides a combinatorial description of the polyhedra of the network:
Theorem 14. The function s is well-defined and injective on cells of C(F ).

Proof. To see that s is well-defined, suppose x1 , x2 ∈ Rn0 are such that sgn(Fij (x1 )) ̸=
sgn(Fij (x2 )) for some i, j. We wish to show that x1 and x2 are not in the same cell of C(F ).
However, we see that the images Fi−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 (x1 ) and Fi−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 (x2 ) cannot be in the same
cell of of R(i) (the induced polyhedral decomposition of Rni−1 by Ai ), because they differ in their
location relative to the jth hyperplane. Thus x1 and x2 are in different cells of C(F(i) ). As C(F ) is
a further polyhedral subdivision of C(F(i) ), x1 and x2 are in different cells of C(F ). So, s is well
defined.
Next, suppose C0 and C1 are cells such that s(C0 ) = s(C1 ). Let x0 ∈ C0 and x1 ∈ C1 . We wish to
show C0 = C1 . We proceed by induction on layers in the forward direction.
We show first that, as a base case for induction, x0 and x1 are in the same cell in C(F1 ).
Indeed since s(C0 ) = s(C1 ), x0 and x1 are contained in the same cell of R(1) , following the
corresponding fact for hyperplane arrangements, this immediately means that x0 and x1 are in the
same cell of C(F1 ).


                                                  15
Now suppose as an inductive hypothesis that x0 and x1 are in the same cell of C(F(k) ). Call y0 =
F(k) (x0 ) and y1 = F(k) (x1 ). Because sgn(F(k+1)j (x1 )) = sgn(F(k+1)j (x2 )) for all 0 ≤ j ≤ nk ,
this implies that y0 and y1 are in the same intersection of halfspaces and hyperplanes in the co-
oriented hyperplane arrangement Ak+1 , that is, the same cell of R(k+1) . Therefore, as x1 and x2 are
in the same cell C of C(F(k) ) and their image is in the same cell C ′ of R(k+1) we conclude x0 and
x1 are in the same cell in C(F(k+1) ) given by


                                              C ∩ (F(k+1) )−1 (C ′ )

That this is a unique polyhedral cell in C(F(k+1) ), follows the work in Grunert (2017), Lemma 2.5.
By induction, as F is composed of finitely many layers, x0 and x1 are in the same cell of C(F ).



Figure 5: Even if Mi are codimension-1 connected co-orientable PL manifolds embedded in Rn
whose intersection subdivides Rn into polyhedral regions, and the resulting polyhedral subdivision
is dual to a cubical complex, it is possible that labeling each region by its location relative to the
co-orientation of those manifolds fails to be injective. This example depicts 3 PL submanifolds in
R2 whose embedding has the aforementioned properties, but there are too many cells (14 vertices,
30 edges, and 17 2-gons) to be labeled by the 27 possible labelings in {−1, 0, 1}3 .


The injectivity of s is special to constructions arising from hyperplane arrangements, and not general
manifold arrangements. Indeed, even if a set of codimension-1 PL submanifolds subdivide Rn in a
way which this injectivity fails; see Figure 5
Below we show that C(F) can be reconstructed from vertices and sign sequences. It is more tradi-
tional to work ”top down,” considering the top dimensional polytopes and their facets. But unlike
theories such as hyperplane arrangements and oriented matroids, there is no guarantee that know-
ing the sign sequences of the top-dimensional regions allows one to deduce the sign sequences of
the zero-dimensional regions (circuit-cocircuit duality does not hold). The following example is an
explicit illustration of this fact.
Theorem 15. There exists a pair of networks F1 and F2 such that the set of strings encoding the
activation patterns in the interiors of the cells of C(F1 ) and C(F2 ) are equal, but the polyhedral
complexes C(F1 ) and C(F2 ) are not combinatorially equivalent.


Proof. We provide an example in Figure 6. Two neural networks F1 : R2 → R4 → R and F2 :
R2 → R4 → R have the pictured canonical polyhedral complexes. One has a bounded decision
boundary, whereas the other is unbounded. However, both have identical sign sequences of their
top-dimensional regions, given by:
  (-1, 1, -1, 1, 1),     (-1, 1, 1, -1, 1),    (1, -1, -1, -1, 1),   (-1, 1, -1, 1, -1),   (-1, -1, 1, -1, 1),
  (-1, 1, 1, 1, -1),    (1, -1, -1, 1, -1),     (1, -1, 1, -1, 1),   (-1, -1, 1, 1, -1),    (-1, 1, 1, 1, 1),
 (-1, -1, -1, 1, -1),   (1, -1, -1, 1, 1),     (-1, -1, 1, 1, 1),    (1, -1, 1, 1, -1),     (1, -1, 1, 1, 1),
  (1, 1, -1, 1, -1),      (1, 1, -1, 1, 1)

                                                        16
Figure 6: The two canonical polyhedral complexes pictured below have differing combinatorics and
differing topology of their decision boundaries, but the set of sign sequences of the top dimensional
regions is equal (see Theorem 15). Explicit weights and biases for this construction are available in
the code provided with the supplemental material.


That these canonical polyhedral complexes have the same sign sequences of their top-dimensional
regions is more easily seen by looking at the differences between the two pictures, which only
depend on the blue ”decision boundary.” Each region which is subdivided into two regions by the
blue bent hyperplane in the left image is also subdivided by the blue bent hyperplane in the right
image.



As illustrated in Grigsby & Lindsey (2020), it is not always the case that the preimages Fij−1 (0) are
n0 − 1 dimensional. In order to establish dimension, supertransversality and genericity are key.
Lemma 16. Let F be generic and supertransversal. Let C be a k-cell of C(F ). Then s(C) has
exactly n0 − k entries which are zero. That is, C is contained in the intersection of n0 − k bent
hyperplanes.

Proof. This is certainly true for any neural network of the form G ◦ Fm satisfying the condition
that Fm is generic as a layer map, as the bent hyperplane arrangement is equal to the hyperplane
arrangement, which is a generic hyperplane arrangement (Definition 10).
We proceed via induction, using the backwards construction of C(F ) (Definition 7).
Suppose by way of induction F (i) = G ◦ Fm ◦ ... ◦ Fi , and that C(F (i) ) satisfies the condition that
C ∈ C(F (i) ) is a k-cell if and only if C is contained in exactly ni − k bent hyperplanes.
Now, suppose Fi−1 is transverse on the cells of R(k−1) to C for all C in C(F(i) ). Consider F(i−1) =
G ◦ Fm ◦ ... ◦ Fi ◦ Fi−1 .
Let C ′ be a cell in C(F(i−1) ). Note that by definition, C ′ is given by F1−1 (C) ∩ D for some
C ∈ C(F(i) ) and some minimal (by inclusion) cell D of R(i−1) . In particular, we may assume
C ′ is not contained in any proper face of D. If D has codimension ℓ, then D is in the intersection of
exactly ℓ hyperplanes in R(i−1) by the genericity of F . Because F1 is transverse on cells of R(i−1)
to C, codim(C ′ ) in the interior of D is equal to codim(C) = k, with total codimension k + ℓ.
As C is contained in the intersection of exactly k bent hyperplanes in C(F (i) ), C ′ is contained in the
intersection of the preimage of precisely those same k bent hyperplanes in B(F(i−1) ). Furthermore
C ′ is contained in the intersection of the ℓ hyperplanes in R(i−1) which intersect to form D, and
no additional hyperplanes as C ′ is not contained in any proper face of D. Thus C ′ is contained in
the intersection of precisely k + ℓ bent hyperplanes in C(F(i−1) ) and has codimension k + ℓ. The
number of zeros in s(C ′ ) must be equal to the number of bent hyperplanes it is contained in, by
definition. This completes the inductive step.


                                                   17
In order to establish additional properties regarding the existence of cells satisfying certain relations
in supertransversal networks, we rely on the following lemma.
Lemma 17. Let f : M → Rn be a PL map affine on cells of an embedded polyhedral complex
M ⊂ Rm . Let N be a polyhedral complex embedded in Rn . Suppose f is transverse on cells of M
to the interior of all cells of N .
If C ≤ C ′ is a face relation in M , D ≤ D′ is a face relation in N , and f (C ◦ ) ∩ D is nonempty,
then f (C ′◦ ) ∩ D′◦ is nonempty.

Proof. First we show that f (C ◦ ) ∩ D′◦ is nonempty. If D = D′ then we are done. Otherwise,
consider f (C), which is the image of the polyhedron C under an affine map. If the affine span A
of f (C) does not intersect the interior of D′ , then A ∩ D′ is contained in a proper face E ′ of D′ .
In this case, T (f (C)) ⊕ T (E ′ ) ̸= Rn , and f is not transverse on C to E ′ . Therefore, A ∩ D′◦ is
nonempty.
Within A we have ∂(A ∩ D′ ) ⊆ A ∩ ∂(D′ ). As a result letting x ∈ C ◦ and f (x) ∈ D′ , every open
neighborhood of f (x) in A must have nontrivial intersection with the interior of D′ . Take an open
neighborhood N of x in C ◦ . We note that f : C → A is a submersion (locally a surjective linear
map). Thus f (N ) is open in A, and N ∩ D′◦ must be nonempty, so C ◦ ∩ f −1 (D′◦ ) is nonempty.
To see that D′◦ ∩f (C ′◦ ) is nonempty, take x ∈ C ◦ with f (x) ∈ D′◦ . If N is a neighborhood of f (x)
in D′◦ then f −1 (N ) must be an open neighborhood of x in M , containing x ∈ C. As C ⊂ ∂C ′ ,
f −1 (N ) ∩ C ′ is nonempty, so f (C ′◦ ) ∩ D′ is nonempty.

Now we can define a key algebraic structure which will lead us to be able to deduce the structure of
C(F ) in general, in particular an algebraic structure which allows us to generate all sign sequences
which are present from the sign sequences of the vertices. The following holds for all supertransver-
sal networks (and does not rely on the layer maps being generic).
Lemma 18. Let F be a supertransversal neural network.
If C and D are two cells of C(F ), the product S(C) · S(D) given by:

                                                        S(C)ij   if S(C)ij ̸= 0
                             (S(C) · S(D))ij =
                                                        S(D)ij   otherwise

is well-defined as a product between sign sequences. That is, there exists a cell E in C(F ) such that
S(C) · S(D) = S(E) for all such cells C and D.
Furthermore, C ≤ E, that is, C is a face of E or equal to E.
Thus, sign sequences of a supertransversal network form a semigroup.

Proof. First, this is true for any single-layer network F : Rnm → R, since it is true for hyperplane
arrangements; see Aguiar & Mahajan (2017), Section 1.4 for a treatment.
Now, suppose these properties hold for any supertransversal k-layer neural network and inductively,
using the backwards construction of C(F ), let F be a k + 1-layer supertransversal neural network.
Then F (2) = G ◦ Fk+1 ◦ ... ◦ F2 is a k-layer supertransversal network and our inductive hypothesis
holds for C(F (2) ). We will denote the sign sequences of cells with respect to C(F (2) ) by S (2) (C).
Let C and D be cells of C(F ) = C(F (2) ◦ F1 ). Then C = R1 ∩ F1−1 (C ′ ) and D = R2 ∩ F1−1 (D′ ),
for cells R1 , R2 in R(1) and cells C ′ , D′ ∈ C(F (2) ), by the definition of C(F ). Now, by inductive
hypothesis S (2) (C ′ ) · S (2) (D′ ) = S (2) (E ′ ) for some cell E ′ in C(F (2) ), and C ′ is a face of E ′ .
Denote the sign sequences with respect to R(1) as S1 . Since R(1) is a polyhedral complex induced
by an affine hyperplane arrangement, S1 (R1 ) · S1 (R2 ) = S1 (R3 ) for R3 a region in R(1) , and R1
is a face of R3 or equal to R3 .
Let E = R3 ∩ F1−1 (E ′ ). We wish to show that S(C) · S(D) = S(E), and that C is a face of E
or equal to it. Now, S(C) is obtained by S1 (R1 ) concatenated with S (2) (C ′ ), and likewise for the
other cells. Since S1 (R1 ) · S1 (R2 ) = S1 (R3 ) by the corresponding hyperplane arrangement and


                                                      18
S (2) (C ′ ) · S (2) (D′ ) = S(E ′ ) by inductive hypothesis, by concatenation this gives S(C) · S(D) =
S(E).
To see that E is nonempty we must note that since F is supertransversal, F1 is transverse on R1 to
C ′ , and apply Lemma 17 to obtain that R3◦ ∩ F1−1 (E ′ )◦ is nonempty.
Lastly, we recall from Lemma 8 that C ′ ≤ E ′ and R1 ≤ R3 implies that (F1−1 (C ′ ) ∩ R1 ) ≤
(F1−1 (E ′ ) ∩ R3 ), that is, C ≤ E.

The following properties of the product defined above are analogous to the same properties in hy-
perplane arrangements.
Lemma 19. For all supertransversal networks, the following relations hold for all C and D in
C(F ), where the relation ≤ denotes “is a face of”:

      1. C ≤ D if and only if S(C) · S(D) = S(D)
      2. S(C) · S(D) = S(D) · S(C) if and only if there is a cell E with D ≤ E and C ≤ E.
      3. S(C) · S(D) = S(C) if and only if all bent hyperplanes which contain D also contain C.

Proof.

      1. We have already shown if S(C) · S(D) = S(D) then C ≤ D. If S(C) · S(D) ̸= S(D)
         then there is some index where sij (C) = ±1 and sij (D) = −sij (C). If so, then C and D
         are sent to opposite sides of some hyperplane in some layer; this cannot occur if C ≤ D.
      2. Immediate from the previous statement and Lemma 18.
      3. S(C) · S(D) = S(C) if and only if for all node maps for which Fij (C) = 0, we also
         have Fij (D) = 0. But this is true if and only if all bent hyperplanes which contain C also
         contain D.



We now assemble these ideas to present a duality between the canonical polyhedral complex of a
generic, supertransversal neural network and a pure cubical complex, providing a surprising amount
of new structure to the combinatorics of the canonical polyhedral complex.
Theorem 20. For each generic, supertransversal neural network F : Rn0 → R with at least n0
hidden units in the first layer, the image of the map S : C(F ) → {−1, 0, 1}n uniquely defines a pure
n0 -dimensional subcomplex of the hypercube [−1, 1]N endowed with the product CW structure. We
will call this subcomplex S(F ). In the image, the vertices in S(F ) correspond to n0 -cells in C(F ),
and in general the k-cells of S(F ) correspond to codimension-k cells of C(F ).

Proof. Recall that cubical faces of [−1, 1]N (with its product CW structure) can be identified by
sequences of {−1, 0, 1}N .
First if F has at least n0 hidden units in the first layer and it is generic, then C(F ) contains vertices
as some of its cells, since the intersection of n0 hyperplanes in general position in Rn0 is a point.
Since C(F ) is a connected polyhedral complex, if any of its polyhedra have vertices, then all of them
do (see Grigsby et al. (2022), Corollary 5.29).
For any C ∈ C(F ) there is a vertex v ≤ C. There are n0 coordinates where S(v) = 0 by Lemma 16.
Furthermore S(v) · S(C) = S(C) by Lemma 18. Thus S(C) is equal to S(v) except those places
where S(v) = 0. But this is equivalent to the condition that the n0 -cell S(v) ∈ S(F ) has S(C) on
its boundary. So, every in the image of S(F ) is contained in an n0 -cube which is also in the image
of S(F ). (There are no n0 + 1-cubes in the image of S(F ) by Lemma 16.) Thus the image of S(F )
is ”pure n0 -dimensional” in the sense that every cube in S(F ) is a face of an n0 -cube in S(F ).
Next we show that for a given n0 -cube in the image of S(F ), all its faces are in the image of
S(F ). Our strategy is to show that there exists an edge corresponding to each possible sign sequence


                                                   19
incident to the corresponding vertex. Then we may apply the sign sequence multiplication in Lemma
18 to obtain all remaining faces. This is equivalent to establishing that a vertex v of C(F ) has 2n0
neighboring edges, each of which have a 1 or −1 replacing a single 0 from S(v). Of course, any
vertex must be incident to at least n0 edges since it belongs to a polyhedral complex with domain
Rn0 , so we show that if there exists an edge incident to v with Sij (E) = 1 while Sij (v) = 0, then
there also exists an edge with Sij (E) = −1 (and, by symmetry, vice versa).
Suppose that this is not the case for some v. Then without loss of generality there exists an earliest
(i, j) node map satisfying that Fij (v) = 0 but for all edges E neighboring v in C(F ), Fij (E) ≥ 0,
since for each edge E, S(E) differs from S(v) only in one location. Since the edge set of v is
nonempty, this implies that Fij cannot be affine on any affine subspace of Rn0 containing v unless
Fij = 0 on that subspace.
As v cannot be a vertex of C(F(i−1) ), since it is contained in the intersection of fewer than n0 bent
hyperplanes before Fij , it is contained in the interior of a larger cell C in C(F(i−1) ). As a result,
Fij is affine on the interior of C. But by the previous paragraph, this means that Fij (C) = 0, and
thus F(i) is not transverse on C to a cell contained in R(i) , and cannot be transverse on C to any
polyhedral subdivision (including C(F (i) )). This implies that there is a layer of F(i−1) which fails
to be transverse on cells, which is a contradiction.
So, if v is a vertex of C(F ), then for each node map Fij such that Fij (v) = 0, v has an incident
edge with Fij (E) = 1 and an incident edge with Fij (E) = −1 by the same argument. We note by
supertransversality that S(E) must have n0 − 1 entries which are zero. Also, since v is incident to
E, by Lemma 19, S(E) must have the same entries as S(V ) except possibly where S(v) = 0. This
means S(E) = S(v) except for at the (i, j) coordinate, as required. Since this occurs at all node
maps for which Fij (v) = 0, we are done.

Once the existing cells in S(F ) have been located, we only need to establish an explicit duality. The
majority of the work has already been done.
Lemma 21. The face poset of C(F ) is the opposite poset of the face poset of S(F ), and the (mod-
two) cellular boundary map of S(F ) is dual to the (mod-two) cellular boundary map of C(F ).

Proof. In [−1, 1]N , the cells consist of cubes which are uniquely defined by their center, at points
given by sequences in {−1, 0, 1}N . The dimension of each cube is given by the number of 0 entries
in this sequence. The cellular boundary of this cube consists of cells one dimension lower, with a
1 or −1 replacing a 0 in the sign sequence, providing the (mod two) boundary in S(C). In C(F ),
if s(C) is related to s(D) by replacing one zero entry of C with a 1 or −1, by Lemmas 19 and 16
that this is equivalent to C ≤ D and dim(C) + 1 = dim(D), which is equivalent to C being in the
(mod two) cellular boundary of D.

Lastly, we prove that the process of computing C(F ) can be done iteratively through layers, begin-
ning with the first layer:
Lemma 22. Let F be a supertransversal, generic neural network.
The 0-cells of C(F(1) ) are given by the solutions to
                                {Wα x = bα : α ⊂ [n1 ] & |α| = n0 }
where W is the weight matrix of the network and α denotes a subset of the n1 vertices.
A vertex v obtained by solving Wα x = bα satisfies si (v) = 0 iff i ∈ α.

Proof. These are the vertices of a generic, affine hyperplane arrangement.

In order to compute the vertices of C(F ) corresponding to bent hyperplanes from further layers, we
loop through regions C of C(F(k−1) ) and solve systems of linear equations arising from n0 bent
hyperplanes on that region, at least one of which corresponds to a new bent hyperplane Fkj . The
following lemma guarantees that if we select these combinations of Fij corresponding to earlier
layers from only those which intersect to form cells on the boundary of C, we are guaranteed to
obtain all new vertices in C(F(k) ).


                                                  20
Lemma 23. Let F be a generic, supertransversal neural network with at least n0 hidden units in its
first layer.
If C is a cell of C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ), then Fij (C) is affine for all i ≤ k. Call the corresponding affine
map Aij : Rn0 → R. Then,

      1. All 0-cells of C(Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1 ) which are contained in the closure of C and which are not
         already in C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ) are the solution to a system of n0 affine equations, of which
         1 ≤ ℓ ≤ n0 are of the form:


                                                   Akm (x) = 0

         and 0 ≤ n0 − ℓ ≤ n0 − 1 equations are of the form:


                                                Aij (x) = 0; i < k

         Here, the Aij of the n0 − ℓ equations from earlier layers are selected such that there exists
         a vertex of C in the intersection of the corresponding bent hyperplanes. In other words, the
         remaining n0 − ℓ equations describe the affine span of a face of C.
      2. A solution to the system of equations described in (1) corresponds to a 0-cell of C(Fk ◦
         ... ◦ F1 ) contained in the closure of C if and only if, for all remaining (i, j) pairs with
         i ≤ k − 1, we have that sij (v) = sij (C).

Proof. For statement (1), suppose that v is in the closure of C, where C is a cell of C(Fk−1 ◦...◦F1 ),
and v is a vertex of C(Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1 ). By Theorem 20, v is the solution to Fij (x) = 0 for exactly n0
node maps. Since Fij |C = Aij , then Aij (v) = 0 for those n0 node maps. If i < k for all of these
node maps Fij , then in fact v is a 0-cell of C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ). So if v is a vertex of C(Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1 )
and not a vertex of C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ), at least one of the Fij must be a node map with i = k. Thus,
any vertex of C(Fk ◦ ... ◦ F1 ) which is contained in the closure of C must be a solution to a system
of equations of this form. For any solution of this form to be nonempty when intersecting with the
     T of C, the the Aij corresponding to this system of equations must satisfy the condition that
closure
C ∩ {x : Aij (x) = 0} is nonempty. Since none of the Aij from earlier layers intersect the interior
of C, the intersection of the Aij are describing the linear span of a face of C, which must contain a
vertex of C.
For statement (2), of course if v is a solution to the system of equations described in (1) and also is in
the closure of C, then by Lemma 19, sij (v) = sij (C) when i ≤ k − 1, except for where sij (v) = 0,
which by Theorem 20 occurs for precisely the bent hyperplanes which were intersected to obtain
sij .
In the other direction, if x is a solution to the above system of equations but is not a 0-cell of C(F ),
it must not be contained in the closure of C. Then x is contained in the interior of some other cell
of C(Fk−1 ◦ ... ◦ F1 ), call it D, such that D is not a face of C (Figure A.2). If there is some bent
hyperplane corresponding to one of the remaining (i, j) pairs such that sij (D) ̸= sij (C) then we are
done. Otherwise we will see a contradiction. If S(D) = S(C) except at (i, j) pairs corresponding
to some of the Aij , then by our selection of equations earlier, there is a face E of C which has
the sign sequence equal to zero at these coordinates (contained in the intersection of the solution of
Aij x = 0). If E = D, then D is a face of C and we have a contradiction. The only other option
is that E is a proper face of D by Lemma 19. The intersection of the solutions to Aij = 0 contains
the affine span of E, so the intersection of these with the closure of D is contained in a proper face
of D, and so x, an element of this intersection, cannot be in the interior of D. This contradicts our
assumption that x is in the interior of D.
This shows that if x is a solution to the above system of equations but is not a 0-cell of C(F ), then
there exists some (i, j) pair with i ≤ k −1 such that sij (x) ̸= sij (C) and which does not correspond
to the hyperplanes which were intersected.



                                                    21
Figure 7: When determining if a solution x to the system of equations in Lemma 23 is a vertex of
C(F(k) ), we look at its sign sequence. However, its sign relative to {Aij } is numerically unstable.
We would like to guarantee it belongs to the closure of C by evaluating the node maps which do
not include Aij . A concern is that it is contained in a different cell D with identical signs to C in
C(F(k−1) ) except possibly in the locations of the Aij which we intersected, which would make this
task impossible. The argument in part (2) shows this does not occur, and the situation pictured above
is impossible.


A note on numerical stability: Suppose that in step (1) we only find an approximate intersection x̃
instead of an exact intersection x, with |x̃ − x| < ε determined by machine precision. According to
the above lemma, if we do locate the exact intersection x, determining whether this point x is a ver-
tex of the polyhedral complex C(F ) relies only on determining the sign of Fij (x) for indices (i, j)
corresponding to the bent hyperplanes which were not intersected. Under the supertransversality as-
sumptions, Fij (x) is strictly nonzero in these (i, j) coordinates. We also note that Fij is continuous,
so there is an open neighborhood N containing x where, for all x̃ ∈ N , we have Fij (x̃) = Fij (x)
for all relevant i, j. We can therefore expect that, despite possible numerical error in computing
x̃, the computation of the sign sequence of the corresponding vertex is stable under these perturba-
tions, since by recording which bent hyperplanes were intersected via signs we have eliminated the
unstable operation of determining which signs were 0.
We finally discuss the question of algorithmic complexity.
Lemma 24. Let F : Rn0 → R be a randomly-initialized ReLU neural network satisfying the
conditions in (Hanin & Rolnick, 2019a).
        Pm
If N = i=1 ni is the number of hidden units of F , then the average number of linear equations
and sign sequence evaluations required for the computation of S(F ) is O(N 2n0 +1 ).

Proof. The first step in Lemma 22 involves solving nn10 equations, which is O(nn1 0 ). Then in the the


recursive step in Lemma 23, in each subsequent layer i ≥ 2, there are an average of O((n1 + · · · +
ni−1 )n0 ) regions to iterate through (Hanin & Rolnick, 2019a). In each region, there are fewer than
 n1 +···+ni

     n0       new equations   to solve. This yields the following big-O upper bound for the average
computational complexity of this algorithm:

                          m
                          X                                                           m
                                                                                      X
                nn1 0 +         (n1 + · · · + ni−1 )n0 n1 + · · · + ni )n0 ≤ N n0 +         N n0
                          i=1                                                         i=1

Since N = n1 + · · · + nm , and each of the ni ≥ 1, it must be the case that the depth m ≤ N , so
this expression is

                                                  O(N 2n0 +1 )

This is polynomial in N and exponential in n0 .

Compare to some possible naı̈ve approaches to computing the face relations of C(F ). First, con-
sider the approach of computing which regions are present and then computing their intersections.
First, naı̈ve search for all regions’ activation patterns in (−1, 1)N would require determining if there


                                                       22
are solutions to 2N linear inequalities in N variables, which would then define highly redundant
descriptions of polyhedral regions. This can be done more optimally than checking each set of
inequalities (Serra et al., 2018; Zhang & Wu, 2020). However, without having tracked sign informa-
tion, following this search, to determine if two polyhedra share a face, and find the dimension of that
face, requires finding whether the union of two sets of N linear inequalities is consistent, with the
expectation that there will be cancellation of redundancies by the exact equality of some linear com-
binations of these linear inequalities in order to observe the existence of lower-dimensional faces.
Numerical error in the expression of these linear inequalities can thus lead to catastrophic failure
in identifying shared lower-dimensional faces, especially the dimension of those faces. Alternative
methods of tracking which vertices are present in a way which could hypothetically allow for track-
ing pairwise intersection between cells, in contrast, currently track the full face poset (Yang et al.,
2020; 2021), and are thus storage-intensive.

B    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS
Here we report additional distributional information about the topology of decision boundaries of
randomly initialized ReLU networks with different architectures. Table 2 summarizes distributional
information about the Betti numbers of the decision boundary, and Table 3 summarizes information
about the connected components of the decision boundary. Figure 8 gives additional distributional
information for selected architectures. While shallow architectures again have a very constant dis-
tribution of the number of unbounded components even across input dimension, the number of
unbounded components seen at initialization in deeper architectures is much greater, and the distri-
butional variability with width is apparent.


Table 2: Betti numbers of the compactified decision boundary dependent on architecture, across the
range of widths studied (50 networks of each architecture). In βn0 −1 , deeper architectures exhibit
greater variability and greater apparent change with width across the range of widths studied.
                                       Shallow Architectures
                                                 β0               βn0 −1
                                        Average        SE     Average   SE
                       (2, 5, 1)          1.06        0.034    1.06     0.059
                       (2, 15, 1)         1.16        0.052    1.04     0.075
                       (3, 5, 1)          1.02        0.019    1.04     0.048
                       (3, 15, 1)         1.04        0.027    1.04     0.040
                       (4, 5, 1)          1.00        0.000    0.98     0.020
                       (4, 15, 1)         1.02        0.020    1.12     0.046
                                         Deep Architectures
                                                 β0               βn0 −1
                                        Average        SE     Average   SE
                       (2, 5, 5, 1)       1.16        0.05     1.14     0.13
                       (2, 15, 15, 1)     1.14        0.05     1.00     0.10
                       (3, 5, 5, 1)       1.00         0.00    1.52     0.14
                       (3, 13, 13, 1)     1.04        0.028    1.34     0.15
                       (4, 5, 5, 1)       1.00        0.00     0.82     0.07
                       (4, 8, 8, 1)       1.04        0.03     1.88     0.30


                                                  23
Table 3: Average number of bounded and unbounded components of the decision boundary depen-
dent on architecture.
                                   Shallow Architectures
                                          Unbounded              Bounded
                                        Average        SE     Average   SE
                       (2, 5, 1)         1.00      0.070       0.06     0.034
                       (2, 15, 1)        0.88      0.073       0.16     0.052
                       (3, 5, 1)         1.02      0.053       0.02     0.020
                       (3, 15, 1)        1.00      0.040       0.04     0.023
                       (4, 5, 1)         0.98      0.020       0.00     0.00
                       (4, 15, 1)        1.10      0.042       0.02     0.020
                                         Deep Architectures
                                          Unbounded              Bounded
                                        Average        SE     Average   SE
                       (2, 5, 5, 1)      0.98      0.140       0.16     0.052
                       (2, 15, 15, 1)    0.86      0.100       0.14     0.049
                       (3, 5, 5, 1)      1.52      0.142       0.00     0.000
                       (3, 10, 10, 1)    1.38      0.155       0.04     0.027
                       (4, 5, 5, 1)      0.82     0.0730       0.00     0.000
                       (4, 8, 8, 1)      1.84     0.301        0.04     0.040


C    L ICENSE I NFORMATION
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) is under a Modified BSD license, permitting use in other projects
and requiring its licensing information repackaged when its source code is redistributed. We do not
redistribute its source code in our work.
Sage (The Sage Developers, 2018) is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL). It is
free to use and distribute. We do not redistribute its source code in our work, but it is necessary to
run the decision boundary topology computations.


                                                  24
Figure 8: Distribution of the total number of connected components of the decision boundary for
selected architectures.


                                              25
