Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DEEAPR: C ONTROLLABLE D EPTH E NHANCEMENT
VIA A DAPTIVE PARAMETRIC F EATURE ROTATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Understanding depth of an image provides viewers with a better interpretation of
         the 3D structures within an image. Photographers utilize numerous factors that
         can affect depth perception to aesthetically improve a scene. Unfortunately, con-
         trolling depth perception after the image has been captured is a difficult process as
         it requires accurate and explicit depth information. Also, defining a quantitative
         metric of a subjective quality (i.e., depth perception) is difficult which makes su-
         pervised learning a great challenge. To this end, we propose DEpth Enhancement
         via Adaptive Parametric feature Rotation (DEEAPR), which modulates the per-
         ceptual depth of an input scene using a single control parameter without the need
         for explicit depth information. We first embed content-independent depth percep-
         tion of a scene by visual representation learning. Then, we train the controllable
         depth enhancer network with a novel modulator, parametric feature rotation block
         (PFRB), that allows for continuous modulation of a representative feature. We
         demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach by verifying each compo-
         nent through an ablation study and comparison to other controllable methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Enhancing depth perception in 2D images exhibits
a more realistic image content to the viewers as         Image space I
it allows for better interpretation of the 3D scene                         shallow                             deep

structure. The human visual system uses a vari-
ety of cues to inference depth information, such as
                                                                                                       ⋯
disparity that arises from binocular vision or mo-
tion (Kim et al., 2016). Depth cues in single static
images, such as occlusion, shading, or blur, are
referred to as pictorial depth cues (O’Shea et al.,
1997). Many artists and photographers utilize pic-                                           Encoder
torial depth cues by adding synthetic effects to in-
crease impression of depth in still images. For          Representation space R

example, amplifying the defocus blur triggers the                                                                      shallow

depth-of-focus cue, where the objects in the range
                                                                                                                       deep
of focus appear sharp and those further away ap-
pear blurry. However, enhancing depth perception
of an image by manipulating depth cues without                              0
                                                                                         𝜎
explicit depth information of a scene is a challeng-                                               1
ing task. Moreover, depth perception of a scene
is a subjective quality that varies from image to                                 Controllable Depth Enhancer

image, which is difficult to learn in a supervised
manner.
                                                     Figure 1: Illustration of DEEAPR framework.
Our final goal is to modulate the perceptual depth
of an input scene using a single control parameter without the need for explicit depth information.
While the traits of depth perception make supervised training very difficult, we rely on the recent
success of unsupervised visual representation learning that considers a high dimensional space in
which the degree of similarity is inversely correlated with the distance between instances. As the
first step, we embed content-independent depth perception of a scene onto the representation space


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by combining contrastive learning (Hadsell et al., 2006) and metric learning (Balntas et al., 2016).
The representation space of the encoder then bridges the image space and the control parameter axis.
Instead of relying on full supervision, we aim to train the direction of depth enhancement during
depth enhancer training. Fig. 1 illustrates our DEEAPR framework combining visual representation
learning and a controllable neural network. We first train a depth representation encoder in an
unsupervised manner, then train the direction of depth perception enhancer such that appropriate
change would be induced in the image domain when the depth representative feature is modulated.
Our contributions are three-fold. First, we propose a novel strategy to learn visual representation
space of style disentangled from image contents. Second, we present a controllable neural network
that enhances the depth perception of an input image according to a single control parameter. Lastly,
we present a novel modulator, parametric feature rotation block (PFRB), that allows for continuous
modulation of feature representation while preserving its norm.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

Recent success of unsupervised representation learning in natural language processing has moti-
vated the computer vision community to pursue learning a manifold of natural images. To learn an
effective feature space for downstream tasks, many works utilized contrastive loss (Hadsell et al.,
2006) to discriminate highly correlated instances (i.e., positive pairs) from others. In general, var-
ious content-preserving data augmentation is applied to the same image independently in order to
generate positive pairs (Chen et al., 2020a). All other examples obtained from different images are
considered as negative samples, and the objective is to minimize the distance between positive pairs
with respect to myriads of negative samples. Momentum Contrast (MoCo) (He et al., 2020b) is a
representative approach which aims to build a dynamic dictionary encoded by a moving-averaged
momentum encoder. Furthermore, DASR (Wang et al., 2021) adapts MoCo to learn a content-
independent degradation representation for the blind super-resolution task. Our strategy is similar
to MoCo v2 (Chen et al., 2020b) and partly motivated from DASR in that we aim to train content-
independent representation of depth perception via contrastive learning. We use triplet margin loss
(Balntas et al., 2016) as an additional regularizer to disentangle depth perception from the image
content.

2.2   D EPTH P ERCEPTION E NHANCEMENT

Interpretation of 3D scene structure from single static images can be obtained from various pictorial
depth cues, such as occlusion, relative size, linear perspective, aerial perspective, texture gradients,
depth-of-focus and shading (Cipiloglu et al., 2010). These depth cues are utilized in conventional
methods by for example, enhancing local contrast (Ritschel et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2014), slightly
darkening or lightening the background or partly occluded objects (Luft et al., 2004), or applying
shading and/or shadows (Vergne et al., 2011; Lopez-Moreno et al., 2011). While these methods
require explicit use of depth information at the pixel level, Hel-Or et al. (2017) extract reflectance
derivatives of an image to manipulate shading cues. Conventional methods often require precise ma-
nipulation of multitude of parameters for plausible and visually pleasing output. More recently, there
have been great interest in developing deep learning-based approaches to render artificial depth-of-
field effect, often referred to as the Bokeh effect. Indeed, through the AIM Boken Challenges (Igna-
tov et al., 2019; 2020b), numerous approaches created depth-dependent blur effects by using depth
information explicitly (Peng et al., 2022) or implicitly (Ignatov et al., 2020a; Qian et al., 2020; Dutta
et al., 2021). Our DEEAPR differs from aforementioned approaches in two major aspects: DEEAPR
procudes a depth enhanced image based on a single parameter without explicit depth information.

2.3   C ONTROLLABLE N EURAL N ETWORK

Conventional deep learning methods learn a deterministic mapping for each task and output a single
image given an input. Controllable methods, on the other hand, provide flexibility in producing im-
ages at continuous levels for modulation over diverse imagery effects. Controllability has appeared
in several low-level vision tasks such as style transfer to permit smooth interpolation between differ-
ent artistic styles (Dumoulin et al., 2016; Ghiasi et al., 2017; Huang & Belongie, 2017; Wang et al.,


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Generation process of query, positive and hard negative samples                                                                                (b) with 50% probability    (c) with 50% probability

                                                                                                           Random crop   Random hflip
                                                                                                                           (p = 0.5)
                                                                                                                                         AWGN
                                                                                                                                        (p = 0.2)
                                                                                                                                                          Depth
                                                                                                                                                         enhancer
                                                                                                                                                                            𝑞                           𝑞
                                                                                                            & Resize


                                                                                                           Random crop                   AWGN             Depth
    𝐼                   Color jitter
              (brightness, contrast, saturation)
                                                        Random grayscale
                                                            (p = 0.2)
                                                                            Random Gaussian blur
                                                                                 (p = 0.5)                  & Resize
                                                                                                                         Random hflip
                                                                                                                           (p = 0.5)    (p = 0.2)        enhancer
                                                                                                                                                                           𝑘+                          𝑘+

                                                                                                           Random crop   Random hflip    AWGN                                         Depth
                                                                                                            & Resize       (p = 0.5)    (p = 0.2)                          𝑘−        enhancer          𝑘−

              (b1) Query                           (b2) Positive sample        (b3) Hard negative sample                 (c1) Query                 (c2) Positive sample          (c3) Hard negative sample


Figure 2: (a) Generation process of query, positive and hard negative sample. (b), (c) The three
samples have same image content but the hard negative sample (b3/c3) has different depth perception
from the query (b1/c1) and positive sample (b2/c2).

2019b) and image restoration to restore images at continuous levels of degradation (Fan et al., 2019;
He et al., 2019; 2020a; Kim et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2019a;b). Various designs of controllable neu-
ral networks have been explored, which include tuning different parameters of normalization layers
(Dumoulin et al., 2016; Ghiasi et al., 2017; Huang & Belongie, 2017), applying linear interpolation
on parameters of multiple correlated networks (Wang et al., 2019b), modifying intermediate layer
features (He et al., 2019) and using a network consisting of several fully-connected layers to learn
the channel importance for a specified task (He et al., 2020a; Kim et al., 2021). Similarly, Wang
et al. (2019a) designed a neural network consisting of a main branch and a tuning branch to modu-
late the feature of the main branch. While aforementioned approaches applied the control parameter
directly to modify the base image generation network, the control parameter in DEEAPR is encoded
to modulate the depth representative feature to separate the base network from the variable part,
lifting the burden of multitask learning from the base network.

3       M ETHODS
The DEEAPR network consists of a depth representation encoder and a controllable depth en-
hancer. The representation encoder is responsible for generating the depth representative feature
of the input image and the enhancer for generating a depth enhanced image. The representation
encoder and the enhancer are trained in two separate stages, which are described in Sec. 3.1 and 3.2,
resp.

3.1         L EARNING D EPTH R EPRESENTATION

It is crucial that the content of an image is preserved in the process of depth enhancement. Thus, our
goal is to learn a feature representative of depth that can be modulated without affecting the contents
of a given image. Due to the lack of a quantitative metric that measures the perception of depth, we
devise a data-driven approach to extract a feature representative of depth via visual representation
learning. As current existing contrastive loss-based algorithms are limited in distinguishing content
from style (or depth perception in the context of depth enhancement), we introduce a hard negative
sample, k− , for each query. The hard negative sample shares the same content as the query and the
positive sample, but has different style to reinforce the encoder to embed visual instances according
to their style, not content. This is achieved by adding the triplet margin loss (Balntas et al., 2016) as
regularization, Lreg , to the MoCo v2’s framework, as follows:
                                                                             exp (q · k+ /τ )
    Ltotal = Lc + λLreg = − log                                                                  + λ · max{(q · k− ) − (q · k+ ) + m, 0}, (1)
                                                                           ΣK
                                                                            i=1 exp (q · ki /τ )
where K is the dictionary size, τ is the softmax temperature, λ is a regularization parameter and m is
a margin. Margin m regulates the difference of correlations between query-positive and query-hard
negative pairs. The Lreg term is crucial for disentangling style from content as it forces the query to
push away image patches with same content but different depth perception. We analyze the effect
of the regularizer in representation space in Sec. 5.1.


                                                                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  (a) Overall architecture of DEEAPR network                                                                                                                               (b) Downblock (DwnBlk)


                                                               𝑓𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙             Depth Representation Encoder
                                                                                           (ResNet-50)

                                                                              𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙3        𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙2        𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙1        𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙0                     Control parameter
                                                                          PFRB          PFRB           PFRB           PFRB                                  𝜎
           Conv3×3


                                                                                                                                             Conv3×3
                                                                                                                                     ConvT
                          DwnBlk                                                                                                                                            (c) Parametric feature rotation block (PFRB)


                                                                                                                       UpBlk
                                    DwnBlk                                                                                                                 𝜎 = 0.0


                                                                                                        UpBlk
                                             DwnBlk                                                                                                                        (d) Upblock (UpBlk)


                                                                                         UpBlk
                                                                                                                                                           𝜎 = 0.1

          Concatenation
                                                      DwnBlk


                                                                                                                                                             ⋯
                                                                           UpBlk
          Element-wise multiplication
          Element-wise sum                                       DwnBlk
          Trainable
          Batchnorm
          GELU
          Sigmoid                                                                                                                                          𝜎 = 1.0



      Figure 3: (a) The overall architecture of DEEAPR network and (b), (c), (d) its constituents.

To obtain positive and hard negatives for a given query, we applied pre- and post-transforms de-
pending on their ability to affect the perception of depth. That is, as blur, brightness, contrast and
saturation can affect depth perception, we applied these operations commonly across the image to
obtain the query, positive and hard negative samples. Crop, resize, horizontal flip, additive white
Gaussian noise and hue, on the other hand, have no effect on depth perception, and thus were ap-
plied independently. We applied the synthetic depth enhancement model (described in Sec. 4.1)
to the query and positive pair or to the hard negative sample with equal probability. We provide
concrete examples of query, positive and hard negative samples in Fig. 2(b) and (c).

3.2       L EARNING D EPTH E NHANCEMENT E FFECT

Network architecture. Fig. 3 illustrates the architecture of the DEEAPR network and its con-
stituents. The parametric feature rotation blocks (PFRBs) modulate the depth representative feature
according to σ and provide modified local representations to the depth enhancer. The depth enhancer,
which is responsible for enhancing the depth perception to a given extent, takes on an architectural
structure of U-Net consisting of N = 5 Downblocks and N − 1 Upblocks. The features are down-
scaled via strided convolution and upscaled via transposed convolution. As the features from the
Downblock and Upblock correspond to blurred features of the input due to the down- and upscaling
operations, we ensure that the two blocks remain connected via the skip connection to retain sharp
as well as contrast and brightness information.
Downblock and Upblock. Both the Downblock and the Upblock reference depth representation, but
treat the information in different ways. The Downblock references the global depth representative
feature and applies channel attention to its input to selectively downsample features-of-interest. Each
Upblock receives two sets of features: one from the previous Upblock (or the last Downblock in
case of the first Upblock) and another from the skip-connection. We ensure that spatial variance is
maintained while combining these features by applying spatially varying scales and biases using a
spatial feature transform (SFT) layer (Wang et al., 2018). The SFT layer takes the modified local
depth representation corresponding to each resolution as a condition.
Parametric Feature Rotation Block (PFRB). The local depth representation is modulated by hy-
perparameter, σ, which controls the strength of the depth enhancement effect. As representative
features reside along the unit hypersphere due to the normalization layer, the features are controlled
by applying sinusoidal operations on the encoded control parameter. That is, the local representation
is multiplied by cosine and sine of ωσ + ϕ, where ω and ϕ are trainable vectors. Formally,

                                   P F RB(flocali , σ) = [cos(ωσ + ϕ) ⊙ flocali : sin(ωσ + ϕ) ⊙ flocali ],                                                                                                                 (2)

where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication (i.e., Hadamard product) and : denotes concatena-
tion. Notice that PFRB preserves the norm of output features regardless of the value of σ by the
Pythagorean trigonometric identity. This ensures that the output feature of PFRB has a local norm
of 1, which in turn stabilizes training of the depth enhancer module.


                                                                                                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Self-Supervised Training. Suppose σ ∈ R[0, 1] denotes the control parameter of depth enhance-
ment, where σ = 0 implies that the target image is the input image and σ = 1 implies that the
target is its depth-enhanced version. Training a depth enhancement network at continuous levels of
σ ∈ R[0, 1] in a fully supervised way would require pairs of an input image and a depth-enhanced
image at various levels of σ. However, the initial depth perception of an input differs from image to
image, which leads to different perception of depth enhancement despite using the same parameters.
Therefore, we utilize the fact that the direction of change remains consistent (i.e., as σ → 1, the
target image should be perceived deeper) and only aim to train the direction of depth enhancement.
Indeed, when training the DEEAPR network, we sample the control parameter σ from {0, 1} with
equal probability but aim to infer depth enhanced images in between R[0, 1]. Given an image I and
its depth-enhanced version O, the depth enhancer network is trained using L1 loss as a reconstruc-
tion loss, where the target is the input I when σ = 0 and the target is O otherwise. Inferencing depth
enhanced images at continuous levels of σ ∈ R[0, 1] is made possible despite training at discrete
levels of σ ∈ {0, 1} as the the sinusoidal functions in the PFRB allow for smooth interpolation
between the depth representation features that reside on the unit hypersphere.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
4.1     M ODELING D EPTH E NHANCEMENT E FFECT

We considered two processes to synthesize depth enhanced images: contrast manipulation and cir-
cular blur effect. Increasing the contrast of near objects enhances volumetric perception, while
decreasing the contrast of the background simulates an atmospheric obscuring effect. To model the
depth-dependent contrast effect, we modified the standard haze model (Yang & Sun, 2018):
    Ocontrast (x) = I(x)T (x) + A(1 − T (x)) and T (x) = max{1, exp(−η(d(x) − δcontrast ))}, (3)
where I(x) is the intensity of scene radiance at position x, A the atmospheric light and d(x) ∈ [0, 1]
the normalized scene depth. The standard haze model only simulates the obscuring effect by setting
A to some constant value. However, we observed that this model does not account for the contrast
enhancement effect of close objects and creates visually unpleasing artifactsPin images with low
brightness. Correspondingly, we redefined A = I¯ + α, where I¯ = |I(x)|      1
                                                                                     ∀x I(x) is a global
average of the scene radiance and α is a constant. In addition, we did not limit the max value of
T (x) to 1 to enhance contrast of relatively near objects (i.e., d(x) < δcontrast ).
Synthetic blur is frequently used in photography to manipulate depth perception of a scene. Images
captured with shallow depth-of-field have blurred background, making the in-focus objects stand
out. We modified the Bokeh effect synthesis in Wadhwa et al. (2018) and applied a circular blur
kernel with its size r linearly increasing with respect to depth, d(x). The blur kernel is applied to
regions farther away than the distance δblur (i.e., d(x) > δblur ) and the size of the kernel increases
with slope s. When applying the kernel, we ignored pixel values whose depth difference exceeded
threshold dmax = 0.1 with respect to the center pixel, xi . In summary, the final output image O(x)
was obtained by
                               1
    O(x) =                                         Σx ∈Ω(x) 1|d(xi )−d(x)|<dmax Ocontrast (xi ),    (4)
             |{xi ∈ Ω(x)| |d(xi ) − d(x)| < dmax }| i
where Ω(x) is a local circular window with radius r(x) = max{s(d(x) − δblur ), 0}.
Both effects require accurate depth information of a scene, d(x). For this purpose, we used pre-
trained DPT (Ranftl et al., 2021) for monocular depth estimation and refined the predicted depth
using the fast bilateral solver (Barron & Poole, 2016). We observed that depth prediction by DPT
was unreliable in regions where depth changed drastically or absolute depth value was large; thus,
we integrated these two heuristics into generating a confidence map for the fast bilateral solver.

4.2     T RAINING D ETAILS

Representation Learning. We trained the depth representation encoder that takes on the architec-
tural structure of ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) with an additional fully connected layer as suggested
in Chen et al. (2020a;b). Following the experimental setup in Chen et al. (2020b), we set τ = 0.07,


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a) Input image         (b) 𝜆 = 0             (c) 𝜆 = 10            (d) 𝜆 = 100
                                                                                               1.0


                                                                                               𝜎′


                                                                                               0.0


Figure 4: t-SNE visualization of representation space, color coded by the strength of depth enhance-
ment effect. (b) Features are widely dispersed w/o regularization. (c), (d) As λ increases, features at
opposite extremes of depth perception are located far away from each other.

K = 65536 and momentum to 0.9. The learning rate was initialized to 0.03 and adjusted with a
cosine annealing scheduler. The network was trained on 8 V100 GPUs for 2000 epochs with a batch
size of 32. We used DIV2K train set (Agustsson & Timofte, 2017), Flickr2K (Lim et al., 2017)
and Waterloo Exploration Database (WED) (Ma et al., 2017) to obtain a total of 8194 high quality
images. In unsupervised representation learning, it is important to show a variety of strengthening
effects to train a rich representation space. Therefore, we randomly sampled each parameter of
depth enhancement model uniformly from the following range: α ∈ R[0.15, 0.3], η ∈ R[0.7, 0.9],
δcontrast , δblur ∈ R[0.35, 0.5] and s ∈ R[11, 33.8].
DEEAPR Training. The DEEAPR network was trained on 8 V100 GPUs for 5000 epochs with a
batch size of 32 using the same dataset. We used the representation encoder trained at λ = 10 and
fixed its weights during training of the depth enhancer. The learning rate was initialized to 0.005
then adjusted with a cosine annealing scheduler. The parameters of depth enhancement model were
fixed for consistency: α = 0.225, η = 0.8, δcontrast = δblur = 0.425 and s = 22.4.


5     R ESULTS

5.1   A NALYZING R EPRESENTATION S PACE

In this section, we analyze the role of the proposed triplet margin loss, Lreg , defined in equation 1
as a regularization function in learning the depth representative feature space independent of con-
tent. The effectiveness of Lreg is observed by training the depth representation encoder (Sec. 3.1)
at various levels of λ ∈ {0, 10, 100}, then performing t-SNE analysis on the global depth repre-
sentation features, fglobal , at a specified value of λ. Specifically, we randomly selected 10 images
from the DIV2K validation set and generated 100 different depth-enhanced versions for each im-
age by applying the depth enhancement model (Sec. 4.1). For visualization purposes, we defined
a variable σ ′ to control the numerous parameters that regulate the strength of depth enhancement
with a single parameter. That is, the five parameters in the depth enhancer, α, η, δcontrast , δblur
and s, were linearly interpolated between their weakest and strongest values according to σ ′ (e.g.,
η ′ = ηmin σ ′ + ηmax (1 − σ ′ )), where σ ′ was uniformly sampled from R[0, 1].
Fig. 4 shows the distribution pattern of encoded features in the representation space, where each
feature point is color coded by the regulation parameter σ ′ (i.e., strength of depth enhancement). At
λ = 0, the distance between points that correspond to similar values of σ ′ is similar to the distance
between points that correspond to extreme values of σ ′ , resulting in a widely dispersed scattered
plot. In contrast, as λ increases, the points that correspond to extreme values are pushed away from
each other while those with similar values are pulled towards each other, resulting in a thin band of
gradation with extreme values at distant ends.

5.2   D EPTH P ERCEPTION E NHANCEMENT

We expect the DEEAPR network to enhance the depth perception of a given image when σ = 1
and show smooth transition of depth enhancement effect within the range of R[0, 1]. Indeed, Fig. 5


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a) Input           (b) 𝜎 = 0.0                               (c) 𝜎 = 0.33                              (d) 𝜎 = 0.67                                   (e) 𝜎 = 1.0         Input   𝜎 = 1.0


Figure 5: Output of DEEAPR when σ ∈ [0, 1] showing gradual change of the depth enhancement
effect. Results are best viewed electronically with zoom. See supplemental for additional examples.
 (a) w/o sine                                     (b) w/o sine + norm                                                           (c) w/o phi
                          𝜔𝜎 + 𝜙                                              𝜔𝜎 + 𝜙                                                                                        𝜔𝜎
                    cos                                                 cos                                                                                           cos


                                                                                                            Normalize
                                                                                                                                                                            𝜔𝜎
                                                                                                                                                                      sin


 (d) Logistic                                     (e) Fully Connected layers (FC)                                              (f) Residual scaling
                                                                                    Conv1×1
                                                                                              Conv1×1


                                                                                                                                                                                 Conv1×1
                      −𝑘(𝜎 − 𝜎0 )
                                                                          𝜎                                                                                             𝜎
                   exp−1


                                                                                                                                                  Conv3×3
                                                                                                                                                            Conv3×3
 Figure 6: Six variants of PFRB used in the ablation study. Purple box indicates GELU activation.

shows that DEEAPR enhances depth perception of the input (column (a)) by simulating contrast
and blur effect when σ = 1 (column (e)). Contrast enhancement of foreground objects (red boxes)
strengthens volumetric perception, while the background (blue boxes) becomes blurry and hazy,
making the foreground objects further stand out. Furthermore, DEEAPR not only produces plausible
outputs when σ ∈ {0, 1}, but also exhibits smooth transition of effects in range R[0, 1]. More
specifically, close objects (the berries in the first row, trees and buildings in the second row and the
car in the third row) show gradual enhancement of contrast as σ → 1 and far objects (leaves in
the first row, the bridge in the second row and the trees in the third row) become blurry and have
decreased contrast as σ → 1, producing perceptual depth enhancement effects.

5.3             A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we study the importance of the PFRB design in producing the controllable depth en-
hancement effect. To this end, we designed six additional controllable module variants and trained
the DEEAPR network using the same pretrained representation encoder and condition as described
in Sec. 3.1 and 4.2, resp. (see Fig. 6 for illustration of the six PFRB design variants, (a) to (f)). (a)
To observe the effectiveness of modulating depth representative feature using the complementary si-
nusoidal functions, we ablated the sine function in the modulator. (b) To observe the importance of
norm preservation via the Pythagorean trigonometric identity, we embedded an additional normal-
ization term to the cosine function in (a). (c) The importance of modulating the control parameter σ
by affine transformation was sought by ablating ϕ. We further explored alternatives to modulating
the control parameter by using (d) a logistic function with trainable midpoint σ0 and curve steepness
k, (e) fully connected layers and (f) residual scaling. (e) and (f) were motivated from the controllable
component of CFSNet (Wang et al., 2019a) and CResMD (He et al., 2020a), resp.
To study the effectiveness of each controllable module, we compared the variability of the output
according to the control parameter σ. For each image in the DIV2K validation set, we first obtained
the output at various levels of σ (e.g., σ = 0.0, 0.1, · · · , 0.9, 1.0). Next, we encoded each output
with the pretrained depth representation encoder commonly used across all six variants and the pro-
posed DEEAPR model (referred to as the baseline) and measured the cosine similarities of encoded
features with respect to the encoded feature of the output produced at σ = 0.
The cosine similarities of the encoded features of the output is illustrated in Fig. 7(a). The proposed
DEEAPR model (blue) demonstrates the second largest variability according to σ with a smoothly
decreasing cosine similarity curve as σ increases. While Fig. 6(f) residual scaling (pink) showed


                                                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the most discrepancy between σ = 0 and 1 in the cosine similarity curve, visualization of the output
results in Fig. 7(c) revealed that residual scaling failed to reproduce the input at σ = 0 and to produce
a depth enhanced image at σ > 0. In addition, the cosine similarity plot revealed that Fig. 6(a) w/o
sine (orange) and Fig. 6(d) logistic function (purple) failed to produce a variable output, which was
further confirmed with no visible changes in the image domain. While Fig. 6(c) w/o phi (red) was
able to produce a variable output in the encoding space and image space (as shown in Fig. 7(a)
and (c), resp.), it was less effective than the proposed model. Altogether, our study revealed that
using both cosine and sine functions is crucial for modulating features obtained via representation
learning.

5.4   C OMPARISON TO OTHER C ONTROLLABLE M ETHODS

In this section, we compare DEEAPR to other controllable methods. Specifically, we consider
image interpolation, network interpolation (Wang et al., 2019b) and two other controllable methods:
CFSNet (Wang et al., 2019a) and CResMD (He et al., 2020a).
For image interpolation, we obtained an image with smooth variation in depth by interpolating
between the input image and the depth enhanced image. That is, suppose the DEEAPR network
is trained at fixed σ = 1 such that the network always enhances the depth perception of the input.
Then the image interpolated output with controllable parameter σ ′ ∈ R[0, 1] is defined as follows:
                             Oimg interp (I; σ ′ ) = (1 − σ ′ )I + σ ′ fθ (I, 1),                (5)
                                                                                  ′
where fθ (I, σ) is the DEEAPR network with parameters θ. Note that we use σ in this section to
avoid confusion with σ, which is an input to the DEEAPR network.
For network interpolation, we interpolated network parameters associated with the input image and
the depth enhanced image. The network affiliated with the input image was obtained by fine-tuning
the trained network, fθ (I, 1), to learn identity mapping (i.e., to reproduce the input image at σ =
1). The network interpolated output was obtained by linearly interpolating the network parameters
according to σ ′ as follows:
                    Onet interp (I; σ ′ ) = fθ′ (I, 1), where θ′ = (1 − σ ′ )θfinetune + σ ′ θ    (6)
For CFSNet and CResMD, we referred to the original papers for architecture and trained the net-
works under the same condition as DEEAPR.
Similar to Fig. 7(a), we show the correlation between encoded features of the output at various levels
σ ′ ∈ R[0, 1] with respect to the output at σ ′ = 0 in Fig. 7(b) and the interpolated results at select
values of σ ′ in Fig. 7(c). The cosine similarity curve indicates that network interpolation (green)
does not decrease monotonically as σ ′ → 1 but forms a v-shaped curve, implying that this method
does not offer a continuous strengthening effect in range R[0, 1]. Again, the proposed method (blue)
shows the largest variability among other controllable methods, as well as visually pleasing output.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a controllable neural network that enhances the depth perception of the
given image by modulating the depth representative feature obtained from the pretrained depth repre-
sentation encoder. To train the content-independent depth representative feature space, we introduce
a hard negative sample that shares the same content as the query and the positive sample but differs
in depth perception. The representation encoder is regularized with a triplet margin loss, which plays
a crucial role in disentangling style (i.e., depth perception) from content. The sinusoidal operations
in the parametric feature rotation block (PFRB) is key to generating controllable depth enhancement
effect as they permit smooth variation of representative features residing along the unit hypersphere.
We want to emphasize that our strategy is not limited to controllable depth enhancement but can be
extended to other image-to-image translation scenarios; for example, a controllable image restora-
tion model can be formulated by training the representation encoder to learn a content-independent
representation of degradation quality and the enhancer to restore the low quality input image. In
addition, our unsupervised visual representation learning strategy is effective even when the style
is difficult to be measured or quantified as we focus on learning the style space manifold. Thus,
our DEEAPR framework is applicable as a general purpose image-to-image translation method with
single-parameter controllability.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                    (a) Ablation study                 (b) Comparison to other controllable methods


    (c) Qualitative Results
                                                 𝜎 = 0.0   𝜎 = 0.25   𝜎 = 0.5                     𝜎 = 0.75            𝜎 = 1.0
     DEEAPR (ours)
     w/o sine
     w/o sine + norm
     w/o phi
     Sigmoid
     FC layers
     Residual scaling
     Network interpolation Image interpolation
     CFSNet
     CResMD


Figure 7: Cosine similarities of encoded features of output at various levels of σ with respect to
the encoded feature of output at σ = 0, comparing to (a) different PFRB designs and (b) other
controllable methods. (c) Qualitative results of DEEAPR and other methods. All networks (except
for image interpolation and network interpolation) are trained with σ ∈ {0, 1} then evaluated in
range σ ∈ R[0, 1]. Best viewed electronically with zoom. See supplemental for additional examples.
                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Eirikur Agustsson and Radu Timofte. NTIRE 2017 Challenge on Single Image Super-Resolution:
  Dataset and Study. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-
  shops (CVPRW), pp. 126–135, 2017.

Vassileios Balntas, Edgar Riba, Daniel Ponsa, and Krystian Mikolajczyk. Learning Local Feature
  Descriptors with Triplets and Shallow Convolutional Neural Networks. In British Machine Vision
  Conference (BMVC), volume 1, pp. 3, 2016.

Jonathan T Barron and Ben Poole. The Fast Bilateral Solver. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), pp. 617–632. Springer, 2016.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A Simple Framework
  for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.

Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved Baselines with Momentum
  Contrastive Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b.

Zeynep Cipiloglu, Abdullah Bulbul, and Tolga Capin. A Framework for Enhancing Depth per-
  ception in Computer Graphics. In Proceedings of the 7th Symposium on Applied Perception in
  Graphics and Visualization, pp. 141–148, 2010.

Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. A Learned Representation for Artistic
  Style. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

Saikat Dutta, Sourya Dipta Das, Nisarg A Shah, and Anil Kumar Tiwari. Stacked Deep Multi-
  Scale Hierarchical Network for Fast Bokeh Effect Rendering from a Single Image. In IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2398–2407, 2021.

Qingnan Fan, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, Gang Hua, Nenghai Yu, and Baoquan Chen. Decou-
  ple Learning for Parameterized Image Operators. In European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), 2019.

Golnaz Ghiasi, Honglak Lee, Manjunath Kudlur, Vincent Dumoulin, and Jonathon Shlens. Ex-
  ploring the Structure of a Real-Time, Arbitrary Neural Artistic Stylization Network. In British
  Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2017.

Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality Reduction by Learning an Invari-
  ant Mapping. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  volume 2, pp. 1735–1742, 2006.

Jingwen He, Chao Dong, and Yu Qiao. Modulating Image Restoration with Continual Levels via
   Adaptive Feature Modification Layers. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition (CVPR), 2019.

Jingwen He, Chao Dong, and Yu Qiao. Interactive Multi-Dimension Modulation with Dynamic
   Controllable Residual Learning for Image Restoration. In European Conference on Computer
   Vision (ECCV), 2020a.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–
  778, 2016.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum Contrast for
  Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9729–9738, 2020b.

Hagit Hel-Or, Yacov Hel-Or, and Renato Keshet. Depth-Stretch: Enhancing Depth Perception with-
  out Depth. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops
  (CVPRW), 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary Style Transfer in Real-Time with Adaptive Instance
  Normalization. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
Andrey Ignatov, Jagruti Patel, Radu Timofte, Bolun Zheng, Xin Ye, Li Huang, Xiang Tian, Saikat
  Dutta, Kuldeep Purohit, Praveen Kandula, et al. AIM 2019 Challenge on Bokeh Effect Synthesis:
  Methods and Results. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop
  (ICCVW), pp. 3591–3598. IEEE, 2019.
Andrey Ignatov, Jagruti Patel, and Radu Timofte. Rendering Natural Camera Bokeh Effect with
  Deep Learning. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-
  shops (CVPRW), June 2020a.
Andrey Ignatov, Radu Timofte, Ming Qian, Congyu Qiao, Jiamin Lin, Zhenyu Guo, Chenghua Li,
  Cong Leng, Jian Cheng, Juewen Peng, et al. AIM 2020 Challenge on Rendering Realistic Bokeh.
  In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 213–228. Springer, 2020b.
Heewon Kim, Sungyong Baik, Myungsub Choi, Janghoon Choi, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Searching
  for Controllable Image Restoration Networks. In IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), 2021.
HyunGoo R Kim, Dora E Angelaki, and Gregory C DeAngelis. The Neural Basis of Depth Per-
  ception from Motion Parallax. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
  Sciences, 371(1697):20150256, 2016.
Jun-Tae Lee, Chulwoo Lee, Jae-Young Sim, and Chang-Su Kim. Depth-Guided Adaptive Contrast
  Enhancement Using 2D Histograms. In IEEE International Conference on Image Processing
  (ICIP), 2014.
Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Enhanced deep resid-
  ual networks for single image super-resolution. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW, July 2017.
Jorge Lopez-Moreno, Jorge Jimenez, Sunil Hadap, Ken Anjyo, Erik Reinhard, and Diego Gutierrez.
  Non-Photorealistic, Depth-based Image Editing. Computers & Graphics, 35(1):99–111, 2011.
Thomas Luft, Carsten Colditz, and Oliver Deussen. Image Enhancement by Unsharp Masking the
  Depth Buffer. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 2004.
Kede Ma, Zhengfang Duanmu, Qingbo Wu, Zhou Wang, Hongwei Yong, Hongliang Li, and Lei
  Zhang. Waterloo Exploration Database: New Challenges for Image Quality Assessment Models.
  IEEE Transactions on Image Processing (TIP), 26(2):1004–1016, Feb. 2017.
Robert P O’Shea, Donovan G Govan, and Robert Sekuler. Blur and Contrast as Pictorial Depth
  Cues. Perception, 26(5):599–612, 1997.
Juewen Peng, Zhiguo Cao, Xianrui Luo, Hao Lu, Ke Xian, and Jianming Zhang. BokehMe: When
  Neural Rendering Meets Classical Rendering. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16283–16292, 2022.
Ming Qian, Congyu Qiao, Jiamin Lin, Zhenyu Guo, Chenghua Li, Cong Leng, and Jian Cheng. Bg-
 gan: Bokeh-Glass Generative Adversarial Network for Rendering Realistic Bokeh. In European
 Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 229–244. Springer, 2020.
René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vision Transformers for Dense Prediction.
  In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 12179–12188, 2021.
Tobias Ritschel, Kaleigh Smith, Matthias Ihrke, Thorsten Grosch, Karol Myszkowski, and Hans-
  Peter Seidel. 3D Unsharp Masking for Scene Coherent Enhancement. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (ToG), 2008.
Romain Vergne, Romain Pacanowski, Pascal Barla, Xavier Granier, and Christophe Shlick. Im-
  proving Shape Depiction under Arbitrary Rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
  Computer Graphics, 2011.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Neal Wadhwa, Rahul Garg, David E Jacobs, Bryan E Feldman, Nori Kanazawa, Robert Carroll, Yair
  Movshovitz-Attias, Jonathan T Barron, Yael Pritch, and Marc Levoy. Synthetic Depth-of-Field
  with a Single-Camera Mobile Phone. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 37(4):1–13, 2018.
Longguang Wang, Yingqian Wang, Xiaoyu Dong, Qingyu Xu, Jungang Yang, Wei An, and Yu-
  lan Guo. Unsupervised Degradation Representation Learning for Blind Super-Resolution. In
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10581–10590,
  2021.
Wei Wang, Ruiming Guo, Yapeng Tian, and Wenming Yang. CFSNet: Toward a Controllable
 Feature Space for Image Restoration. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
 (ICCV), 2019a.
Xintao Wang, Ke Yu, Chao Dong, and Chen Change Loy. Recovering Realistic Texture in Image
  Super-Resolution by Deep Spatial Feature Transform. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 606–615, 2018.
Xintao Wang, Ke Yu, Chao Dong, Xiaoou Tang, and Chen Change Loy. Deep Network Interpolation
  for Continuous Imagery Effect Transition. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019b.
Dong Yang and Jian Sun. Proximal Dehaze-Net: A Prior Learning-based Deep Network for Single
  Image Dehazing. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 702–717, 2018.


                                             12
