Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                D IFF E DIT: D IFFUSION - BASED SEMANTIC IMAGE EDIT-
                                ING WITH MASK GUIDANCE

                                  Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk                                               Matthieu Cord
                                                       Meta AI                                                                Sorbonne Université, Valeo.ai
                                              {gcouairon,jjverbeek,                                                             matthieu.cord@
                                                schwenk}@meta.com                                                             sorbonne-universite.fr



                                                                                               A BSTRACT
                                     Image generation has recently seen tremendous advances, with diffusion models
                                     allowing to synthesize convincing images for a large variety of text prompts. In
                                     this article, we propose D IFF E DIT, a method to take advantage of text-conditioned
                                     diffusion models for the task of semantic image editing, where the goal is to edit
                                     an image based on a text query. Semantic image editing is an extension of image
                                     generation, with the additional constraint that the generated image should be as
                                     similar as possible to a given input image. Current editing methods based on
                                     diffusion models usually require to provide a mask, making the task much easier
                                     by treating it as a conditional inpainting task. In contrast, our main contribution is
                                     able to automatically generate a mask highlighting regions of the input image that
                                     need to be edited, by contrasting predictions of a diffusion model conditioned on
                                     different text prompts. Moreover, we rely on latent inference to preserve content in                                                                           Text
                                     those regions of interest and show excellent synergies with mask-based diffusion.                                                                           A bowl o
                                     D IFF E DIT achieves state-of-the-art editing performance on ImageNet. In addition,
                                DiffEdit
                                     we evaluate semantic image editing in more challenging settings, using images
                                     from the COCO dataset as well as text-based generated images.
    Diffusion w/ query “A                                                                                          Input Image
                                     Input Image                                   Masked Diffusion                                                      Masked Diffusion
        bowl of pears”
                                                                   Encode                                                                   Encode
                                                                                                                                                                              A bowl of fruits

                                                                                                                                                                            Input Image
                                                                                                                                                                                               Text  Quer
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Encode
                                                                                                                                                                                           A basket of frui
                                 Caption: A bowl of fruits     Generate Mask                                 Caption: A bowl of fruits   Generate Mask
                                 Query: A bowl of pears                                                     Query: A basket of fruits


                                Figure 1: In semantic image editing the goal is to modify an input image based on a textual query,
                                while otherwise leaving the image as close as possible to the original. In our D IFF E DIT approach, a
                                mask generation module determines which part of the image should be edited, and an encoder infers
   Diffusion w/ query “A        the latents, to provide inputs to a text-conditional diffusion model which produces the image edit.
      basket of fruits”



                                1      I NTRODUCTION
                                                             Text Query     A bowl of pears

                                  The task of semantic image editing consists in Mask     modifying an input image in accordance with a
                                  textual transformation    query. For  instance,      Generation
                                                                                   given an  image of a bowl of fruits and
                                                                                                                        Maskedthe query “fruits”
                                                   Input Image                          Module
                                  →   “pears”,
                            Edited Image
                                                the  aim   is to produce    a  novel image  where    the fruits have    Diffusion
                                                                                                                     been  changed   into pears,
                                  while keeping the bowl and the background as similar as possible to the input image. The text query
                                  can also be a more elaborate description like “A basket     Encode
                                                                                                   of fruits”. See the example edits obtained
Diffusion with                    with D IFF E DIT in Figure 1. Semantic image editing bears strong similarities with image generation
 mask-based                                        Text Query A basket of fruits
  guidance                        and can be viewed    as extending text-conditional image generation with an additional constraint: the
                                  generated image should be as close as possible toMask   a given input image.
                                                                                                      Generation                                Masked
                                Text-conditionalInput
                                                  image
                                                      Imagegeneration is currently Module
                                                                                   undergoing a revolution, with    DALL-E (Ramesh
                                                                                                               Diffusion
                                et al., 2021), Cogview (Ding et al., 2021), Make-a-scene (Gafni et al., 2022), Latent Diffusion Mod-
                                els (Rombach et al., 2022), DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et Encode al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022b),


                                                                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


vastly improving state of the art in modelling wide distributions of images and allowing for un-
precedented compositionality of concepts in image generation. Scaling these models is a key to
their success. State-of-the art models are now trained on vast amounts of data, which requires large
computational resources. Similarly to language models pretrained on web-scale data and adapted
in downstreams tasks with prompt engineering, the generative power of these big generative mod-
els can be harnessed to solve semantic image editing, avoiding to train specialized architectures (Li
et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2022a), or to use costly instance-based optimization (Crowson et al., 2022;
Couairon et al., 2022; Patashnik et al., 2021).
Diffusion models are an especially interesting class of model for image editing because of their it-
erative denoising process starting from random Gaussian noise. This process can be guided through
a variety of techniques, like CLIP guidance (Nichol et al., 2021; Avrahami et al., 2022; Crowson,
2021), and inpainting by copy-pasting pixel values outside a user-given mask (Lugmayr et al., 2022).
These previous works, however, lack two crucial properties for semantic image editing: (i) inpaint-
ing discards information about the input image that should be used in image editing (e.g. changing
a dog into a cat should not modify the animal’s color and pose); (ii) a mask must be provided as
input to tell the diffusion model what parts of the image should be edited. We believe that while
drawing masks is common on image editing tools like Photoshop, language-guided editing offers a
more intuitive interface to modify images that requires less effort from users.
Conditioning a diffusion model on an input image can also be done without a mask, e.g. by consid-
ering the distance to input image as a loss function (Crowson, 2021; Choi et al., 2021), or by using
a noised version of the input image as a starting point for the denoising process as in SDEdit (Meng
et al., 2021). However, these editing methods tend to modify the entire image, whereas we aim for
localized edits. Furthermore, adding noise to the input image discards important information, both
inside the region that should be edited and outside.
To leverage the best of both worlds, we propose D IFF E DIT, an algorithm that leverages a pretrained
text-conditional diffusion model for zero-shot semantic image editing, without expensive editing-
specific training. D IFF E DIT makes it possible by automatically finding what regions of an input
image should be edited given a text query, by contrasting the predictions of a conditional and uncon-
ditional diffusion model. We also show how using a reference text describing the input image and
similar to the query, can help obtain better masks. Moreover, we demonstrate that using a reverse
denoising model, to encode the input image in latent space, rather than simply adding noise to it,
allows to better integrate the edited region into the background and produces more subtle and natural
edits. See Figure 1 for illustrations. We quantitatively evaluate our approach and compare to prior
work using images of the ImageNet and COCO dataset, as well as a set of generated images.


2    R ELATED WORK

Semantic image editing. The field of image editing encompasses many different tasks, from photo
colorization and retouching (Shi et al., 2020), to style transfer (Jing et al., 2019), inserting objects in
images (Gafni & Wolf, 2020; Brown et al., 2022), image-to-image translation (Zhu et al., 2017; Sa-
haria et al., 2022a), inpainting (Yu et al., 2018), scene graph manipulation (Dhamo et al., 2020), and
placing subjects in novel contexts (Ruiz et al., 2022). We focus on semantic image editing, where
the instruction to modify an image is given in natural language. Some approaches involve training
an end-to-end architecture with a proxy objective before being adapted to editing at inference time,
based on GANs (Li et al., 2020b;a; Ma et al., 2018; Alami Mejjati et al., 2018; Mo et al., 2018) or
transformers (Wang et al., 2022a; Brown et al., 2022; Issenhuth et al., 2021). Others (Crowson et al.,
2022; Couairon et al., 2022; Patashnik et al., 2021; Bar-Tal et al., 2022) rely on optimization of the
image itself, or a latent representation of it, to modify an image based on a high-level multimodal
objective in an embedding space, typically using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). These approaches
are quite computationnaly intensive, and work best when the optimization is coupled with a pow-
erful generative network. Given a pre-trained generative model such as a GAN, it has also been
explored to find directions in the latent space that corresponds to specific semantic edits (Härkönen
et al., 2020; Collins et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Shoshan et al., 2021), which then requires GAN
inversion to edit real images (Wang et al., 2022c; Zhu et al., 2020; Grechka et al., 2021).
Image editing with diffusion models. Because diffusion models iteratively refine an image starting
from random noise, they are easily adapted for inpainting when a mask is given as input. Song et al.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2021) proposed to condition the generation process by copy-pasting pixel values from the reference
image at each denoising step. Nichol et al. (2021) use a similar technique by copy-pasting pixels in
the estimated final version of the image. Wang et al. (2022b) use DDIM encoding of the input image,
and then decode on edited sketches or semantic segmentation maps. The gradient of a CLIP score
can also be used to match a given text query inside a mask, as in Paint by Word (Bau et al., 2021),
local CLIP-guided diffusion (Crowson, 2021), or blended diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022). Lug-
mayr et al. (2022) apply a sequence of noise-denoise operations to better inpaint a specific region.
There are also a number of methods that do not require an editing mask. In DiffusionCLIP (Kim &
Ye, 2021), the weights of the diffusion model themselves are updated via gradient descent from a
CLIP loss with a target text. The high computational cost of fine-tuning a diffusion model for each
input image, however, makes it impractical as an interactive image editing tool. In SDEdit (Meng
et al., 2021) the image is corrupted with Gaussian noise, and then the diffusion network is used to
denoise it. While this method is originally designed to transform sketches to real images and to
make pixel-based collages more realistic, we adapt it by denoising the image conditionally to the
text query. In ILVR (Choi et al., 2021), the decoding process of diffusion model is guided with
the constraint that downsampled versions of the input image and decoded image should stay close.
Finally, in recent work concurrent to ours, Hertz et al. (2022) propose to edit images by modifying
attention maps during the diffusion process.

3     D IFF E DIT FRAMEWORK
In this section, we first give an overview of diffusion models. We then describe our D IFF E DIT
approach in detail, and provide a theoretical analysis comparing D IFF E DIT with SDEdit.

3.1   BACKGROUND : DIFFUSION MODELS , DDIM AND ENCODING

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (Ho et al., 2020) is a class of generative models that are
trained to invert a diffusion process. For a number of timesteps T , the diffusion process gradually
adds noise to the input data, until the resulting distribution is (almost) Gaussian. A neural network
is then trained to reverse that process, by minimizing the denoising objective
                                    L = Ex0 ,t,ϵ ∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)∥22 ,                             (1)
where ϵθ is the noise estimator
                          √        √ aims to find the noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I) that is mixed with an input
                                which
image x0 to yield xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ. The coefficient αt defines the level of noise and is a
decreasing function of the timestep t, with α0 = 1 (no noise) and αT ≈ 0 (almost pure noise).
Song et al. (2021) propose to use ϵθ to generate new images with the DDIM algorithm: starting from
xT ∼ N (0, I), the following update rule is applied iteratively until step 0:
                                         √
                         √         xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t)     p
                 xt−1 = αt−1                √                + 1 − αt−1 ϵθ (xt , t).            (2)
                                              αt
The variable x is updated by taking small steps p in the direction of ϵθ . Equation 2 can be written as
                                   √
the neural ODE , taking u = x/ α and τ = 1/α − 1:
                                                     u
                                       du = ϵθ ( √        , t)dτ.                                   (3)
                                                   1 + τ2
This allows to view DDIM sampling as an Euler scheme for solving Equation 3 with initial condition
u(t = T ) ∼ N (0, αT I). This illustrates that we can use fewer sampling steps during inference than
the value of T chosen during training, by using a coarser discretization of the ODE. In the remainder
of the paper, we parameterize the timestep t to be between 0 and 1, so that t = 1 corresponds to T
steps of diffusion in the original formulation. As proposed by Song et al. (2021), we can also use this
ODE to encode an image x0 onto a latent variable xr for a timestep r ≤ 1, by using the boundary
condition u(t = 0) = x0 instead of u(t = 1), and applying an Euler scheme until timestep r. In
the remainder of the paper, we refer to this encoding process as DDIM encoding, we denote the
corresponding function that maps x0 to xr as Er , and refer to the variable r as the encoding ratio.
Similarly, we note Dr the inverse function that maps xr to x0 , which corresponds to regular DDIM
decoding. With sufficiently small steps in the Euler scheme, decoding xr approximately recovers
the original image x0 . This property is particularly interesting in the context of image editing: all
the information of the input image x0 is encoded in xr , and can be accessed via DDIM sampling.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Step 1: Compute Mask
                                                                                                         Mask M
                                                    Estimate noise     Compute
                                                    conditioned to    normalized
                                                   reference text R   difference              Binarize
                     Gaussian
                      noise                         Estimate noise
                                                   conditionally to
                                                       query Q
Query Q: Zebra
                    Step 2: Encode with DDIM until encoding ratio r
 Ref.    Horse
 Text R: or Ø
                      Reverse                                                               Reverse
                      DDIM                                                                  DDIM
                       Step                                                                  Step



                    Step 3: Decode with mask-wise correction
                                                                                     M


           Output


                      DDIM                                                         DDIM      DDIM
                       Step                                                         Step      Step

                                                                                    zebra     zebra



Figure 2: The three steps of D IFF E DIT. Step 1: we add noise to the input image, and denoise it:
once conditioned on the query text, and once conditioned on a reference text (or unconditionally).
We derive a mask based on the difference in the denoising results. Step 2: we encode the input
image with DDIM, to estimate the latents corresponding to the input image. Step 3: we perform
DDIM decoding conditioned on the text query, using the inferred mask to replace the background
with pixel values coming from the encoding process at the corresponding timestep.


3.2      S EMANTIC IMAGE EDITING WITH D IFF E DIT

In many cases, semantic image edits can be restricted to only a part of the image, leaving other parts
unchanged. However, the input text query does not explicitly identify this region, and a naive method
could allow for edits all over the image, risking to modify the input in areas where it is not needed.
To circumvent this, we propose D IFF E DIT, a method to leverage a text-conditioned diffusion model
to infer a mask of the region that needs to be edited. Starting from a DDIM encoding of the input
image, D IFF E DIT uses the inferred mask to guide the denoising process, minimizing edits outside
the region of interest. Figure 2 illustrates the three steps of our approach, which we detail below.
Step 1: Computing editing mask. When the denoising an image, a text-conditioned diffusion
model will yield different noise estimates given different text conditionings. We can consider where
the estimates are different, which gives information about what image regions are concerned by
the change in conditioning text. For instance, in Figure 2, the noise estimates conditioned to the
query zebra and reference text horse1 are different on the body of the animal, where they will tend
to decode different colors and textures depending on the conditioning. For the background, on the
other hand, there is little change in the noise estimates. The difference between the noise estimates
can thus be used to infer a mask that identifies what parts on the image need to be changed to
match the query. In our algorithm, we use a Gaussian noise with strength 50% (see analysis in
Appendix A.1), remove extreme values in noise predictions and stabilize the effect by averaging
spatial differences over a set of n input noises, with n = 10 in our default configuration. The result is
then rescaled to the range [0, 1], and binarized with a threshold, which we set to 0.5 by default. The
masks generally somewhat overshoot the region that requires editing, this is beneficial as it allows it
to be smoothly embedded in it’s context, see examples in Section 4 and Section A.5.
Step 2: Encoding. We encode the input image x0 in the implicit latent space at timestep r with
the DDIM encoding function Er . This is done with the unconditional model, i.e. using conditioning
text ∅, so no text input is used for this step.

   1
       We can also use an empty reference text, which we denote as Q = ∅.


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Step 3: Decoding with mask guidance. After obtaining the latent xr , we decode it with our diffu-
sion model conditioned on the editing text query Q, e.g. zebra in the example of Figure 2. We use our
mask M to guide this diffusion process. Outside the mask M , the edited image should in principle
be the same as the input image. We guide the diffusion model by replacing pixel values outside the
mask with the latents xt inferred with DDIM encoding, which will naturally map back to the original
pixels through decoding, unlike when using a noised version of x0 as typically done (Meng et al.,
2021; Song et al., 2021). The mask-guided DDIM update can be written as ỹt = M yt + (1 − M )xt ,
where yt is computed from yt−dt with Eq. 2, and xt is the corresponding DDIM encoded latent.
The encoding ratio r determines the strength of the edit: larger values of r allow for stronger edits
that allow to better match the text query, at the cost of more deviation from the input image which
might not be needed. We evaluate the impact of this parameter in our experiments. We illustrate the
effect of the encoding ratio in Appendix A.5.

3.3   T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS

In D IFF E DIT, we use DDIM encoding to encode images before doing the actual editing step. In this
section, we give theoretical insight on why this component yields better editing results than adding
random noise as in SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021). With xr being the encoded version of x0 , using
DDIM decoding on xr unconditionally would give back the original image x0 . In D IFF E DIT, we
use DDIM decoding conditioned on the text query Q, but there is still a strong bias to stay close
to the original image. This is because the unconditional and conditional noise estimator networks
ϵθ and ϵθ (·, Q) often produce similar estimates, yielding similar decoding behavior when initialized
with the same starting point xr . This means that the edited image will have a small distance w.r.t.
the input image, a property critical in the context of image editing. We capture this phenomenon
with the proposition
               √          √ where we compare the DDIM encoder Er (x0 ) to the SDEdit encoder
                       below,
Gr (x0 , ϵ) := αr x0 + 1 − αr ϵ, which simply adds noise to the image x0 .
Proposition 1. Let X = Rd be the space of input images, pD be the data distribution of
couples (x0 , Q) where x0 ∈ X and Q a textual query to edit that image. Suppose that
∥ϵθ (xt , Q, t)∥2 ≤ C for all x ∈ X , t ∈ [0, 1], that ϵθ (·, ∅, t) is K1 -Lipschitz for all t, and let
K2 = E(x0 ,Q)∈pD maxt∈[0,1] ∥ϵθ (x, Q, t) − ϵθ (x, ∅, t)∥. Then, for all encoding ratios 0 ≤ r ≤ 1,
we have the two following bounds:
                   E    ∥x0 − Dr (Gr (x0 , ϵ), Q)∥2 ≤ (C + 1)τ,                                     (4)
               (x0 ,Q)∼pD
                ϵ∼N (0,1)
                                                                 K2 τ      p        K1
                      E       ∥x0 − Dr (Er (x0 ), Q)∥2 ≤ √              τ + τ2 + 1     ,                            (5)
                 (x0 ,Q)∼pD                                      τ2 + 1
            p
where τ =    1/αr − 1 increases with the encoding ratio r: τ (r = 0) = 0 and limr→1 τ = +∞.
We provide the proof in Appendix B. The first bound is
associated with SDEdit, and is an extension of a bound
proven in the original paper. The second bound we con-                                     SDEdit upper bound
                                                                                 15
tribute is associated with D IFF E DIT. It is tighter than the                             DiffEdit upper bound
                                                                   L2 Distance


first bound below a certain encoding ratio, see Figure 3.                        10
We empirically estimated the parameters K1 , K2 and C
with the diffusion models that we are using. While the                            5
asymptotic behavior of the second bound is worse than
the first with K1 > 1, it is the very small value of K2 that                      0
gives a tighter bound.                                                                0%   20%     40%      60%   80%
This supports our argument from above: because the un-                     Encoding ratio r
conditional and text-conditional noise estimates generally
give close results —K2 being a measure of the average
difference— the Euler scheme with ϵθ (·, Q, ·) gives a se-
quence of intermediate latents yr , ..., y0 that stays close Figure 3: Illustration of the bounds
to the trajectory xr , . . . , Dr (xr ) ≈ x0 mapping back xr from Proposition 1, with estimated pa-
to x0 . While these upper bounds do not guarantee that rameters C = 1, K2 = 0.02, and K1 = 3.
DDIM encoding yields smaller edits than SDEdit, exper-
imentally we find that it is indeed the case.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe our experimental setup, followed by qualitative and quantitative results.

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Datasets. We perform experiments on three datasets. First, on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) we
follow the evaluation protocol of FlexIT (Couairon et al., 2022). Given an image belonging to
one class, the goal is to edit it so that it will depict an object of another class as indicated by the
query. Given the nature of the ImageNet dataset, edits often concern the main object in the scene.
Second, we consider editing images generated by Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022b) based on structured
text prompts, in order to evaluate edits that involve changing the background, replacing secondary
objects, or changing object properties. Third, we consider edits based on images and queries from
the COCO (Lin et al., 2014) dataset to evaluate edits based on more complex text prompts.
Diffusion models. In our experiments we use latent diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022). We
use the class-conditional model trained on ImageNet at resolution 256×256, as well as the 890M
parameter text-conditional model trained on LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2021), known as Stable
Diffusion, at 512×512 resolution.2 Since these models operate in a VQGAN latent spaces (Esser
et al., 2021), the resolution of our masks is 32 × 32 (ImageNet) or 64 × 64 (Imagen and COCO).
We use 50 steps in DDIM sampling with a fixed schedule, and the encoding ratio parameter further
decreases the number of updates used for our edits. This allows to edit images in ∼10 seconds on
a single Quadro GP100 GPU. We also use classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) with the
recommended values: 5 on ImageNet, 7.5 for Stable Diffusion. For more details see Section A.2.
Comparison to other methods. We use SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) as our main point of compari-
son, since we can use the same diffusion model as for D IFF E DIT. We also compare to FlexIT (Coua-
iron et al., 2022), a mask-free, optimization-based editing method based on VQGAN and CLIP. On
ImageNet, we evaluate ILVR (Choi et al., 2021) which uses another diffusion model trained on
ImageNet (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Finally, on COCO and Imagen images, we compare to the
concurrent work of Hertz et al. (2022). 3
Evaluation. In semantic image editing, we have to satisfy the two contradictory objectives of (i)
matching the text query and (ii) staying close to the input image. For a given editing method, better
matching the text query comes at the cost of increased distance to the input image. Different editing
methods often have a parameter that allows to control the editing strength: varying its value allows to
get different operating points, forming a trade-off curve between the two objectives aforementioned.
Therefore, we evaluate editing methods by comparing their trade-off curves. For diffusion-based
methods, we use the encoding ratio to control the trade-off.

4.2     E XPERIMENTS ON I MAGE N ET
                                                                                   Copy                 DiffEdit
On ImageNet, we follow the evaluation protocol of Coua-                     100
                                                                                                        SDEdit
iron et al. (2022), with the associated metrics: the LPIPS                                              ILVR
                                                                            75
                                                                    CSFID


perceptual distance (Zhang et al., 2018) measures the dis-                                              FlexIT
tance with the input image, and the CSFID, which is a                       50
class-conditional FID metric (Heusel et al., 2017) mea-                           50%
suring both image realism and consistency w.r.t. the trans-                 25      60%
formation prompt. For both metrics, lower values indicate                                 90%           Retrieve
better edits. For more details see Couairon et al. (2022).                          20     40      60     80
                                                                                           LPIPS
We compare D IFF E DIT to other semantic editing meth-
ods from the literature in terms of CSFID-LPIPS trade-             Figure 4: Comparison on ImageNet
off. Stronger edits improve (lower) the CSFID score as             data of D IFF E DIT with other Image
the edited images better adhere to the text query, but the         Editing methods. For D IFF E DIT we
resulting images tend to deviate more from the input im-           annotate the different operating points
age, leading to worse (increased) LPIPS distances.                 with the corresponding encoding ratios.
    2
     Available at https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion.
    3
     As there is no official implementation available at the time of writing, we used the unofficial implementa-
tion adapted for Stable Diffusion from https://github.com/bloc97/CrossAttentionControl.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Input
         Image

                      English   Semi-trailer                                 Bald      Black                         Brown
      Text Query                               Ambulance     Axolotl                                Boxer                         Zebra
                     foxhound     truck                                      eagle     grouse                         bear


        SDEdit


        Encode-
        Decode

      Our Mask
        (before
     binarization)

       DiffEdit
      w/o Encode


       DiffEdit


Figure 5: Edits obtained on ImageNet with D IFF E DIT and ablated models. Encode-Decode is
D IFF E DIT without masking, and SDEdit is obtained when not using masking nor encoding. When
not using masking (SDEdit and Encode-Decode) we observe undesired edits to the background,
see e.g. the sky in the second column. When not using DDIM encoding (SDEdit and DiffEdit w/o
Encode), appearance information from the input —such as pose— is lost, see last two columns.

The results in Figure 4 indicate that D IFF E DIT obtains the best trade-offs among the different meth-
ods. For fair comparison with previous methods, here we do not leverage the label of the input
image and use the empty text as reference when inferring the editing mask. The Copy and Retrieve
baselines are two opposite cases where we have best possible LPIPS distance —zero, by copying
the input image— and best possible transformation score by discarding the input image and replac-
ing it with a real image from the target class from the ImageNet dataset. D IFF E DIT, as well as
the diffusion-based SDEdit and ILVR, are able to obtain CSFID values comparable to that of the
retrieval baseline. Among the diffusion-based methods, our D IFF E DIT obtains comparable CSFID
values at significantly better LPIPS scores. For FlexIT, the CSFID best value is significantly worse,
indicating it is not able to produce both strong and realistic edits. Using more optimization steps
does not solve this issue, as the distance to the input image is part of the loss it minimizes.
Ablation experiments. We ablate the two core components of D IFF E DIT, mask inference and
DDIM encoding, to measure their relative contributions in terms of CSFID-LPIPS trade-off. If we do
not use either of these components our method reverts to SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021). The results in
Figure 6, left panel, show that adding DDIM encoding (Encode-Decode) and the masking (DiffEdit
w/o Encode) separately both improve the trade-off and reduce the average editing distance w.r.t. the
input image compared to SDEdit. Moreover, combining these two elements into D IFF E DIT gives
an even better trade-off, showing their complementarity: masking better preserves the background,
while DDIM encoding retains visual appearance of the input inside the mask. See Figure 5 for
qualitative examples of these ablations, along with the inferred masks.
The right panel of Figure 6 shows                                                          DiffEdit                                  Thres. 0.5
D IFF E DIT with different mask bi-                                                                                 50               Thres. 0.25
                                                                                           SDEdit
                                                                   60                                                                Thres. 0.75
narization thresholds. Compared to                                                         DiffEdit
                                                                                                            CSFID
                                                           CSFID


                                                                                           w/o Encode               40
our default value of 0.5, a lower                                                          Encode-Decode
threshold of 0.25 results in larger                                40
                                                                                                                    30
masks (more image modifications)
and worse CSFID-LPIPS tradeoff. A                                  20
                                                                        20            40            60                       20              40
higher threshold of 0.75 results in                                                  LPIPS                                        LPIPS
masks that are too restrictive: the CS-
FID score stagnates around 40, even                   Figure 6: Ablations on ImageNet. Left: effect of masking
at large encoding ratios.                             and encoding component. Right: D IFF E DIT with different
                                                      mask thresholds; with 0.5 our default setting.

                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                        Input Image                       Query text                  A bowl of pears                    A plate of fruits        A plate of pears
                                                                                                                                   Mask            Output               Mask         Output          Mask         Output


Finally, our mask guidance operator ỹt = M yt + (1 − M )x“Atw/ bowl
                                                                 provides
                                                                reference  text
                                                                      of fruits”
                                                                                 a better trade-off than the
operator used in GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), which interpolates yt with a mask-corrected version
of the predicted denoised image ŷ0 . With encoding ratio 80%, both operators produce edits with a
                                                            w/o reference text
LPIPS score of 30.5, but the GLIDE version yields a CSFID of     26.4 compared to 23.6 for ours.
                                                                                                               Query text                             A bowl of pears                                A basket of fruits

4.3    E XPERIMENTS ON IMAGES GENERATED BY I MAGEN                                                                                             Mask                   Output                  Mask                   Output

                                                                            Input Image
                                                                                                              w/ reference text
In our second set of experiments we evaluate edits that involve “Achanges       bowl of fruits”  in background, replacing
secondary objects, and editing object properties. We find that images generated by Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022b) offer a well suited testbed for this purpose. Indeed, the authors tested the compositional
abilities of Imagen with templated prompts of the form: “{A photo                           of a | An oil painting of a}
                                                                             w/o reference text

{fuzzy panda | British shorthair cat | Persian cat | Shiba Inu dog | raccoon} {wearing a cowboy
hat and | wearing sunglasses and} {red shirt | black jacket} {playing a guitar | riding a bike |
skateboarding} {in a garden | on a beach | on top of a mountain}”, resulting in 300 prompts.
We use the generated images as in-                        Input
                                                         Image
put and ask to change the prompt                          80% 90%                 80%                            DiffEdit
                                                        70%                70%                                   w/o ref. text
to another prompt for which one of            30                                              60
                                                        Ref. text                                                DiffEdit
                                                                       60%
                                                                                    A bowl of fruits        A bowl of fruits        A cat drinking milk      A cat drinking milk

                                                     60%
                                                 CLIPScore                                                       w/ ref text
these elements is changed. Since we                   Query text                    A bowl of pears         A basket of fruits
                                                                                                                 SDEdit
                                                                                                                                   A cat drinking coffee     A dog drinking milk

                                                                   50%                        50


                                                                                                                          FID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A bowl of
cannot use the CSFID metric as for            29 50%                                                             Encode-                                                                                                      pears
                                                  40%Computed 40%                                                Decode
ImageNet, as images do not carry                          Mask                                40                 FlexIT
a single class label, we use FID to           28                                                                 CrossAtt.
                                                   Copy                                       30                 Control
measure image realism, and CLIP-
Score (Hessel et al., 2021) to mea-               0      Edited 20          40                      29 30
                                                         Image LPIPS                               CLIPScore
sure the alignment of the query and
output image. Acoffee
                    These
                     cup of  two scores            Figure 7: Editing trade-offs on Imagen images.
have become the standard in evalu-
ating text-conditional image genera- Input Image Ref. Text Query                     w/o Ref. Text           w/ Ref. Text

tion (Saharia et al., 2022b).
                                                                        A bowl of    A basket
                                                                          fruits     of fruits
Figure 7 displays the CLIP-LPIPS
and FID-CLIP trade-offs. D IFF E DIT
provides more accurate edits than                                       Panda in
                                                                          the    Panda on
SDEdit, FlexIT, and Cross Atten-                                        mountain the beach

tion Control, by combining inferred
                                                                                                                 Mask                     Output                   Mask                  Output
masks with DDIM encoding. Two
versions of DiffEdit are shown,                   Figure 8: Masks and edits obtained with and without refer-
which differ by how the mask is com-              ence text in the mask computation algorithm.                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          f
puted: they correspond to (i) using
the original caption as reference text
(labelled w/ ref. text) or (ii) using the                      Input
empty text ∅ (labelled w/o ref. text).                        Image
Computing the mask with the orig-
                                                     Text Query                                                                                                 in the              Riding a bike
inal caption as reference text yields                                       cowboy hat
                                                                            → sunglasses
                                                                                                       sunglasses →
                                                                                                        cowboy hat
                                                                                                                                 cat → Shiba
                                                                                                                                   Inu dog
                                                                                                                                                            mountain →               → playing
                                                     (simplified)
the best overall trade-off. Leverag-                                                                                                                        on the beach             the guitar

ing the original caption yields better
                                                              SDEdit
CLIP and FID scores. Figure 8 il-
                                                               (70%)
lustrates the difference in the masks
obtained with and without reference
text for two examples. The refer-                            DiffEdit
ence text allows to ignore parts of                           Mask
the image that are described both by
the query and reference text (e.g. the
fruits), because in both cases the net-                      DiffEdit
work uses the common text on the                              (90%)
corresponding image region to esti-
mate the noise. On the contrary, parts            Figure 9: Edits on Imagen dataset. We use encoding ratio of
where the query and reference text                90% for DiffEdit and 70% for SDEdit for fair comparison:
disagree, e.g. “bowl” vs. “basket”,               both methods have similar CLIPScore, for larger encoding
will have different noise estimates.              ratios SDEdit drastically change the input.


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Qualitative transformation examples are shown in Figure 9, where the masks are inferred by con-
trasting the caption and query texts.

4.4   E XPERIMENTS ON COCO

To evaluate semantic image editing with more complex prompts, we use images and captions from
the COCO dataset Lin et al. (2014). To this end, we leverage the annotations provided by Hu et al.
(2019), which associate images from the COCO validation set with other COCO captions that are
similar to the original ones, but in contradiction with the given image. This makes these annotations
particularly interesting as queries for semantic image editing, as they can often be satisfied by editing
only a part of the input image, see Figure 15 in the supplementary material for examples. Similar to
our evaluation for Imagen images, here we evaluate edits in terms of CLIPScore, FID and LPIPS.
The results in Figure 10 show that the CLIP-LPIPS trade-off of D IFF E DIT is the best, but that
it reaches lower maximum CLIP score than SDEdit. The FID scores are similar to SDEdit,
but significantly improves upon the Encode-Decode ablation, which does not use a mask.
Moreover, in contrast to results on the
Imagen data, leveraging the original
                                                                          40.0              DiffEdit
image caption does not change the                       90%                                 w/o ref. text
CLIP-LPIPS and FID-CLIP trade-            30       80%                    37.5              DiffEdit
                                                 70%                                        w ref. text
                                           CLIPScore


offs. We find that the caption often           60%                        35.0              SDEdit
                                          29


                                                                                             FID
describes the input image differently                                                       Encode-
                                             50%                          32.5              Decode
compared to the query text, making it     28                                                FlexIT
more difficult to identify which part      40%                            30.0              CrossAtt.
                                                                                            Control
of the image needs to be edited. We       27
verify this hypothesis in Section A.3              20       40     60          27.5   30.0
                                                        LPIPS                   CLIPScore
by filtering the dataset according to
the edit distance between the caption          Figure  10:   Quantitative evaluation  on COCO.
and edit query. When the caption and
edit query are similar, leveraging the
image caption boosts CLIP scores by      Input
0.25 points, a similar improvement as   Image
seen on the Imagen data.
                                                                                                                Living room with   A TV sitting on
Qualitative examples are shown in                  Text    A man [skiing → [Trees → City] in Living room with a a [TV → painting
                                                                                              [brown floor →
                                                                                                                                   top of a [brown
                                                  query    snowboarding]. the background.                           of snowy          cabinet →
Figure 11. The first column illus-                                                               red carpet].      mountains].        fireplace].
trates the benefit of DDIM encod-
ing: we are able to correctly main-            DiffEdit
tain properties of the object inside the        Mask

mask, such as clothes’ color. The
three last columns illustrate how con-
trasting different pairs of reference           DiffEdit
                                                 output
and query text allows to select differ-
ent objects in the input image to per-
form different edits. See Section A.5
for more examples.                                         Figure 11: Examples edits on COCO images.

5     C ONCLUSION
We introduced D IFF E DIT, a novel algorithm for semantic image editing based on diffusion mod-
els. Given a textual query, using the diffusion model, D IFF E DIT infers the relevant regions to be
edited rather than requiring a user generated mask. Furthermore, in contrast to other diffusion-based
methods, we initialize the generation process with a DDIM encoding of the input.We provide the-
oretical analysis that motivates this choice, and show experimentally that this approach conserves
more appearance information from the input image, leading to lighter edits. Quantitative and qual-
itative evaluations on ImageNet, COCO, and images generated by Imagen, show that our approach
leads excellent edits, improving over previous approaches. Although D IFF E DIT works better with
a reference text describing the input image, we believe this additional information can be inferred
from input image and target caption, which we leave for future work.


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   E THICS STATEMENT
Image editing raises several ethical challenges that we wish to discuss here. First, as image editing
is closely related to image generation, it inherits known concerns. Open-source diffusion models
are trained on large amounts of web-scraped data like LAION, and inherit their biases. In par-
ticular, it was shown that LAION contains inappropriate content (violence, hate, pornography),
along with racist and sexist stereotypes. Furthermore it was found that diffusion models trained on
LAION, such as Imagen, can exhibit social and cultural bias. Therefore, the use of such models can
raise ethical issues, whether the text prompt is intentionnally harmful or not. Because image edit-
ing is usually performed on real images, there are additionnal ethical challenges, such as potential
skin tone change when editing a person or re-inforcing harmful social stereotypes. We believe that
open-sourcing editing algorithms in a research context contributes to a better understanding of such
problems, and can aid the community in efforts to mitigate them in the future. Furthermore, image
editing tools could be used with harmful intent such as harrassement or propagating fake news. This
use, known as deep fakes, has been largely discussed in previous work, e.g. in Etienne (2021). To
mitigate potential misuse, the Stable Diffusion model is released under a license focused on ethical
and legal use, stating explicitly that users “must not distribute harmful, offensive, dehumanizing
content or otherwise harmful representations of people or their environments, cultures, religions,
etc. produced with the model weights”.
Our editing benchmark based on the COCO dataset also has some limitations. COCO has a pre-
dominant western cultural bias, and we are therefore evaluating transformations on a small subset
of images mostly associated with western culture. Finding relevant transformation prompts for an
image is challenging: while we found it relevant to leverage existing annotations based on COCO,
we believe that evaluating image editing models on a less culturally biased dataset is needed.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Youssef Alami Mejjati, Christian Richardt, James Tompkin, Darren Cosker, and Kwang In Kim.
  Unsupervised attention-guided image-to-image translation. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 31, 2018.

Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In CVPR, 2022.

Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2LIVE: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2204.02491, 2022.

David Bau, Alex Andonian, Audrey Cui, YeonHwan Park, Ali Jahanian, Aude Oliva, and Antonio
  Torralba. Paint by word. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2103.10951, 2021.

Andrew Brown, Cheng-Yang Fu, Omkar Parkhi, Tamara L Berg, and Andrea Vedaldi. End-to-end
  visual editing with a generatively pre-trained artist. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2205.01668, 2022.

Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. ILVR:
  Conditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In ICCV, 2021.

Edo Collins, Raja Bala, Bob Price, and Sabine Susstrunk. Editing in style: Uncovering the local
  semantics of GANs. In CVPR, 2020.

Guillaume Couairon, Asya Grechka, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. FlexIT:
  Towards flexible semantic image translation. In CVPR, 2022.

Katherine Crowson. CLIP Guided Diffusion HQ 512x512. 2021. URL https://colab.
  research.google.com/drive/1V66mUeJbXrTuQITvJunvnWVn96FEbSI3.

Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Castri-
  cato, and Edward Raff. VQGAN-CLIP: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. In ECCV, 2022.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.

Helisa Dhamo, Azade Farshad, Iro Laina, Nassir Navab, Gregory D Hager, Federico Tombari, and
  Christian Rupprecht. Semantic image manipulation using scene graphs. In CVPR, 2020.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.

Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. CogView: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 In NeurIPS, 2021.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In CVPR, 2021.

Hubert Etienne. The future of online trust (and why deepfake is advancing it). AI and Ethics, 1, 11
  2021. doi: 10.1007/s43681-021-00072-1.

Oran Gafni and Lior Wolf. Wish you were here: Context-aware human generation. In CVPR, 2020.

Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In ECCV, 2022.

Asya Grechka, Jean-François Goudou, and Matthieu Cord. MAGECally invert images for realistic
  editing. In BMVC, 2021.

Erik Härkönen, Aaron Hertzmann, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Sylvain Paris. GANSpace: Discovering
  interpretable GAN controls. In NeurIPS, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. CLIPScore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. In NeurIPS,
 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Hexiang Hu, Ishan Misra, and Laurens van der Maaten. Evaluating text-to-image matching using
  binary image selection (BISON). In ICCV Workshop on closing the loop between vision and
  language, 2019.
Thibaut Issenhuth, Ugo Tanielian, Jérémie Mary, and David Picard. EdiBERT, a generative model
  for image editing. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2111.15264, 2021.
Yongcheng Jing, Yezhou Yang, Zunlei Feng, Jingwen Ye, Yizhou Yu, and Mingli Song. Neural
  style transfer: A review. Transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 26(11):3365–
  3385, 2019.
Valentin Khrulkov and Ivan Oseledets. Understanding DDPM latent codes through optimal trans-
  port. Applied Mathematics Letters, 2022.
Gwanghyun Kim and Jong Chul Ye. DiffusionCLIP: Text-guided image manipulation using diffu-
 sion models. In CVPR, 2021.
Hugo Lavenant and Filippo Santambrogio. The flow map of the Fokker-Planck equation does not
  provide optimal transport. Applied Mathematics Letters, 2022.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip H. S. Torr. ManiGAN: Text-guided image
  manipulation. In CVPR, 2020a.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Philip HS Torr, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Image-to-image translation with
  text guidance. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2002.05235, 2020b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  RePaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In CVPR, 2022.
Shuang Ma, Jianlong Fu, Chang Wen Chen, and Tao Mei. Da-gan: Instance-level image translation
  by deep attention generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5657–5666, 2018.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  SDEdit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In ICLR, 2021.
Sangwoo Mo, Minsu Cho, and Jinwoo Shin. Instagan: Instance-aware image-to-image translation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.10889, 2018.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. StyleCLIP: Text-
  driven manipulation of StyleGAN imagery. In ICCV, 2021.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  DreamBooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint, arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In SIGGRAPH,
  2022a.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint,
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022b.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. LAION-400M: Open dataset
  of CLIP-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Yujun Shen, Jinjin Gu, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou. Interpreting the latent space of GANs for
  semantic face editing. In CVPR, 2020.
Jing Shi, Ning Xu, Trung Bui, Franck Dernoncourt, Zheng Wen, and Chenliang Xu. A benchmark
   and baseline for language-driven image editing. In ACCV, 2020.
Alon Shoshan, Nadav Bhonker, Igor Kviatkovsky, and Gerard Medioni. GAN-control: Explicitly
  controllable GANs. In ICCV, 2021.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR,
   2021.
Jianan Wang, Guansong Lu, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, Chunjing Xu, and Yanwei Fu. ManiTrans:
   Entity-level text-guided image manipulation via token-wise semantic alignment and generation.
   In CVPR, 2022a.
Tengfei Wang, Ting Zhang, Bo Zhang, Hao Ouyang, Dong Chen, Qifeng Chen, and Fang Wen.
  Pretraining is all you need for image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2205.12952,
  2022b.
Tengfei Wang, Yong Zhang, Yanbo Fan, Jue Wang, and Qifeng Chen. High-fidelity GAN inversion
  for image attribute editing. In CVPR, 2022c.
Jiahui Yu, Zhe Lin, Jimei Yang, Xiaohui Shen, Xin Lu, and Thomas S Huang. Generative image
   inpainting with contextual attention. In CVPR, 2018.
R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep
  features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018.
Jiapeng Zhu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Bolei Zhou. In-domain GAN inversion for real image
   editing. In ECCV, 2020.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2017.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    D IFF E DIT: Diffusion-based semantic image editing with mask generation
                             Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material we provide more details on the experiments and methods presented in
the main paper. In Section A we provide additional experimental results, including assessment of
the impact of the strength of classifier-free guidance, the impact of using reference texts describing
the input image, an illustration of the effect of the encoding ratio, more qualitative editing examples,
as well as a number of example images and associated reference and query texts on COCO. In
Section B we provide proofs that support Proposition 1 in the main paper.

A     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A.1    A NALYSIS OF NOISE USED TO COMPUTE THE MASK

In step one our method an editing mask is in-                     0.8
ferred by contrasting noise estimations on a                                            Enc. ratio 0.7
noised version of the input image, see Sec-                  35                         Enc. ratio 0.8
tion 3.2. In this section, we study the impact


                                                         CSFID
of the level of noise added to the input image,
                                                             30
by varying its value between 0.1 and 0.8, where
                                                                        0.1
0 corresponds to using the initial image as in-                           0.2 0.7
put, and 1 to replacing the input image with                 25
random Gaussian noise. We evaluate the ob-                                       0.4 0.5
tained operating points on ImageNet with the                                          0.6
CSFID and LPIPS metrics when using a encod-                           26      28     30       32
ing ratios of 0.7 and 0.8 for DDIM encoding                                     LPIPS
and masked-guided denoising in steps two and
three of D IFF E DIT. From the results in Fig- Figure 12: Impact of the noise added to input im-
ure 12, we find that best results are obtained for age when computing the mask, for a encoding ra-
moderate values of noise addition of 0.6 and be- tios of 0.7 or 0.8 on ImageNet.
low. Indeed, with too much noise added to the
input image, it is difficult to correctly identify visual elements in the input image. We use a value of
0.5 in all our experiments.

A.2    C LASSIFIER - FREE GUIDANCE

In diffusion models, the noise estimator ϵθ can               90                         Ours (Guidance 5)
be conditioned on text describing the image,                                             Guidance 1
                                                              80
which provides a signal to guide the noise es-                                           Guidance 2
timation process (Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia                70                         Guidance 3
                                                              60                         Guidance 8
                                                      CSFID


et al., 2022b). Ho & Salimans (2022) intro-
duced classifier-free guidance, a technique to
greatly improve generation quality and image-                 50
text alignment in text-conditional diffusion                  40
models. It consists in training both a condi-                 30
tional and unconditional model by dropping the
conditioning text at train time with fixed prob-                     10 15 20 25 30 35
ability, e.g. 10%. Then, after training, at each                                    LPIPS
step t during decoding, the noise estimation
ϵθ (xt , Q, t) is extrapolated by using the uncon- Figure 13: Ablation on the value of the classifier-
ditional noise estimation ϵθ (xt , ∅, t) as origin. free guidance parameter. On ImageNet, we find
Formally, the noise that is used is                      that a value of at least 3 must be used to get good
ϵ = ϵθ (xt , ∅, t) + λ(ϵθ (xt , Q, t) − ϵθ (xt , ∅, t)), results. We chose to use 5, which is the default
                                                         value recommended for generation.
where λ is the classifier-free guidance parame-
ter. We study the influence of this parameter on D IFF E DIT in Figure 13, finding that similarly to
generation, a value above 3 yields the best results. Without classifier-free guidance, the obtained
trade-off is not competitive. For our experiments we use a default guidance value of λ = 5.


                                                    14
                  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  A.3    E XPERIMENTS ON COCO FILTERING

                  Here, we investigate why                                                90%                                    90%
                  there is little difference          30.0     DiffEdit               80%     31.2    DiffEdit
                                                               w/ ref. text                           w/ ref. text           80%
                  between using or not the                     DiffEdit           70%         31.0    DiffEdit
                  reference text to compute           29.5     w/o ref. text                          w/o ref. text
                                                                                              30.8


                                                     CLIPScore


                                                                                                 CLIPScore
                  the mask on our COCO                29.0                60%
                                                                                              30.6                      70%
                  queries.     In Figure 15
                  we show several editing             28.5                                    30.4             60%
                                                                50%
                  queries on the COCO                                                         30.2
                                                      28.0
                  dataset taken from the                                                         50%
                                                                                              30.0
                  BISON dataset (Hu et al.,           27.5 40%
                  2019). Generally, the text                  10         15      20    25            10            15       20
                  query describes a scene                                    LPIPS                                  LPIPS
                  similar to the one in the
                  input image, and it is Figure 14: Results on COCO: unfiltered (left) and filtered (right).
                  possible to match the text While having a small impact overall, for the filtered set using the ref-
                  query by editing only a erence text is beneficial, especially at high encoding ratios, e.g. 90%.
                  fraction of the input image.
                  However, we find that while queries have been built to be close to a caption of the input image,
                  most of the time the query is not well aligned with the caption. We create a filtered version of this
                  dataset, for which queries are structurally similar to the caption, i.e. where only a few words are
                  changed, but the grammatical structure stays the same. We use the filtering criterion that the total
                  number of words inserted/deleted/replaced must not exceed 25% of the total number of words in
                  the original caption, resulting in a total of 272 queries out of 50k original queries. In Figure 14 we
                  compare results with and without filtering, and observe that for the images with small caption edits
                  the gain of D IFF E DIT (w/ ref. text) compared to Encode-Decode is somewhat larger than on the
                  unfiltered dataset. Moreover, using the original caption as reference text to compute the mask gives
                  higher CLIPScore, especially at high encoding ratio. This illustrates that a well chosen reference
                  text helps to generate better editing masks.

 ImageNet                     Dataset             COCO                        COCO                             COCO



                                Input
                               Image



                                          A modern style bathroom                                     Three giraffe stand near a
                             Caption                                       A large tall tower
Longhorn beetle                          with a large tub and shower                                    fence as two women
                                                                          with a clock on top.
                                                and tile floor.                                             watch them.

                               Text       A bathroom with sheer        A tall clock tower with          Two giraffe standing
  Lady bug                    Query        curtains framing the                                         next to each other near
                                                                          trees all around.
                                                   tub.                                                 brick building.


                                              Figure 15: Editing queries on the COCO dataset.


                  A.4    V ISUALISATION OF THE IMPACT OF ENCODING RATIO

                  We show visual results for ablations of our two main components, mask inference and DDIM en-
                  coding, in Figure 16. The resulting methods are SDEdit, Encode-Decode, D IFF E DIT w/o Encoding,
                  and D IFF E DIT. We demonstrate the qualitative behavior of these different methods, at varying en-
                  coding ratios between 30% and 80%. Compared to SDEdit, Encode-Decode allows to better match
                  the query with less modifications of the main object and the background, especially at 60% − 70%.


                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mask inference allows to maintain exactly the background. Using DDIM inference on top of mask-
based decoding allows to better retain of the content inside the mask, especially at 70% and 80%,
c.f. row 3 vs. 4.
                           Method Name     Encoding Mask   30%   40%   50%   60%      70%      80%

     Input                       SDEdit
    Image


    Query     Bald Eagle        Encode-
                                Decode



                                DiffEdit
     Mask
                           w/o Encoding
 generated
w/ DiffEdit


                                DiffEdit


Figure 16: Qualitative ablations of the mask and encoding components, using different encoding
ratios from 30% to 80%.


A.5      A DDITIONAL VISUALIZATIONS AND QUALITATIVE RESULTS

Figure 17 illustrates editing examples on Imagen, in comparison with other mask-free editing meth-
ods. D IFF E DIT generally performs more targeted and accurate edits, leaving more of the original
image in tact where possible. Consider for example the first column of Figure 17, where D IFF E DIT
leaves the guitar as it, while other methods make unnecessary and unrealistic changes to the guitar.
Additional qualitative examples on COCO images are shown in Figure 19.
Figure 20 shows several failure cases of semantic image editing with D IFF E DIT. Some failure
modes are inherited from the generative model itself: models trained on web-scrapped image-text
data are known to struggle with understanding spatial positions in images, spatial reasoning, and
counting (Ramesh et al., 2021). Others are specific to our mask-based method, like the difficulty to
insert objects, because the mask often seeks an “anchor” visual element to insert an object, see first
column.

A.6      D ETAILS ON COMPARISONS WITH OTHER METHODS

On the COCO and Imagen datasets, we do not compare with ILVR, since it cannot be used within
the latent diffusion framework: the method needs image downsampling and upsampling, which does
not work well with the latent spaces used in latent diffusion. Even adapted with a diffusion model
without latent spaces like Imagen, we do not expect the CLIP-LPIPS trade-off to be favorable for this
method, given the high editing distance obtained on ImageNet. Instead, we compare against Cross-
Attention Control Hertz et al. (2022), a recent method for text-driven image editing based on the
unreleased Imagen diffusion model. The method is very recent and has been adapted to use with Sta-
ble Diffusion at https://github.com/bloc97/CrossAttentionControl/. We have
performed lightweight hyperparameter search to optimize the CLIP-LPIPS trade-off on a subset
of Imagen images. We generally find that this re-implementation, while producing edited images
structurally similar to the input, changes local features more than SDEdit, leading to generally high
LPIPS distances, resulting in a CLIP-LPIPS trade-off not competitive with other methods on our
COCO and Imagen benchmark. In particular, LPIPS distance are high on the COCO dataset where
text query and reference text have a high edit distance on average, whereas Cross-Attention Control
was designed to perform well for prompt-to-prompt editing, i.e. the input and target text should al-
most exactly match. Given that our results are based on the unofficial re-implementation, we caution
that they are temporary and we will update them when the official code (or official adaptation for
Stable Diffusion) is released.


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Input


                                                                  british shorthair   fuzzy panda →
         Text Query    glasses →    glasses →   riding a bike →     cat → fuzzy
                      cowboy hat   cowboy hat    skateboarding                           raccoon
                                                                        panda



           FlexIT
          (res 256)



           Cross-
          Attention
          Control


           SDEdit


           DiffEdit


  Figure 17: Example edits from Imagen, in comparison with other mask-free editing methods.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Input                                                                                                                      Input
    Image                                                                                                                      Image


                                                                                                                                         A dog playing w
    Editing    Pancake with egg →   train → coach   Bread → burger   Truck → rusty   Keyboard → Piano   Mashed potatoes →     Editing     frisbees → A d
                     burger                                            old truck         keyboard           fried egg          query         playing with
     query
                                                                                                                                           basketball ball



    SDEdit
                                                                                                                              SDEdit


   Encode-
   Decode                                                                                                                    Encode-
                                                                                                                             Decode


   DiffEdit
                                                                                                                              DiffEdit
    Mask
                                                                                                                               Mask


  DiffEdit
                                                                                                                             DiffEdit
 w/o Encode
                                                                                                                            w/o Encode


    DiffEdit                                                                                                                  DiffEdit


Figure 18: More qualitative examples on COCO. Baseline methods are shown for comparison. The
mask is sometimes bigger or smaller that one could expect: In column 3, it is larger, but there are
few edits outside the requested bread → burger transformation (except for the wine bottle label),
which is not the case without DDIM encoding. In column 4, the mask does not cover the interior of
the truck, but this does not affect the edit quality.


                                                           18
                              Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  Input
                                 Image


                                           A dog playing with                                                                         A motorbike and a         A house and
→ Piano   Mashed potatoes →     Editing                           A dog playing with      House and carriage   House and carriage
                                            frisbees → A dog                                                                            balcony → A           motorbike → A
 rd           fried egg                                            frisbees → A wolf      → House and race     → middle-age castle
                                 query         playing with
                                                                 playing with frisbees.          car              and carriage       motorbike and plants   house and vintage old
                                             basketball balls.                                                                          on a balcony.               car


                                SDEdit


                               Encode-
                               Decode


                                DiffEdit
                                 Mask


                               DiffEdit
                              w/o Encode


                                DiffEdit


                              Figure 19: More qualitative examples on COCO. In the first column, the color of the objects to be
                              edited is maintained, which would not be the case with regular inpainting methods. Contrasting
                              similar text query and reference text allows to select the object to be edited.


                                                                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Input
  Image



           A black cat and an empty                                                             A grey parrot and a parrot                           A blue car on the left of
 Editing   white wall on the right. →         A plane and clouds         Two giraffes → two      with yellow head → A         A cat and a dog →      orange garage door → A
           A black cat and a painting         → A plane and a hot        giraffes and a zebra    rainbow lorikeet and a       A cat and a raccoon     blue car on the right of
 Query     of the eiffel tower on the             air balloon                                   parrot with yellow head.                                orange garage door
            white wall on the right.


DiffEdit
 Mask


DiffEdit
Output



                                          Object inserted at the wrong                           Mask does not isolate                                   Unable to change
 Failure   Object inserted at the wrong      place and undesired          Object not inserted
                                                                                                object to be edited, both
                                                                                                                             Mask does not isolate
                      place                                                                                                   object to be edited       positions of objects
 Mode                                      modification of existing                                      objects
                                                     object


Figure 20: Illustration of failure modes. In the first two columns show difficulty to insert an object
in a smooth region of the image. In column three the mask fails to identify a region where to add the
zebra. Columns 4 and 5 show mask identification errors, where multiple similar objects are included
in the mask, whereas matching the text query only requires to edit a single object. In both cases this
results in over-editing. Col. 6 shows the failure to change a spatial relation in the image.


                                                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     T HEORETICAL RESULTS
Here, we prove the bounds given in the main paper. We reused notations from Proposition 1 in the
main paper. We also discuss links to optimal transport.

B.1    P ROOF OF SDE DIT BOUND

Proposition 2. Suppose that ∥ϵθ (x, Q, t)∥2 ≤ C for all x ∈ X , t ∈ [0, 1]. Then
                           E      ∥x0 − Dr (Gr (x0 , ϵ), Q)∥2 ≤ (C + 1)τ                           (6)
                          (x0 ,Q)∼pD
                           ϵ∼N (0,1)


Proof. Let T , xr = Gr (x0 , ϵ) , yr = xr and y0 = Dr (yr , Q). Then
                                                       Z 0
                    xr                yr     y0
                 ∥ √ − y0 ∥ = ∥ √ − √ ∥ = ∥                 ϵθ (xt , Q, t)dτ ∥ ≤ Cτ.               (7)
                     αr                αr     α0        τ

Since √xαrr = x0 + τ ϵ, we have ∥x0 − y0 ∥ ≤ ∥x0 + τ ϵ − y0 ∥ + ∥τ ϵ∥ ≤ Cτ + τ which concludes
the proof.

In the SDEdit paper (Meng et al., 2021), a proof similar to what we state is given, with three main
differences: (i) the proof is given in the case of variance-exploding Stochastic Differential Equation
(VE-SDE), which needs adaption for our setting which uses variance-preserving SDE; (ii) the bound
is derived in the case of a stochastic differential equation, whereas we use a deterministic DDIM
process; (iii) the bound is given by controlling the probability tail, whereas we only consider the
expectancy of edit distance. However, despite these differences, the spirit of the proof is the same as
here.

B.2    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

Proposition 3. Suppose that ϵθ (·, Q, t) is K1 -lipschitz and κ2 defined as
                    κ2 (x0 ) = max ∥ϵθ (Et (x0 ), Q, t) − ϵθ (Et (x0 ), ∅, t)∥                     (8)
                                  t∈[0,1]
                                                                 p
Let K2 = Ex0 κ2 (x0 ). Then for all encoding ratio r, with τ =       αr−1 − 1,

                                                       K2 τ      p        K1
                     Ex0 ∥x0 − Dr (Er (x0 ), Q)∥ ≤ √          τ + τ2 + 1                           (9)
                                                       τ2 + 1

                                                                                          √
                                                                     q
Proof. Let σ be a time-dependent variable defined as σ(t) =       αt−1 − 1. Let u = x/ α =
 √                  √
x 1 + σ 2 and v = y 1 + σ 2 . u and v are solutions of the following differential system:

                                               p
                                  du|t = ϵθ (u/ 1 + σ 2 , ∅, t)dσ,                                (10)
                                               p
                                  dv|t = ϵθ (v/ 1 + σ 2 , Q, t)dσ,                                (11)
                                                        p
                                  u(r) = v(r) = Er (x0 ) 1 + σ 2 .                                (12)

Let w = ∥u − v∥, then w|t=r = 0 and


    dw|t ≤ ∥du|t − dv|t ∥ = ∥(ϵθ (x, ∅, t) − ϵθ (y, Q, t))dσ∥                                     (13)
                          ≤ ∥(ϵθ (x, ∅, t) − ϵθ (x, Q, t)∥dσ + ∥(ϵθ (x, Q, t) − ϵθ (y, Q, t)∥dσ   (14)
                          ≤ κ2 (x0 )dσ + K1 ∥x − y∥dσ                                             (15)
                                             K1
                          ≤ κ2 (x0 ) + √            w dσ.                                         (16)
                                            1 + σ2


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By integration we get
                                                      Z τ
                                                                 K1
                        w(t) ≤ κ2 (x0 ) ∗ (τ − t) +         √          w(σ)dσ.
                                                        t       1 + σ2
From here we can apply Grönwall’s inequality:

                                                  Z τ  K1
                          w(0) ≤ κ2 (x0 )τ exp          √    ds                                 (17)
                                                      1 + s2
                                                 0         p
                                ≤ κ2 (x0 )τ exp K1 log(τ + τ 2 + 1)                             (18)
                                                p        K1
                                ≤ κ2 (x0 )τ τ + τ 2 + 1     .                                   (19)

Which finally gives
                                          κ2 (x0 )τ      p        K1
                             ∥x0 − y0 ∥ ≤ √           τ + τ2 + 1     .                          (20)
                                            τ2 + 1

Taking the expectation w.r.t. the input image x0 gives the final result:
                                                      K2 τ           p      K1
                  Ex0 ∥x0 − DT (ET (x0 ), Q)∥ ≤ √               τ + τ2 + 1                      (21)
                                                      τ2 + 1
which concludes the proof.



B.3   L INKS TO OPTIMAL TRANSPORT THEORY

The reverse DDIM encoder Er maps the distribution of images p0 = pD to the distribution pr of
images noised at timestep r. Khrulkov & Oseledets (2022) suggested that Er could be an optimal
transport map between p0 and pr , minimizing the transport cost Ex0 ∥x0 − Er (x0 )∥22 . This means
that the encoded images are, on average, as close as possible to the input images, while following
the correct distribution pr . It would entail that the unconditional decoder Dr = Er−1 would be
an optimal transport map between pr and p0 , and moreover that the conditional decoder Dr (·, Q)
would be an optimal transport map between the distributions pr (·|Q) and p0 (·|Q) conditioned by
text description Q. Under the hypothesis that pr is very close to pr (·|Q), then the Encode-Decode
algorithm would be the combination of two optimal transport maps Er and Dr (·, Q), mapping p0
to pr and then pr ≃ pr (·|Q) to p0 (·|Q). This is a very interesting property and we make the
connection with the desired properties of semantic image editing, which can be expressed as an
optimal transport problem. Given two distribution of images p1 , p2 (lets say cats and dogs), the aim
is to find the function f that performs the expected edit (changing images of cats into images of
dogs) while minimally editing the image, which can be expressed mathematically as:
                          f = arg min Ex ∥x − f (x)∥        s.t.   p 2 = f# p 1 ,               (22)
                                  f

where f# is the push-forward measure. The function Dr (·, Q) ◦ Er is not a solution of this optimal
transport problem, because (i) it was proven that the reverse DDIM encoder is not the optimal
transport map for some distributions (Lavenant & Santambrogio, 2022), and (ii) the composition
of two optimal transport maps is not necessarily an optimal transport map. However, experiments
and numerical simulations suggest that Er is very close from an optimal transport map. It would
be interesting to study the “optimality defect” of Er and of the editing function Dr (·, Q) ◦ Er . We
leave this for future work.


                                                 22
