Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NTERNEURONS ACCELERATE LEARNING DYNAMICS
IN RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORKS FOR
STATISTICAL ADAPTATION

 David Lipshutz1 , Cengiz Pehlevan2 , Dmitri B. Chklovskii1,3
 1
   Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
 2
   John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
 3
   Neuroscience Institute, New York University School of Medicine
 {dlipshutz,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org
 cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Early sensory systems in the brain rapidly adapt to fluctuating input statistics,
         which requires recurrent communication between neurons. Mechanistically, such
         recurrent communication is often indirect and mediated by local interneurons. In
         this work, we explore the computational benefits of mediating recurrent commu-
         nication via interneurons compared with direct recurrent connections. To this end,
         we consider two mathematically tractable recurrent linear neural networks that sta-
         tistically whiten their inputs — one with direct recurrent connections and the other
         with interneurons that mediate recurrent communication. By analyzing the corre-
         sponding continuous synaptic dynamics and numerically simulating the networks,
         we show that the network with interneurons is more robust to initialization than
         the network with direct recurrent connections in the sense that the convergence
         time for the synaptic dynamics in the network with interneurons (resp. direct re-
         current connections) scales logarithmically (resp. linearly) with the spectrum of
         their initialization. Our results suggest that interneurons are computationally use-
         ful for rapid adaptation to changing input statistics. Interestingly, the network
         with interneurons is an overparameterized solution of the whitening objective for
         the network with direct recurrent connections, so our results can be viewed as a
         recurrent linear neural network analogue of the implicit acceleration phenomenon
         observed in overparameterized feedforward linear neural networks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Efficient coding and redundancy reduction theories of neural coding hypothesize that early sen-
sory systems decorrelate and normalize neural responses to sensory inputs (Barlow, 1961; Laughlin,
1989; Barlow & Földiák, 1989; Simoncelli & Olshausen, 2001; Carandini & Heeger, 2012; Westrick
et al., 2016; Chapochnikov et al., 2021), operations closely related to statistical whitening of inputs.
Since the input statistics are often in flux due to dynamic environments, this calls for early sen-
sory systems that can rapidly adapt (Wark et al., 2007; Whitmire & Stanley, 2016). Decorrelating
neural activities requires recurrent communication between neurons, which is typically indirect and
mediated by local interneurons (Christensen et al., 1993; Shepherd et al., 2004). Why do neuronal
circuits for statistical adaptation mediate recurrent communication using interneurons, which take
up valuable space and metabolic resources, rather than using direct recurrent connections?
A common explanation for why communication between neurons is mediated by interneurons is
Dale’s principle, which states that each neuron has exclusively inhibitory or excitatory effects on all
of its targets (Strata & Harvey, 1999). While Dale’s principle provides a physiological constraint that
explains why recurrent interactions are mediated by interneurons, we seek a computational principle
that can account for using interneurons rather than direct recurrent connections. This perspective is
useful for a couple of reasons. First, perhaps Dale’s principle is not a hard constraint; see (Saunders
et al., 2015; Granger et al., 2020) for results along these lines. In this case, a computational benefit
of interneurons would provide a normative explanation for the existence of interneurons to mediate


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Recurrent neural networks for ZCA whitening with direct recurrent connections (left,
Algorithm 1) and with interneurons (right, Algorithm 2).


recurrent communication. Second, decorrelation and whitening are useful in statistical and machine
learning methods (Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000; Krizhevsky, 2009), especially recent self-supervised
methods (Ermolov et al., 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2022; Hua et al., 2021), so our
analysis is potentially relevant to the design of artificial neural networks, which are not bound by
Dale’s principle.
In this work, to better understand the computational benefits of interneurons for statistical adapta-
tion, we analyze the learning dynamics of two mathematically tractable recurrent neural networks
that statistically whiten their inputs using Hebbian/anti-Hebbian learning rules — one with direct
recurrent connections and the other with indirect recurrent interactions mediated by interneurons,
Figure 1. We show that the learning dynamics of the network with interneurons are more robust
than the learning dynamics of the network with direct recurrent connections. In particular, we prove
that the convergence time of the continuum limit of the network with direct lateral connections scales
linearly with the spectrum of the initialization, whereas the convergence time of the continuum limit
of the network with interneurons scales logarithmically with the spectrum of the initialization. We
also numerically test the networks and, consistent with our theoretical results, find that the network
with interneurons is more robust to initialization. Our results suggest that interneurons are compu-
tationally important for rapid adaptation to fluctuating input statistics.
Our analysis is closely related to analyses of learning dynamics in feedforward linear networks
trained using backpropagation (Saxe et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2018; Saxe et al., 2019; Gidel et al.,
2019; Tarmoun et al., 2021). The optimization problems for deep linear networks are overparame-
terizations of linear problems and this overparameterization can accelerate convergence of gradient
descent or gradient flow optimization — a phenomenon referred to as implicit acceleration (Arora
et al., 2018). Our results can be viewed as an analogous phenomenon for gradient flows correspond-
ing to recurrent linear networks trained using Hebbian/anti-Hebbian learning rules. In our setting,
the network with interneurons is naturally viewed as an overparameterized solution of the whitening
objective for the network with direct recurrent connections. In analogy with the feedforward setting,
the interneurons can be viewed as a hidden layer that overparameterizes the optimization problem.
In summary, our main contribution is a theoretical and numerical analysis of the synaptic dynamics
of two linear recurrent neural networks for statistical whitening — one with direct lateral connec-
tions and one with indirect lateral connections mediated by interneurons. Our analysis shows that the
synaptic dynamics converge significantly faster in the network with interneurons than the network
with direct lateral connections (logarithmic versus linear convergence times). Our results have po-
tential broader implications: (i) they suggest biological interneurons may facilitate rapid statistical
adaptation, see also (Duong et al., 2023); (ii) including interneurons in recurrent neural networks for
solving other learning tasks may also accelerate learning; (iii) overparameterized whitening objec-
tives may be useful for developing online self-supervised learning algorithms in machine learning.


2   S TATISTICAL WHITENING

Let n ≥ 2 and x1 , . . . , xT be a sequence of n-dimensional centered inputs with positive definite
(empirical) covariance matrix Cxx := T1 XX⊤ , where X := [x1 , . . . , xT ] is the n × T data matrix
of concatenated inputs. The goal of statistical whitening is to linearly transform the inputs so that the
n-dimensional outputs y1 , . . . , yT have identity covariance; that is, Cyy := T1 YY⊤ = In , where
Y := [y1 , . . . , yT ] is the n × T data matrix of concatenated outputs.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Statistical whitening is not a unique transformation. For example, if Cyy = In , then left multipli-
cation of Y by any n × n orthogonal matrix results in another data matrix with identity covariance
(Kessy et al., 2018). We focus on Zero-phase Components Analysis (ZCA) whitening (Bell & Se-
                                                                              −1/2
jnowski, 1997), also referred to as Mahalanobis whitening, given by Y = Cxx X, which is the
whitening transformation that minimizes the mean-squared error between the inputs X and the out-
puts Y (Eldar & Oppenheim, 2003). In other words, it is the unique solution to the objective
                            1                                      1
                     arg min  ∥Y − X∥2Frob         subject to        YY⊤ = In .                     (1)
                     Y∈Rn×T T                                      T

The goal of this work is to analyze the learning dynamics of 2 recurrent neural networks that learn
to perform ZCA whitening in the online, or streaming, setting using Hebbian/anti-Hebbian learning
rules. The derivations of the 2 networks, which we include here for completeness, are closely related
to derivations of PCA networks carried out in (Pehlevan & Chklovskii, 2015; Pehlevan et al., 2018).
Our main theoretical and numerical results are presented in sections 6 and 7, respectively.


3     O BJECTIVES FOR DERIVING ZCA WHITENING NETWORKS

In this section, we rewrite the ZCA whitening objective 1 to obtain 2 objectives that will be the start-
ing points for deriving our 2 recurrent whitening networks. We first expand the square in equation 1,
substitute in with the constraint YY⊤ = T In , drop the terms that do not depend on Y and finally
flip the sign to obtain the following objective in terms of the neural activities data matrix Y:
                               2                                  1
                        max        Tr(YX⊤ )       subject to        YY⊤ = In .
                      Y∈Rn×T T                                    T

3.1   O BJECTIVE FOR THE NETWORK WITH DIRECT RECURRENT CONNECTIONS

To derive a network with direct recurrent connections, we introduce the positive definite matrix M
as a Lagrange multiplier to enforce the upper bound YY⊤ ⪯ T In :

                                       min
                                         n
                                                max f (M, Y),                                       (2)
                                      M∈S++ Y∈Rn×T

       n
where S++ denotes the set of positive definite n × n matrices and
                                     2           1
                      f (M, Y) :=      Tr(YX⊤ ) − Tr(M(YY⊤ − T In )).
                                     T           T
Here, we have interchanged the order of optimization, which is justified because f (M, Y) is linear
in M and strongly concave in Y, so it satisfies the saddle point property (see Appendix A). The
maximization over Y ensures that the upper bound YY⊤ ⪯ T In is in fact saturated, so the whiten-
ing constraint holds. The minimax objective equation 2 will be the starting point for our derivation
of a statistical whitening network with direct recurrent connections in section 4.

3.2   OVERPARAMETERIZED OBJECTIVE FOR THE NETWORK WITH INTERNEURONS

To derive a network with k ≥ n interneurons, we replace the matrix M in equation 2 with the
overparameterized product WW⊤ , where W is an n×k matrix, which yields the minimax objective

                                       min      max g(W, Y),                                        (3)
                                     W∈Rn×k Y∈Rn×T

where
                                           2           1
          g(W, Y) := f (WW⊤ , Y) =           Tr(YX⊤ ) − Tr(WW⊤ (YY⊤ − T In )).
                                           T           T
The overparameterized minimax objective equation 3 will be the starting point for our derivation of
a statistical whitening network with interneurons in section 5.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4   D ERIVATION OF A NETWORK WITH DIRECT RECURRENT CONNECTIONS
Starting from the ZCA whitening objective in equation 2, we derive offline and online algorithms
and map the online algorithm onto a network with direct recurrent connections. We assume that the
neural dynamics operate at faster timescale than the synaptic updates, so we first optimize over the
neural activities and then take gradient-descent steps with respect to the synaptic weight matrix.
In the offline setting, at each iteration, we first maximize f (M, Y) with respect to the neural activi-
ties Y by taking gradient ascent steps until convergence:
                        Y ← Y + γ(X − MY)               ⇒        Y = M−1 X,
where γ > 0 is a small constant. After the neural activities converge, we minimize f (M, Y) with
respect to M by taking a gradient descent step with respect to M:

                                                 1
                                M←M+η              YY⊤ − In .                                (4)
                                                 T

In the online setting, at each time step t, we only have access to the input xt rather than the whole
dataset X. In this case, we first optimize f (M, Y) with respect to the neural activities vector yt by
taking gradient steps until convergence:
                       yt ← yt + γ(xt − Myt )           ⇒        yt = M−1 xt .
After the neural activities converge, the synaptic weight matrix M is updated by taking a stochastic
gradient descent step:
                                     M ← M + η(yt yt⊤ − In ).
This results in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: A whitening network with direct recurrent connections
  input centered inputs {xt }; parameters γ, η
  initialize positive definite n × n matrix M
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
     yt ← 0
     repeat
        yt ← yt + γ(xt − Myt )
     until convergence
     M ← M + η(yt yt⊤ − In )
  end for

Algorithm 1 can be implemented in a network with n principal neurons with direct recurrent con-
nections −M, Figure 1 (left). At each time step t, the external input to the principal neurons is xt ,
the output of the principal neurons is yt and the recurrent input to the principal neurons is −Myt .
Therefore, the total input to the principal neurons is encoded in the n-dimensional vector xt − Myt .
The neural outputs are updated according to the neural dynamics in Algorithm 1 until they converge
at yt = M−1 xt . After the neural activities converge, the synaptic weight matrix M is updated
according to Algorithm 1.

5   D ERIVATION OF A NETWORK WITH INTERNEURONS
Starting from the overparameterized ZCA whitening objective in equation 3, we derive offline and
online algorithms and we map the online algorithm onto a network with k ≥ n interneurons. As in
the last section, we assume that the neural dynamics operate at a faster timescale than the synaptic
updates.
In the offline setting, at each iteration, we first maximize g(W, Y) with respect to the neural activi-
ties Y by taking gradient steps until convergence:
                  Y ← Y + γ(X − WW⊤ Y)                 ⇒        Y = (WW⊤ )−1 X.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


After the neural activities converge, we minimize g(W, Y) with respect to W by taking a gradient
descent step with respect to W:

                                                1
                                W ←W+η            YY⊤ W − W .                                (5)
                                                T

In the online setting, at each time step t, we first optimize g(W, Y) with respect to the neural
activities vectors yt by running the gradient ascent-descent neural dynamics:
                  yt ← yt + γ(xt − WW⊤ yt )              ⇒        yt = (WW⊤ )−1 xt .
After convergence of the neural activities, the matrix W is updated by taking a stochastic gradient
descent step:
                                    W ← W + η(yt yt⊤ W − W).
To implement the online algorithm in a recurrent neural network with interneurons, we let zt :=
W⊤ yt denote the k-dimensional vector of interneuron activities at time t. After substituting into
the neural dynamics and the synaptic update rules, we obtain Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2: A whitening network with interneurons
  input centered inputs {xt }; k ≥ n; parameters γ, η
  initialize full rank n × k matrix W
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
     yt ← 0
     repeat
        zt ← W ⊤ y t
        yt ← yt + γ(xt − Wzt )
     until convergence
     W ← W + η(yt z⊤      t − W)
  end for

Algorithm 2 can be implemented in a network with n principal neurons and k interneurons, Figure 1
(right). The principal neurons (resp. interneurons) are connected to the interneurons (resp. principal
neurons) via the synaptic weight matrix W⊤ (resp. −W). At each time step t, the external input to
the principal neurons is xt , the activity of the principal neurons is yt , the activity of the interneurons
is zt = W⊤ yt and the recurrent input to the principal neurons is −Wzt . The neural activities are
updated according to the neural dynamics in Algorithm 2 until they converge to yt = (WW⊤ )−1 xt
and zt = W⊤ yt . After the neural activities converge, the synaptic weight matrix W is updated
according to Algorithm 2.
Here, the principal neuron-to-interneuron weight matrix W⊤ is the negative transpose of the
interneuron-to-principal neuron weight matrix −W, Figure 1 (right). In general, enforcing such
symmetry is not biologically plausible and commonly referred to as the weight transport problem.
In addition, we do not sign-constrain the weights, so the network can violate Dale’s principle. In
Appendix B, we modify the algorithm to be more biologically realistic and we map the modified
algorithm onto the vertebrate olfactory bulb and show that the algorithm is consistent with several
experimental observations.

6     A NALYSES OF CONTINUOUS SYNAPTIC DYNAMICS
We now present our main theoretical results on the convergence of the corresponding continuous
synaptic dynamics for M and W. We first show that the synaptic updates are naturally viewed as
(stochastic) gradient descent algorithms. We then analyze the corresponding continuous gradient
flows. Detailed proofs of our results are provided in Appendix C

6.1   G RADIENT DESCENT ALGORITHMS

We first show that the offline and online synaptic dynamics are naturally viewed as gradient descent
and stochastic gradient descent algorithms for minimizing whitening objectives. Let U (M) be the


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


convex function defined by
                      U (M) := max f (M, Y) = Tr M−1 Cxx − M .

                                    Y∈Rn×T

Substituting the optimal neural activities Y = M−1 X into the offline update in equation 4, we see
that the offline algorithm is a gradient descent algorithm for minimizing U (M):
                       M ← M + η M−1 Cxx M−1 − In = M − η∇U (M).


Similarly, Algorithm 1 is a stochastic gradient descent algorithm for minimizing U (M).
Next, let V (W) be the nonconvex function defined by
                 V (W) := max g(W, Y) = Tr (WW⊤ )−1 Cxx − WW⊤ .

                             Y∈Rn×T

Again, substituting the optimal neural activities Y = (WW⊤ )−1 X into the offline update in equa-
tion 5, we see the offline algorithm is a gradient descent algorithm for minimizing V (W):
                                                                              η
            W ← W + η (WW⊤ )−1 Cxx (WW⊤ )−1 W − W = W − ∇V (W).

                                                                              2
Similarly, Algorithm 2 is a stochastic gradient descent algorithm for minimizing V (W).
A common approach for studying stochastic gradient descent algorithms is to analyze the corre-
sponding continuous gradient flows (Saxe et al., 2014; 2019; Tarmoun et al., 2021), which are more
mathematically tractable and are useful approximations of the average behavior of the stochastic
gradient descent dynamics when the step size is small. In the remainder of this section, we analyze
and compare the continuous gradient flows associated with Algorithms 1 and 2.
To further facilitate the analysis, we consider so-called ‘spectral initializations’ that commute with
Cxx (Saxe et al., 2014; 2019; Gidel et al., 2019; Tarmoun et al., 2021). Specificially, we say that
A0 ∈ S++  n
              is a spectral initialization if A0 = Ux diag(σ1 , . . . , σn )U⊤x , where Ux is the n × n
orthogonal matrix of eigenvectors of Cxx and σ1 , . . . , σn > 0. To characterize the convergence
rates of the gradient flows, we define the Lyapunov function
                               ℓ(A) := ∥Cxx − A2 ∥Frob ,      A ∈ S++    n
                                                                            .

6.2   G RADIENT FLOW ANALYSIS OF A LGORITHM 1

The gradient flow of U (M) is given by
                      dM(t)
                              = −∇U (M(t)) = M(t)−1 Cxx M(t)−1 − In .                                  (6)
                        dt
To analyze solutions of M(t), we focus on spectral intializations.
Lemma 1. Suppose M0 is a spectral initialization. Then the solution M(t) of the ODE 6 is of the
form M(t) = Ux diag(σ1 (t), . . . , σn (t))U⊤
                                            x where σ1 (t), . . . , σn (t), are the solutions of the ODE
                               dσi (t)     λ2i
                                       =         − 1,          i = 1, . . . , n.                      (7)
                                 dt      σi (t)2
Consequently,
                   d                          4
                      (σi (t)2 − λ2i )2 = −        (σi (t)2 − λ2i )2 ,       i = 1, . . . , n.        (8)
                   dt                       σi (t)

From Lemma 1, we see that for a spectral initialization with σi (0) ≤ λi , the dynamics of σi (t)
satisfy
                                d                       4
                                  (σi (t)2 − λ2i )2 ≤ − (σi (t)2 − λ2i )2 .
                               dt                      λi
                                                                                             √
It follows that σi (t)2 converges to λ2i exponentially with convergence rate greater than 2/ λi . On
the other hand, suppose σi (0) ≫ λi . From equation 7, we see that while σi (t) ≫ λi , σi (t) decays
at approximately unit rate; that is,
                                              dσi (t)
                                                      ≈ −1.                                       (9)
                                                 dt
Therefore, the time for σi (t) to converge to λi grows linearly with σi (0). We make these statements
precise in the following proposition.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 1. Suppose M0 is a spectral initialization and let M(t) denote the solution of the ODE
6 starting from M0 . If σi ≤ λi for all i = 1, . . . , n, then for ϵ < ℓ(M0 ),
                                                           √
                                                             λmax
                                                                  log ℓ(M0 )ϵ−1 ,

                      min{t ≥ 0 : ℓ(M(t)) ≤ ϵ} ≤                                                (10)
                                                             2
where λmax := maxi λi . On the other hand, if σi > λi for some i = 1, . . . , n, then for ϵ < σi2 − λ2i ,
                                                             q
                         min{t ≥ 0 : ℓ(M(t)) ≤ ϵ} ≥ σi − λ2i + ϵ.                                  (11)

6.3   G RADIENT FLOW ANALYSIS OF A LGORITHM 2

The gradient flow of the overparameterized cost V (W) is given by
      dW(t)    1                    −1                −1
            = − ∇V (W) = W(t)W(t)⊤     Cxx W(t)W(t)⊤     W(t) − W(t).                               (12)
       dt      2
Next, we show that ℓ(W(t)W(t)⊤ ) converges to zero exponentially for any initialization W0 .
Proposition 2. Let W(t) denote the solution of the ODE 12 starting from any W0 ∈ Rn×k . Let
ϵ < ℓ(W0 W0⊤ ). For spectral initializations W0 W0⊤ ,
                                                           1
                   min{t ≥ 0 : ℓ(W(t)W(t)⊤ ) ≤ ϵ} =          log ℓ(W0 W0⊤ )ϵ−1 .

                                                                                                    (13)
                                                           4
For general initializations W0 W0⊤ ,
                                                           1
                   min{t ≥ 0 : ℓ(W(t)W(t)⊤ ) ≤ ϵ} ≤          log ℓ(W0 W0⊤ )ϵ−1 .

                                                                                                    (14)
                                                           2

7     N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we numerically test the offline and online algorithms on synthetic datasets. Let

            Whitening error(t) = ∥A−1     −1
                                   t Cxx At − In ∥Frob ,             At ∈ {Mt , Wt Wt⊤ },

where At is the value of matrix after the tth iterate. To quantify the convergence time, define
                   Convergence time := min{t ≥ 1 : Whitening error(t) < 0.1}.
In plots with multiple runs, lines and shaded regions respectively denote the means and 95% confi-
dence intervals over 10 runs.

7.1   O FFLINE ALGORITHMS

Let n = 5, k = 10 and T = 105 . We generate a data matrix X with i.i.d. entries xt,i chosen
                       √ (0, 12). The eigenvalues of Cxx are {24.01, 16.42, 10.45, 6.59, 3.28}.
uniformly from the interval
We initialize W0 = Q αΣP⊤ , where α > 0, Σ = diag(5, 4, 3, 2, 1), Q is an n × n orthogonal
matrix and P is a random k × n matrix with orthonormal column vectors. We set M0 = W0 W0⊤ =
αQΣ2 Q⊤ . We consider spectral initializations (i.e., Q = Ux ) and nonspectral initializations (i.e.,
Q is a random orthogonal matrix). We use step size η = 10−3 .
The results of running the offline algorithms for α = 0.1, 1, 10 are shown in Figure 2. Consistent
with Propositions 1 and 2, the network with direct recurrent connections convergences slowly for
‘large’ α, whereas the network with interneurons converges exponentially for all α. Further, as
predicted by equation 9, when the eigenvalues of M are ‘large’, i.e., σi ≫ λi , they decay linearly.
In Figure 3, we plot the convergence times of the offline algorithms with spectral and nonspectral
initializations, for α = 1, 2, . . . , 20. Consistent with our analysis of the gradient flows, the con-
vergence times for network with direct lateral connections (resp. interneurons) grows linearly (resp.
logarithmically) with α.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             (a) Spectral initializations                           (b) Nonspectral initializations

Figure 2: Comparison of whitening error and eigenvalue evolution for the offline algorithms with
(a) spectral initializations and (b) nonspectral initializaitons.


Figure 3: Comparison of convergence times for the offline algorithms with both spectral and non-
spectral initializations, as functions of α = 1, 2, . . . , 20.


7.2   O NLINE ALGORITHMS

We test our online algorithms on a synthetic dataset with samples from 2 distributions. Let
n = 2, k = 4 and T = 105 . Fix covariance matrices CA = UA diag(4, 25)U⊤                        A and CB =
UB diag(9, 16)U⊤     B , where   U   A  ,  U B are random 2 × 2 rotation matrices.  We      generate a 2 × 4T
dataset X = [x1 , . . . , x4T ] with independent samples x1 , . . . , xT , x2T +1 , . . . , x3T ∼ N (0, CA )
and xT +1 , . . . , x2T , x3T +1 , . . . , x4T ∼ N (0, CB ). We evaluated our online algorithms with step
size η = 10−4 and initializations M0 = W0 W0⊤ , where W0 = Qdiag(σ1 , σ2 )P⊤ , Q is a random
2 × 2 rotation matrix, P is a random 4 × 2 matrix with orthonormal column vectors and σ1 , σ2 are
independent random variables chosen uniformly from the interval (1, 1.5). The results are shown in
Figure 4. Consistent with our theoretical analyses, we see that the network with interneurons adapts
to changing distributions faster than the network with direct recurrent connections.

7.3   A PPLICATION TO PRINCIPAL SUBSPACE LEARNING

A challenge in unsupervised and self-supervised learning is preventing collapse (i.e., degenerate
solutions). A recent approach in self-supervised learning is to decorrelate or whiten the feature


Figure 4: Comparison of whitening error and eigenvalue evolution for the online algorithms on a
dataset with switching distributions (white vs. light orange backgrounds).


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Left: networks for principal subspace projection with output whitening using direct lateral
connections or interneurons. Right: comparison of subspace error for the two networks with relative
learning rates η = ζ or η = 10ζ.


representation (Ermolov et al., 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2022; Hua et al., 2021).
Here, using Oja’s online principal component algorithm (Oja, 1982) as a tractable example, we
demonstrate that the speed of whitening can affect the accuracy of the learned representation.
Consider a neuron whose input and output at time t are respectively st ∈ Rd and yt := v⊤ st , where
v ∈ Rd represents the synaptic weights connecting the inputs to the neuron. Oja’s algorithm learns
the top principal component of the inputs by updating the vector v as follows:
                                       v ← v + ζ(yt st − yt2 v),                                     (15)
where ζ > 0 is the step size.
Next, consider a population of 2 ≤ n ≤ d neurons with outputs yt ∈ Rn and feedforward synaptic
weight vectors v1 , . . . , vn ∈ Rd connecting the inputs st to the n neurons. The goal is to project
the inputs onto their n-dimensional principal subspace. Running n instances of Oja’s algorithm in
parallel without lateral connections results in collapse — each synaptic weight vector vi converges
to the top principal component. One way to avoid collapse is to whiten the output yt using recurrent
connections, Figure 5 (left). Here we show that when the subspace projection and output whitening
are learned simultaneously, it is critical that the whitening transformation is learned sufficiently fast.
We set d = 3, n = 2 and generate i.i.d. inputs st ∼ N (0, diag(5, 2, 1)). We initialize two random
vectors v1 , v2 ∈ R3 with independent N (0, 1) entries. At each time step t, we use the projection
xt := (v1⊤ st , v2⊤ st ) as the input to either Algorithm 1 or 2 and we let yt be the output; that is,
yt = M−1 xt or yt = (WW⊤ )−1 xt . For i = 1, 2, we update vi according to equation 15 with
ζ = 10−3 and with vi (resp. yt,i ) in place of v (resp. yt ). We update the recurrent weights M or W
according to Algorithm 1 or 2. To measure the performance, we define
      Subspace error := ∥V(V⊤ V)−1 V⊤ − diag(1, 1, 0)∥2Frob ,             V := [v1 , v2 ] ∈ R3×2 ,
which is equal to zero when v1 , v2 span the 2-dimensional principal subspace of the inputs. We plot
the subspace error for Algorithms 1 and 2 using learning rates η = ζ and η = 10ζ, Figure 5 (right).
The results suggest that in order to learn the correct subspace, the whitening transformation must
be learned sufficiently fast relative to the feedforward vectors vi ; for additional results along these
lines, see (Pehlevan et al., 2018, section 6). Therefore, since interneurons accelerate learning of the
whitening transform, they are useful for accurate or optimal representation learning.

8    D ISCUSSION
We analyzed the gradient flow dynamics of 2 recurrent neural networks for ZCA whitening — one
with direct recurrent connections and one with interneurons. For spectral initializations we can
analytically estimate the convergence time for both gradient flows. For nonspectral initializations,
we show numerically that the convergence times are close to the spectral initializations with the
same initial spectrum. Our results show that the recurrent neural network with interneurons is more
robust to initialization.
An interesting question is whether including interneurons in other classes of recurrent neural net-
works also accelerates the learning dynamics of those networks. We hypothesize that interneurons
accelerate learning dynamics when the objective for the network with interneurons can be viewed as
an overparameterization of the objective for the recurrent neural network with direct connections.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Yanis Bahroun, Nikolai Chapochnikov, Lyndon Duong, Johannes Friedrich, Siavash
Golkar, Jason Moore and Tiberiu Teşileanu for helpful feedback on an earlier draft of this work.
C. Pehlevan acknowledges support from the Intel Corporation.

R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks: Implicit
  acceleration by overparameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  244–253. PMLR, 2018.

Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann Lecun. VICReg: Variance-invariance-covariance regular-
  ization for self-supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.

Horace Barlow and Peter Földiák. Adaptation and Decorrelation in the Cortex, pp. 54–72. Addison-
  Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., USA, 1989. ISBN 020118348X.

Horace B Barlow. Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. Sensory
  Communication, 1(01), 1961.

Anthony J Bell and Terrence J Sejnowski. The “independent components” of natural scenes are edge
  filters. Vision Research, 37(23):3327–3338, 1997.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Matteo Carandini and David J Heeger. Normalization as a canonical neural computation. Nature
 Reviews Neuroscience, 13(1):51–62, 2012.

Nikolai M Chapochnikov, Cengiz Pehlevan, and Dmitri B Chklovskii. Normative and mechanistic
  model of an adaptive circuit for efficient encoding and feature extraction. bioRxiv, 2021.

TA Christensen, BR Waldrop, ID Harrow, and JG Hildebrand. Local interneurons and informa-
  tion processing in the olfactory glomeruli of the moth manduca sexta. Journal of Comparative
  Physiology A, 173(4):385–399, 1993.

Lyndon R Duong, David Lipshutz, David J Heeger, Dmitri B Chklovskii, and Eero P Simoncelli.
  Statistical whitening of neural populations with gain-modulating interneurons. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.11955, 2023.

Yonina C Eldar and Alan V Oppenheim. MMSE whitening and subspace whitening. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Information Theory, 49(7):1846–1851, 2003.

Aleksandr Ermolov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Enver Sangineto, and Nicu Sebe. Whitening for self-
  supervised representation learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3015–
  3024. PMLR, 2021.

Rainer W Friedrich and Gilles Laurent. Dynamic optimization of odor representations by slow
  temporal patterning of mitral cell activity. Science, 291(5505):889–894, 2001.

Rainer W Friedrich and Gilles Laurent. Dynamics of olfactory bulb input and output activity during
  odor stimulation in zebrafish. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91(6):2658–2669, 2004.

Gauthier Gidel, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Implicit regularization of discrete gradient
  dynamics in linear neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.

Sonya Giridhar, Brent Doiron, and Nathaniel N Urban. Timescale-dependent shaping of correlation
  by olfactory bulb lateral inhibition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(14):
  5843–5848, 2011.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Siavash Golkar, David Lipshutz, Yanis Bahroun, Anirvan Sengupta, and Dmitri Chklovskii. A
  simple normative network approximates local non-Hebbian learning in the cortex. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7283–7295, 2020.
Adam J Granger, Wengang Wang, Keiramarie Robertson, Mahmoud El-Rifai, Andrea F Zanello,
  Karina Bistrong, Arpiar Saunders, Brian W Chow, Vicente Nuñez, Miguel Turrero Garcı́a, et al.
  Cortical chat+ neurons co-transmit acetylcholine and gaba in a target-and brain-region-specific
  manner. Elife, 9:e57749, 2020.
Olivier Gschwend, Nixon M Abraham, Samuel Lagier, Frédéric Begnaud, Ivan Rodriguez, and Alan
  Carleton. Neuronal pattern separation in the olfactory bulb improves odor discrimination learning.
  Nature Neuroscience, 18(10):1474–1482, 2015.
Tianyu Hua, Wenxiao Wang, Zihui Xue, Sucheng Ren, Yue Wang, and Hang Zhao. On feature
  decorrelation in self-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 9598–9608, 2021.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Erkki Oja. Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications.
  Neural networks, 13(4-5):411–430, 2000.
Agnan Kessy, Alex Lewin, and Korbinian Strimmer. Optimal whitening and decorrelation. The
  American Statistician, 72(4):309–314, 2018.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s thesis, University
  of Toronto, 2009.
Simon B Laughlin. The role of sensory adaptation in the retina. Journal of Experimental Biology,
  146(1):39–62, 1989.
Antoine Nissant, Cedric Bardy, Hiroyuki Katagiri, Kerren Murray, and Pierre-Marie Lledo. Adult
  neurogenesis promotes synaptic plasticity in the olfactory bulb. Nature Neuroscience, 12(6):728–
  730, 2009.
Erkki Oja. Simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer. Journal of Mathematical
  Biology, 15(3):267–273, 1982.
Cengiz Pehlevan and Dmitri B Chklovskii. A normative theory of adaptive dimensionality reduction
  in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Cengiz Pehlevan, Anirvan M Sengupta, and Dmitri B Chklovskii. Why do similarity matching
  objectives lead to Hebbian/anti-Hebbian networks? Neural Computation, 30(1):84–124, 2018.
Kurt A Sailor, Matthew T Valley, Martin T Wiechert, Hermann Riecke, Gerald J Sun, Wayne Adams,
  James C Dennis, Shirin Sharafi, Guo-li Ming, Hongjun Song, et al. Persistent structural plasticity
  optimizes sensory information processing in the olfactory bulb. Neuron, 91(2):384–396, 2016.
Arpiar Saunders, Ian A Oldenburg, Vladimir K Berezovskii, Caroline A Johnson, Nathan D Kingery,
  Hunter L Elliott, Tiao Xie, Charles R Gerfen, and Bernardo L Sabatini. A direct gabaergic output
  from the basal ganglia to frontal cortex. Nature, 521(7550):85–89, 2015.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dy-
  namics of learning in deep linear neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. A mathematical theory of semantic
  development in deep neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
  (23):11537–11546, 2019.
Gordon M Shepherd. Dendrodendritic synapses: past, present and future. Annals of the New York
  Academy of Sciences, 1170, 2009.
Gordon M Shepherd, Chen Wei R, and Charles A Greer. Olfactory bulb. In Gordon M Shepherd
  (ed.), The Synaptic Organization of the Brain, chapter 5, pp. 165–216. Oxford University Press,
  2004.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eero P Simoncelli and Bruno A Olshausen. Natural image statistics and neural representation.
  Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24(1):1193–1216, 2001.
Piergiorgio Strata and Robin Harvey. Dale’s principle. Brain Research Bulletin, 50(5):349–350,
  1999.
Salma Tarmoun, Guilherme Franca, Benjamin D Haeffele, and Rene Vidal. Understanding the
  dynamics of gradient flow in overparameterized linear models. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10153–10161. PMLR, 2021.
Adrian A Wanner and Rainer W Friedrich. Whitening of odor representations by the wiring diagram
  of the olfactory bulb. Nature Neuroscience, 23(3):433–442, 2020.
Barry Wark, Brian Nils Lundstrom, and Adrienne Fairhall. Sensory adaptation. Current Opinion in
  Neurobiology, 17(4):423–429, 2007.
Zachary M Westrick, David J Heeger, and Michael S Landy. Pattern adaptation and normalization
  reweighting. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(38):9805–9816, 2016.
Clarissa J Whitmire and Garrett B Stanley. Rapid sensory adaptation redux: a circuit perspective.
  Neuron, 92(2):298–315, 2016.
Stuart D Wick, Martin T Wiechert, Rainer W Friedrich, and Hermann Riecke. Pattern orthogonal-
  ization via channel decorrelation by adaptive networks. Journal of Computational Neuroscience,
  28(1):29–45, 2010.
Thomas B Woolf, Gordon M Shepherd, and Charles A Greer. Serial reconstructions of granule cell
  spines in the mammalian olfactory bulb. Synapse, 7(3):181–192, 1991.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12310–
  12320. PMLR, 2021.


A      S ADDLE POINT PROPERTY

Here we recall the following minimax property for a function that satisfies the saddle point property
(Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004, section 5.4).
Theorem 1. Let V ⊆ Rn , W ⊆ Rm and f : V × W → R. Suppose f satisfies the saddle point
property; that is, there exists (a∗ , b∗ ) ∈ V × W such that
                 f (a∗ , b) ≤ f (a∗ , b∗ ) ≤ f (a, b∗ ),   for all (a, b) ∈ V × W.
Then
                        min max f (a, b) = max min f (a, b) = f (a∗ , b∗ ).
                        a∈V b∈W                b∈W a∈V


B      R ELATION TO NEURONAL CIRCUITS

In this section, we modify Algorithm 2 to satisfy additional biological constraints and we map the
modified algorithm onto the vertebrate olfactory bulb.

B.1    D ECOUPLING THE INTERNEURON SYNAPSES

The neural circuit implementation of Algorithm 2 requires that the principal neuron-to-interneuron
synaptic weight matrix W⊤ is the negative transpose of the interneuron-to-principal neuron synaptic
weight matrix −W. In general, enforcing this symmetry is not biologically plausible, and is com-
monly referred to as the weight transport problem. Here, following (Golkar et al., 2020, appendix
D), we decouple the synapses and show that the (asymptotic) symmetry of the synaptic weight ma-
trices follows from the symmetry of the local Hebbian/anti-Hebbian updates.

                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We begin by replacing W and W⊤ in Algorithm 2 with Wzy and Wyz , respectively. Then the
neural activities are given by
              yt ← yt + γ(xt − Wzy zt ),                  zt ← zt + γ(Wyz yt − zt ),             (16)
which converge to (Wzy Wyz )−1 xt and zt = Wyz yt . After the neural activities converge, the
synaptic weights are updated according to the update rules
                                 Wzy ← Wzy + η(yt z⊤
                                                   t − Wzy )
                                 Wyz ← Wyz + η(zt yt⊤ − Wyz ).
Let Wzy,t and Wyz,t denote the values of the synaptic weight matrices after t updates. By iterating
the above updates, we see that the difference between the weight matrices after t updates is given by
                                   ⊤                  t     ⊤
                          Wyz,t − Wzy,t = (1 − η) (Wyz,0 − Wzy,0 ).
Therefore, provided 0 < η < 1, the difference decays exponentially.

B.2   S IGN - CONSTRAINING THE INTERNEURON WEIGHTS

In equation 16, the matrix Wyz is preceded by a positive sign and the matrix Wzy is preceded by a
negative sign, which is consistent with the fact that the principal neuron-to-interneuron synapses are
excitatory whereas the interneuron-to-principal neuron synapses are inhibitory. However, this inter-
pretation is superficial because the matrices are not constrained to be non-negative, so the network
can violate Dale’s principle.
One approach to enforce Dale’s principle is to take projected gradient descent steps when updating
the synaptic weight matrices, which results in the offline updates

                                                   1      ⊤
                           Wzy ← Wzy + η             YZ − Wzy           ,
                                                   T                  +

                                                   1
                           Wyz ← Wyz + η             ZY⊤ − Wyz          ,
                                                   T                  +

and online updates
                               Wzy ← [Wzy + η(yt z⊤
                                                  t − Wzy )]+ ,
                               Wyz ← [Wyz + η(zt yt⊤ − Wyz )]+ ,
where [·]+ denotes the element-wise rectification operation. This results in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3: A whitening network with interneurons and sign-constrained weights
  input centered inputs {xt }; parameters γ, η
  initialize non-negative matrices Wyz , Wzy
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
     repeat
        yt ← yt + γ(xt − Wzy zt )
        zt ← zt + γ(Wyz yt − zt )
     until convergence
     Wyz ← [Wyz + η(zt yt⊤ − Wyz )]+
     Wzy ← [Wzy + η(yt z⊤    t − Wzy )]+
  end for

In general, this modification results in a network output that does not correspond to ZCA whitening
of the inputs. That being said, it is still worth comparing the performance of the network to the net-
work with interneurons derived in section 5. In Figure 6, we compare the performance of the offline
versions of Algorithms 2 and 3. We see that Algorithm 3 equilibrates at a rate that is comparable to
Algorithm 2 (and therefore much faster than Algorithm 1 for large α). In particular, this modified
algorithm appears to also exhibit the accelerated dynamics due to the overparamterization of the
objective.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Comparison of whitening error and eigenvalue evolution for the offline algorithms (with
non-spectral initializations) corresponding to the network with interneurons with unconstrained or
non-negative weights. The lines and shaded regions respectively denote the means and 95% confi-
dence intervals over 10 runs.


As expected, the outputs of the projected gradient descent algorithm are not fully whitened — after
the synaptic dynamics of Algorithm 3 equilibrate, the eigenvalues of the output covariance Cyy are
{1.39, 1.01, 1.00, 0.98, 0.61}. This can be compared with the eigenvalues of the input covariance
matrix Cxx : {24.01, 16.42, 10.45, 6.59, 3.28}, which suggests that the network significantly nor-
malizes the eigenvalues of the output covariance without exactly performing ZCA whitening. In
general, understanding the exact statistical transformation that results from the projected gradient
descent algorithm is more mathematically challenging. For instance, in the case of Algorithm 2,
                                               1/2
the weights W adapt so that WW⊤ = Cxx ; that is, the algorithm solves a symmetric matrix
factorization problem whose solutions can be written in closed form in terms of the SVD of the
covariance matrix Cxx . In the case of Algorithm 3, the algorithm is essentially solving for the op-
                                                                            1/2
timal (approximate) non-negative symmetric matrix factorization of Cxx , for which there do not
exist general closed form solutions. That being said, the empirical results suggest that the more
biologically realistic network still performs rapid statistical adaptation.

B.3   M APPING A LGORITHM 3 ONTO THE OLFACTORY BULB

In vertebrates, an early stage of olfactory processing occurs in the olfactory bulb. The olfactory
bulb receives direct olfactory inputs, which it processes and transmits to higher order brain regions
(Shepherd et al., 2004), Figure 7. Olfactory receptor neurons project to the olfactory bulb, where
their axon terminals cluster by receptor type into spherical structures called glomeruli. Mitral cells,
which are the main projection neurons of the olfactory bulb, receive direct inputs from the olfactory
receptor neuron axons and output to the rest of the brain. Each mitral cell extends its apical dendrite
into a single glomerulus, where it forms synapses with the axons of the olfactory receptor neurons
expressing a common receptor type. The mitral cell activities are modulated by lateral inhibition
from interneurons called granule cells, which are axonless neurons that form reciprocal dendroden-
dritic synapses with the basal dendrites of mitral cells (Shepherd, 2009). Experimental evidence
indicates that the olfactory bulb transforms its inputs so that mitral cell responses to distinct odors
are approximately orthogonal (Friedrich & Laurent, 2001; 2004; Giridhar et al., 2011; Gschwend
et al., 2015; Wanner & Friedrich, 2020), a transformation referred to as pattern separation, which is
closely related to statistical whitening (Wick et al., 2010).
We explore the possibility that the mitral-granule cell microcircuit implements Algorithm 3, Figure
7. In this case, the vectors xt and yt represent the inputs to and outputs from the mitral cells,

                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Figure 7: A simplified schematic of the olfactory bulb.



respectively. The vector zt represents the granule cell outputs. We let Wyz (resp. −Wzy ) denote
the mitral cell-to-granule cell (resp. granule cell-to-mitral cell) synaptic weights.
We compare our model with additional experimental observations. First, Algorithm 3 learns by
adapting the matrices Wyz and Wzy . This is in line with experimental observations that gran-
ule cells in the olfactory bulb are highly plastic suggesting that the dendrodendritic synapses are
a synaptic substrate for experience dependent modulation of the olfactory bulb output (Nissant
et al., 2009; Sailor et al., 2016). Second, a consequence of Algorithm 3 is that the mitral cell-to-
granule cell synapses and granule cell-to-mitral cell synapses are (asymptotically) symmetric; that
               ⊤
is, Wzy = Wyz     . There is experimental evidence in support of this symmetry — the dendrodendritic
synapses are mainly present in reciprocal pairs (Woolf et al., 1991). In other words, the connectivity
matrix of mitral cell-to-granule cell synapses (the matrix obtained by setting the non-zero entries
in Wyz to 1) is approximately equal to the transpose of the connectivity matrix of granule cell-to-
mitral cell synapses. Finally, Algorithm 3 requires that k ≥ n; that is, there are more granule cells
than mitral cells. This is consistent with measurements in the olfactory bulb indicating that there are
approximately 50–100 times more granule cells than mitral cells (Shepherd et al., 2004).



C     P ROOFS OF OUR MAIN RESULTS

C.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. Let σ1 (t), . . . , σn (t) be solutions of the ODE 7 and define M(t) := Ux Σ(t)U⊤
                                                                                       x , where
Σ(t) := diag(σ1 (t), . . . , σn (t)). Then


                                                 λ21              λ2n

                        dM(t)
                              = Ux diag                , . . . ,               U⊤
                                                                                x − In
                         dt                    σ1 (t)2           σn (t)2
                                = M(t)−1 Cxx M(t)−1 − In .

In particular, we see that M(t) must be the unique solution of the ODE 6, where uniqueness of
solutions follows because the right-hand-side of equation 6 is locally Lipschitz continuous on its
domain of definition. Equation 8 then follows from the ODE 7 and the chain rule.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proof. Suppose σi (0) ≤ λi for i = 1, . . . , n. By equation 8, σi (t) ≤ λi for all t ≥ 0 and so

                  2    2 2          2        2 2          4t
           (σi (t) − λi ) ≤ (σi (0) − λi ) exp − √              ,             i = 1, . . . , n.
                                                           λi
Therefore,
                                 m
                                 X                                       4t
                   ℓ(M(t))2 =        (σi (t)2 − λ2i )2 ≤ ℓ(M0 )2 exp − √        .
                                 i=1
                                                                         λmax

It follows that equation 10 holds. Now suppose σi (0) ≥ λi for some i = 1, . . . , n. By equation 7,
                     σi (t)2 − λ2i ≥ (σi (0) − t)2 − λ2i ,       t ∈ [0, σi (0) − λi ].
It follows that equation 11 holds.

C.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

Proof. Define A(t) := W(t)W(t)⊤ . By the product rule,
                          dA(t)
                                 = A(t)−1 Cxx + Cxx A(t)−1 − 2A(t).               (17)
                            dt
Then, by the chain rule and equation 17, for all t ≥ 0,
   dℓ(A(t))2

                               2
                                               dA(t)
               = 4 Tr A(t) − Cxx A(t)
       dt                                         dt
                                        2
               = −4 Tr A(t) − Cxx − 4 Tr (A(t)2 − Cxx )(A(t)2 − A(t)Cxx A(t)−1 )
                               2

                                        2
               = −4 Tr A(t)2 − Cxx − 4 Tr (A(t)2 − Cxx )A(t)(A(t)2 − Cxx )A(t)−1


                = −4ℓ(A(t))2 − 4∥A(t)−1/2 (A(t)2 − Cxx )A(t)1/2 ∥2Frob .
Suppose W0 W0⊤ is a spectral initialization. Then A(t) commutes with Cxx and so
              dℓ(A(t))2
                         = −8ℓ(A(t))2          ⇒             ℓ(A(t)) = ℓ(A(0)) exp(−4t).
                  dt
Thus, equation 13 holds. For general initializations,
              dℓ(A(t))2
                         ≤ −4ℓ(A(t))2            ⇒           ℓ(A(t)) ≤ ℓ(A(0)) exp(−2t).
                  dt
Therefore, inequality equation 14 holds.


                                                   16
