Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING BASED
I NSIGHT S ELECTION P OLICY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         We live in the era of ubiquitous sensing and computing. More and more data is
         being collected and processed from devices, sensors, and systems. This opens up
         opportunities to discover patterns from these data that could help in gaining better
         understanding into the source that produces them. This is useful in a wide range
         of domains, especially in the area of personal health, in which such knowledge
         could help in allowing users to comprehend their behavior and indirectly improve
         their lifestyle. Insight generators are systems that identify such patterns and ver-
         balize them in a readable text format, referred to as insights. The selection of
         insights is done using a scoring algorithm which aims at optimizing this process
         based on multiple objectives, e.g., factual correctness, usefulness, and interest-
         ingness of insights. In this paper, we propose a novel Reinforcement Learning
         (RL) framework that for the first time recommends health insights in a dynamic
         environment based on user feedback and their lifestyle quality estimates. With the
         use of highly reusable and simple principles of automatic user simulation based
         on real data, we demonstrate in this preliminary study that the RL solution may
         improve the selection of insights towards multiple pre-defined objectives.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The latest developments in big data, internet of things and personal health monitoring have led to
the massive increase in the ease and scale at which data has been collected and processed. Learning
from the information present in the data has shown to help to gain wisdom to better run businesses,
manage health care services and even maintain a healthier lifestyle. Such understanding are mostly
in the form of identifying significant rise or fall of a certain measurement given a context of interest.
Let’s say that the sleep data logs of a user of a health monitoring service shows that the time at
which they went to sleep was later during the weekends in comparison to weekdays. This can be
informed to the user as a statement such as, “You went to sleep later during the weekends than the
weekdays”. Here, the time at which they went to sleep is the measurement and the fact of the day
being a weekday or a weekend is the context of interest. We call such statements as ’insights’.
Providing such insights that accurately describe the scenarios during which certain health parameter
improved or deteriorated could enable the user to make better lifestyle choices. Moreover, it has been
accepted Abraham & Michie (2008) that providing relevant information to the user could improve
their behavior.
The insight generation task can be seen as a natural language generation task where a generator
model creates appropriate insight statements. A generalized framework for such an insight gen-
erator (Genf) was proposed, in which components to analyze the data and generate the statements
played an important role (Susaiyah et al., 2020). More importantly, the framework has a provision to
capture user feedback mechanism that understands what type of insights they are interested in. Im-
plementations of this framework have shown to incorporate the “overgenerate and rank” approach,
in which all possible candidates as per definition are generated and later filtered using a calculated
rank or a score (Gatt & Krahmer, 2018; Varges & Mellish, 2010).
The selection of the most relevant insight via ranking or scoring from a list of multiple insights is an
ongoing research topic. Earlier works have utilized purely statistical insight selection mechanisms
where the top ranking insights based on a statistical algorithm are selected (Härmä & Helaoui,
2016), often combined with machine-readable knowledge (Musto et al., 2017). Other approaches


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


combined neural networks with the knowledge of statistical algorithms with simulated user feedback
(Susaiyah et al., 2021). All the above techniques have limitations with respect to over-simplification
of user-preference or need for a huge amount of data.
On the other hand, as noted in Afsar et al. (2021), the very nature of a recommendation is a sequential
decision problem thus that could be modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). Reinforcement
Learning (RL) can therefore be used to solve this problem, taking into account the dynamics of the
user’s interactions with the system, its long-term engagement to specific topics and more complex
feedbacks than binary ratings.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) based framework to rec-
ommend health insights to users based on their health status and feedback. While it incorporates
previously developed insights generation techniques (Susaiyah et al., 2020), the presented frame-
work is based on a completely new training pipeline that uses real-time simulated data instead of
retrospective data and an objective of choosing the best insight instead of assigning scores to all in-
sights. By the use of DRL, the presented system is able to deliver both useful and preferable insights.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no other existing system capable of reaching both of those
objectives. We evaluate it in this preliminary study in terms of significance of life quality improve-
ments, speed and accuracy of adaptation to the dynamics of user preferences, and deploy-ability in
a real life scenario.



2   R ELATED WORK

Traditionally, insights were generated using associate rule mining techniques (Agrawal & Shafer,
1996), where associations between different contexts in a dataset are discovered. However, they
do not work for continuous variables. This led to the work of Härmä & Helaoui (2016) where
both continuous and categorical variables were considered. However, it lacked the ability to adapt
to specific users, which is very important as what we consider as an insight is highly subjective.
Later, a Genf was introduced in Susaiyah et al. (2020) to incorporate the users as part of the insight
generation system. This framework requires highly dynamic mechanisms to rank and recommend
the insights based on the dynamics of user interests.
To have a clear understanding of the main goals of this task, the survey Pramod & Bafna (2022)
summarizes and presents ten challenges to overcome for conversational recommender systems. As
one of them, our approach was designed to respond to nine out of the ten, the latest being only related
to dialogue management, which is not part of the scope of the present study. The main challenges
that we focus on are to: 1) keep the reliability in the ratings given by the user, 2) minimize the time
spent for rating, 3) allow cold start recommendations, 4) balance cognitive load against user control,
5) remove user’s need to tell the technical requirement, 6) allow a fallback recommendation when
no items found, 7) limit item presentation complexity, 8) allow domain-dependent recommendations
using a Genf, and 9) convince users about the recommendation by presenting facts.
The neural insight selection model presented in Susaiyah et al. (2021) was agnostic to the overall
objective of the user to use the insights: to improve a behavior/performance. The authors modeled
the problem as a scoring objective that assigns a score between 0 and 1 on how relevant it is to the
user. Tops insights were selected on need basis in order to improve the systems understanding of
users preference. The main drawback of this approach is that it only focuses on insight selection
for user preferences and used supervised learning from binary feedback. Therefore, it could neither
consider the long term nor short term impact a given insight will produce for a given user. Nowadays,
the problem of long time interaction, understand daily recommendation over multiple months, can
be solved using DRL. However, DRL is known to be a very consuming approach in terms of sample
efficiency whether being model-free as policy-gradient, value-based, actor critic or model-based.
All DRL algorithms as SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), A3C (Mnih et al., 2016), DDPG (Lillicrap
et al., 2015), DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) or PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) suffer from this problem
and require, on average, several millions of interactions with their environment to solve complex
problems as demonstrated in their paper. This is even more problematic as the continuous supervised
learning in Susaiyah et al. (2021) already required on average 15.6 labelled insights with the user
feedback every day.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To implement such a DRL approach in the healthcare domain, several challenges need to be solved
as described in Riachi et al. (2021). Usually data needs to be obtained through time-consuming,
and not necessarily realistic, studies requiring the patient to wear electronic devices. Therefore,
this leads to the usage of limited observational data, which denies the freedom to explore different
interaction strategies during the training process. As a solution to solve this issue in DRL, dialogue
(Zhao et al., 2021) or video game (Young et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020) approaches, rely on episodic
memory to exploit the observations in order to optimize both the training and decision processes.
Researchers also worked on other strategies such as designing simulations from the data itself and
plenty of examples can be found in the literature as HeartPole and GraphSim (Liventsev et al.,
2021), or the dozens of RL applications presented in Yu et al. (2019). Another major challenge, as
detailed in Riachi et al. (2021), is the design of the most appropriate reward function. To this end,
RL solutions often exploit counterfactuals available in their own collected data, or datasets such
as MIMIC-III (Johnson et al., 2016), to design their environment. Indeed, knowing what would
have happened taking another decision allows for a more efficient reward function and training, but
requires a careful and manual design. This conception, then, makes it difficult to reuse the ideas
from one specific problem to another.
In an objective of simplifying the reusability of a such DRL approach, the authors focused on devel-
oping an environment in which the selection process is given an unlimited amount of data to learn.
To leverage the limitations about the data, this work presents a generic replication procedure for
individuals’ behaviors from existing data, requiring only start and stop times of activities allowing
to automatically create a simulated user. Even though the selection problem is represented as an
MDP by the DRL policy, this user simulator was designed as a Gaussian-based probabilistic state
machine. From the use of this state machine, the policy network can learn through trial and error on
how its actions impact the simulation, based on very simple assumptions, without the need of coun-
terfactuals in the original dataset. Moreover, the probabilistic nature of the simulation generates an
infinite, yet realistic amount of data, therefore not requiring manually designed reward functions to
guide the policy during its training.
The approach detailed in Susaiyah et al. (2021) proposed to use an insight generator with a neural
network to select insights to be given to the user. Depending on the simulated feedback, the system
was able to change the selected insights and was therefore demonstrated to be robust to the user
interests when tested with preferences variations. The role of this preliminary study is to show
the interest of using DRL instead of supervised learning, requiring a continuous training on the
current preferences of the user. Moreover, the reward system of RL allows taking into account more
complex metrics of performance than just binary preferences (e.g., life quality improvements such
as sleep quality). The experiments presented here show the robustness of this approach, considering
the variability and complexity of the simulated user’s behavior and associated preferences. In order
to give to the reader the easiest explanation of our approach, we use the same sleeping simulation
example throughout this paper.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
We designed a complete training pipeline, presented in Figure 1, composed of 3 stages that are
repeated every day: (1) insight generation, (2) insight selection, (3) user lifestyle simulation. The
pipeline was designed to simulate the interaction between the policy network and a user, aiming at
two distinct objectives being to select insights that are appreciated by the user and beneficial to their
life quality.

3.1   I NSIGHT G ENERATION

Insight generation is performed using the insight generator described in Susaiyah et al. (2021). The
proper generation of insights is based on predefined schemas of comparison such as
                  sleep period : 1 measurement sleep period : 2 mean : 2
                short period : 1 measurement measurement benchmark : 2
with :1 and :2 respectively referring to subset 1 and 2 that are compared. In the above exam-
ple, the first schema states that all insights that compare a given measurement across two sub-
sets of time-periods like months, weeks, days of week, etc. A example from this schema would


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


be, ”You sleep less on Mondays than the other days”. The second schema compares a measure-
ment during a period with a predefined benchmark value such as 8 hours of sleep per night or
time of going to bed at around 11PM. For example, such an insights would be: ”You sleep less
than 8 hours on Mondays”. The queries to extract the relevant data subsets are routinely called
by the system to validate these insights. This approach allows for a very precise control over
the generation process, encoding all the possible comparisons between two subsets of the data.
                                                  From those comparisons, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov
                                                  test is computed on the two subsets of all insights
                                                  to score their individual statistical significance.
                                                  The non-significant insights, with a pvalue <
                                                  0.05, are filtered and removed. Subsequently, a
                                                  score for relevance (ScoreF ) is calculated, deter-
                                                  mined by both the completeness of the data and
                                                  the tolerance level as shown in Equation 1. The
                                                  first factor is calculated using the expected rate
                                                  of sampling of the data Fexp that is preset man-
                                                  ually depending upon the data source, the time
                                                  period of the queried data T , and the number of
                                                  data samples available Nrec . The second factor,
                                                  is calculated using γ, a weighting factor that de-
                                                  termines the slope of the sigmoid function and δ,
                                                  the difference in the means of the measurements
Figure 1: Representation of the daily insight se- across the two contexts.
lection pipeline.                                                    Nrec             1
                                                       ScoreF =              ∗                    (1)
                                                                   Fexp ∗ T 1 + exp(− γδ   τ )

Each insight is assigned a feature vector of size NT based on the bag of words (BoW) embedding.
This encodes, into a vector format, the number of occurrences of each word of a predefined dictio-
nary of words present in the insight. Finally, K-means clustering is performed on the feature vectors
using Euclidean distances. Only the insights having the highest relevance scores are chosen forward
from each of the K clusters.

3.2   I NSIGHT S ELECTION

From the feature vectors of the available insights after generation, the policy network was trained to
directly select one of the NC insights that are composed of the K-clustered insights and NC − K
benchmark insights, ensuring the policy network to always have comparison with benchmark values
for each measurement.
Finally, to simulate the everyday lifestyle of a user, we opted for a state machine with probabilistic
and time dependent transitions. Depending on the insight that is selected by the policy network, the
behavior of the user is assumed to tend towards the optimal behavior implied by the insight. For
example, an insight as ’You sleep around 3 hours later than 21:00 on weekdays’ implies to the user
to sleep earlier. A new day of simulation is then computed and new data about the user (e.g., sleep
duration, exercise duration, etc.) is generated. If the policy is trained on user satisfaction, it will be
rewarded by a discrete feedback whether the topics from the selected insight meets the interests of
the user or not. Otherwise, the policy network is rewarded using metrics evaluating the life quality
of the user.

3.3   U SER S IMULATION

In an effort to be able to model any kind of time dependent behavior, our system relies only on three
types of input data for each activity the user might be doing, i.e., the day, the start time and the
stop time on which it happened. From this information, a state machine is automatically constructed
with one state representing each activity. Additionally, one other state, named Idle, is created to play
the role of link between all the others. In this state machine, each transition between two states is
modelled as a Bayesian Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) (Roberts et al., 1998; Blei & Jordan, 2006;
Attias, 2000) in order to preserve the random nature of human behavior depending on the current
time and day in the simulation. An example of a state machine with seven activities is presented


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in Figure 2. As the reader can note, all the possible activities are linked to the state Idle by one
transition in each direction.


(a) State machine with seven states
representing the seven possible activ-   (b) Associated probabilities to Sleeping state transitions for
ities plus the Idle state                Wednesday and Saturday in function of the time of the day

                   Figure 2: Example of state machine and associated probabilities


3.3.1   DATA EXTRACTION

In order to construct this state machine, the process is composed of three steps: (1) data filtering that
depends on the activities considered and extraction of features such as start and stop time or duration,
(2) Gaussian estimation with optional iterative component reduction and (3) creation of a new state in
the state machine. As presented in the algorithm 1, two Bayesian GMMs are computed for every day
of the week and every activity to simulate. First, the start times, stop times and durations related to
a specific day and activity is filtered. Then, a Bayesian GMM is computed, using the library Scikit-
Learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011), from the filtered start times, and another one from the filtered stop
times of the activity. An example of probabilities associated with the activation of the state Sleeping
is given in Figure 2 for two different days of the week after the Bayesian GMM estimations. In
this example, we can observe that the wake time is on average later and more scattered for Saturday
than for Wednesday. The initial number of component for the GMM was set to 24 and is decreased
until a mixture model can be computed from the data. This value has been empirically selected
and is suited for the later experiments presented in this paper, but may need to be modified. In the
case where one considered activity would be happening consistently more than 24 times a day, a
higher number of Gaussians would be needed to simulate it accurately. Finally, the Bayesian GMM
corresponding to the start times of the activity is added to the transition from the state Idle of the
state machine and the other GMM added to the transition to the state Idle.
Additionally, two other constraints are added to the transitions: the horizon and the proportion of
the activity during the day. The horizon constraint is a mechanism of attention that is used here to
filter the sampled points from the GMM and ensures that (1) transition from Idle to any other state is
selected within a range of 3.5 hours and (2) transition from a given state back to Idle happens within
the maximum duration of the activity observed in the data. The proportion constraint is used to
balance the activation likelihood of all states by normalizing them by their number of occurrences in
a given day. Indeed, the GMM only provides a time-dependent activation probability, independent
of other states. For example, incorporating the proportion of Working as a constraint, the simulator
knows that the likelihood of the occurrence of Working will be much greater than Shopping on the
weekdays contrary to the weekend.

3.3.2   RUN TIME EXECUTION

On run time, the simulation starts on Monday at 00:00 and is incremented by one minute at
each new step. The first state to be activated is Idle and the following process, represented
in Figure 3, is repeated for each new active state. To illustrate how a transition is selected,
we will consider the state machine in Figure 2, the current active state Idle and the current
time 12:00. For all the possible transition from Idle (i.e., to Sleeping, Working, Shopping,
Eating, Exercising, Relaxing or Travelling), the transition processing in Figure 3 is repeated.

                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                   The first step is to sample 100 transi-
                                                                   tion candidates, randomly generated
                                                                   from the GMM associated to the tran-
                                                                   sition, as 12:20, 4:30 or 21:45 in this
                                                                   example. Then, the candidates re-
                                                                   ferring to transitions in the past are
                                                                   removed, such as 4:30. The third
                                                                   step is to remove candidate times fur-
                                                                   ther than the horizon constraint asso-
                                                                   ciated to the transition, here it corre-
                                                                   sponds to 3.5 hours, filtering 21:45.
                                                                   Finally, the transition with the high-
                                                                   est probability is selected from the re-
Figure 3: Representation of the state machine run time pro- maining candidates. Once this pro-
cess.                                                              cess has been repeated for every pos-
                                                                   sible transition, the one wielding the
                                                                   highest likelihood = probability ∗
proportion is selected. The simulation then advances until the transition time is reached. The new
state is activated, and the loop starts again. In case no activation is found, which happens by the end
of the day as there are fewer candidates, the simulation goes to the next time step.

3.4     R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING

3.4.1    O BSERVATIONS
However, to take its decisions, the policy network is
not able to see the underlying state machine repre-
senting the user nor the history of activated states.
Instead, it is able to see both the history of selected
insights for the last T days, with their impact on the
user (represented by life quality metrics) and the cur-
rently available insights as presented is figure 4. As
each day, the policy network selects one new insight,
one day is represented by a matrix with as many rows             Figure 4: Observation matrix
as the features dimension and 2 columns. The fea-
ture vector of the selected insight is represented ver-
tically while the second column contains information about the metrics to be optimized, for a given
day. In our example, these values are related to exercise duration, feedback about the selected insight
or sleep quality measures. When a new day of data is available, the oldest day matrix is removed, the
T days matrices are rolled to the left, the new day matrix is added to the right, and the NC available
insights are updated.

3.4.2    ACTIONS
We assume that the users improve their behavior when presented with relevant insights as mentioned
in Abraham & Michie (2008). For this, we define a rvalue to be the difference between the predefined
recommended value and the current value of a measurement. This factor helps to simulate behavior
change based on the insight presented to the user using Equation 2.
                                new value = old value + β ∗ rvalue                                     (2)
. Where β is a lifestyle improvement factor. For example, if an insights says that the user generally
sleeps 5 hours instead of 8 hours, the sleep will be modified to 5.3 hours with β = 0.1. Further, to
facilitate this, the Gaussian means µ are modified in the state machine by equation 3.
                                           µ = β ∗ rvalue ∗ µ                                          (3)

3.4.3    R EWARDS
For this study, we decided that the reward should translate (1) the improvements of the sleep quality,
(2) the exercise duration and (3) satisfaction of the user’s interests by giving them the insights they


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


want to see. In order to give a realistic sense of the user’s sleep quality, we decided to use the
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index or PSQI (Buysse et al., 1989). The PSQI is composed of 19 questions
grouped into seven components respectively related to subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep
duration, habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleeping medications and daytime
dysfunction. Each of these components are equally rated from 0 to 3 and summed to create a global
PSQI score, therefore ranging from 0 to 21. In this study, the simulation being rather simple on
purpose, only sleep duration and habitual sleep efficiency have been computed from the simulation
and the other components were assigned a constant value. This results in a global PSQI score ranging
from 4 to 10, the lower being the better. The exercise duration of the user is computed as the exercise
done in one week. Given our study example presented in figures 2, exercise can only happen on the
Tuesday, Saturday and Sunday, raising the optimal value to 180 minutes of exercise per week.
Finally, to incite the policy network to give insights that the user appreciates, we decided of four
different topics that could be selected as of interest for the user: sleep time, wake time, sleep duration
or exercise. At each epoch of training, a new order of those four topics is randomly generated. Every
three weeks, the topic of interest is modified following the previously generated order. If the selected
insight contains the current topic of interest, the reward can very simply be 1 and otherwise 0.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In order to create a digital twin of a real user, we used the American Time Use Survey 2003-2020
dataset. This dataset contains information about how people spend their time in a day of 24 hours,
each household being interviewed only once. From the 219,368 individuals interviewed, we focused
on the working population (21 to 50 years old) which represents 68 percent of the respondents.
Among the hundred of available activities, we only considered seven of them: sleeping, working,
eating, exercising, relaxing, shopping and travelling. We intentionally created a user with a difficult
sleep, as he/she is waking up in the middle of the night and also very early in the morning by
taking into account thousands of persons with very different lifestyles as it is the perfect example
for the policy network to work on. Indeed, the resulting simulated user has a great potential for
improvements, generating a lot of very relevant recommendation insights.
For the following experiments, the features encode 15 possible topics present in an insight: mea-
surement benchmark, exercise duration, sleep duration, weekday, wake time, sleep time, weekend,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, or Sunday. These topics have been se-
lected in order to inform the policy network about: the measurement conveyed in the insight, if it
compares it to a benchmark value or to which day of the week it refers to.
For both topic selection and insight selection objectives, we decided to go for the same number
of choices. That is, the number of topics (NT ) and the number of insights to select from (NC )
are both equal to 15. In the case of insight selection, 4 out of the 15 insights are reserved for
benchmark insights, which ensure that the policy network has enough choices at all times. For
the training of the policy network, the impact an insight can have on the simulation was entirely
described in the previous sections. For the test part presented in the next sections, we set an even
more difficult problem by dividing by two the lifestyle improvement factors and by ten the lifestyle
fallback factors. The values of interest available to the policy network every day were the PSQI with
its seven components, the exercise duration and the feedback from the user. The policy network had
access to the history of the past 7 days, which means T = 7.

4.1   I NSIGHT SELECTION FOR HEALTHCARE

For the first experiment, the reward was based on the PSQI and the exercise duration per week. In
order to evaluate the capacity of the policy to learn relevant selection behaviors, the training was
repeated with each of the following reward functions:
                                                −P SQI + 10
                                      rP SQI =                                                    (4)
                                                       6
                                                         TEXE
                                     rEXE = sigmoid(           )                                  (5)
                                                          180
                                      −P SQI + 10                 TEXE
                            rF U LL =                + sigmoid(          )                        (6)
                                            6                      180

                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             −P SQI + 10 TEXE
                             rF U LL LIN =              +                                         (7)
                                                  6       180
Moreover, to have a point of comparison, we performed two other tests by randomly selecting an
insight every day (i.e., RANDOM) and not selecting any insights at all (i.e., BASELINE). Each
epoch of RL was composed of 3 weeks of only simulation plus 21 weeks of interaction, which
means 147 actions required. As the process is time-consuming and this study is a preliminary study,
the policy network was trained only for 500,000 steps and required an accelerated training process
to be executed in a reasonable amount of time. For this reason, during the training, insights were
only computed once every week instead of every day.
                                                              In the figure 5 is presented how the
                                                              life quality of the simulated user
                                                              evolve over time with the different se-
                                                              lection policies. On the upper plot,
                                                              three policies are able to increase
                                                              the PSQI value within 35 days up to
                                                              4: the PSQI, FULL and FULL LIN
                                                              policies. The other policies, EXE and
                                                              RANDOM, are then able to reach the
                                                              same value within 120 days, while
                                                              the BASELINE stays around 7. On
                                                              the lower plot, the EXE policy is able
                                                              to make the user perform almost 4000
Figure 5: User’s life quality over one test simulation with hours of exercise over the simulation,
different insights selection policies.                        BASELINE is almost reaching 3000
                                                              hours as exercise can happen without
any intervention from the policy while FULL, RANDOM and PSQI are not getting more than 500
hours of exercise. Additional results can be found in the Appendix.
All policies using the PSQI in their reward: the PSQI, FULL and FULL LIN policies, were the
fastest to improve the sleep quality of the user compared to EXE, RANDOM or BASELINE. This
highlights the capacity of the policy network to learn the optimal behavior in order to improve sleep
quality by different strategies. The EXE policy was the one pushing the user to do the most exercise,
thus that learned how to maximize this behavior, while also selecting other types of insights as the
PSQI can be seen improving. However, the policies that were trained to optimize both PSQI and
exercise duration failed on the later objective. This could be due to an improper weightage of the
two components of the reward, or a lack of training time.

4.2   I NSIGHT SELECTION WITH FEEDBACK

The problem explained in 4.1 only par-
tially addresses the preference of the user.
For example, if the user doesn’t improve
a particular aspect of their lifestyle in
spite of repeatedly informing about it, the
model automatically realized its useless-
ness and discards such insights. However,
some insights can get repetitive over time
and the user might want to start to see
other types of insights. For this, we carry
off the second experiment, where we fo-
cused on selecting insights relevant to the
preference of the user rather than lifestyle
scores. As the reward is solely composed Figure 6: Comparison of user’s topic of interest and the
of the feedback of the user, that is gener- presence of it in the selected insight by the policy over
ated at the start of the epoch, it does not time.
require the state machine to run at every
step from then. Therefore, each epoch of
RL was composed of 6 weeks of simulation only, in order to generate enough insight candidates for


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


every topic, and 60 weeks of interaction. This process allowed to greatly decrease the computing
time, dividing it by a tenth.
In Figure 6 we present the behavior of the policy network after 12 million steps of training. The
policy network learned (1) that only 4 topics were of interest for this user and (2) to keep proposing
the same type of insights while the feedback of the user is positive. It is perfectly able to select the
right insight when the topic of interest is either sleep time, exercise duration or wake time. When
the topic of interest is sleep duration, the policy does not know which insight to select, and it results
in choosing insights on other topics. This probably results from a lack of training time.


5     D ISCUSSION

5.1   C OMPARISON

The closest pre-existing research is the supervised learning approach presented in Susaiyah et al.
(2021). Although it focuses on insight generation with feedback, it models the problem as a insight
scoring problem where each insight is assigned a score using a neural network. Insights were chosen
on need-basis to satisfy the accuracy constrains of the system. Whereas, in our work, we focus on
showing the single best insight to the user. Although comparison in terms of accuracy could be
difficult due to different objectives, we could compare their results with ours in terms of performance
drops. In the former technique performance drops were observed a few days into beginning of a new
user interest. That is, even after providing feedback on user preference, the system showed insights
contradicting to the feedback. However, in our system we do not see such performance drops. In
Figure 6, we observe that once our system latches on to a particular user interest, it almost never
deviates, indicating a robust insight selection policy. There was however a drop in performance when
the user was interested in sleep-duration insights. This could be improved with sufficient training.
On the other hand, it is not easy to make a comparison with other RL or DRL based recommender
systems. As presented in Afsar et al. (2021), a lot of effort have been put by the RL community to
design RL recommenders in healthcare for clinical decision. However, our framework is dedicated
to the improvement of day-to-day individual behaviors, therefore out of the scope of those recom-
mender systems as well as their work is out of our scope. Furthermore, unlike the MIMIC dataset,
the ATUS dataset does not include any type of intervention.

5.2   E FFORT NEEDED TO ADD A NEW EVENT

The design of the user simulation and DRL-based insight selection allows a very flexible usability
for further experiments. As an example, only 3 simple steps would have to be carried if we wanted to
add one more activity. First, a new state need to be added to the state machine representing the user
and the associated Gaussian transitions computed thanks to the log data of the individual. Then, a
new schema should be added to the insight generator in order to compare the lifestyle measurement
as described in section 3.1. Additionally, the new measurement could be incorporated in the reward
function if it had an impact on the life quality. This also needs to include a dedicated lifestyle
improvement factor as explained in section to model how such an insight will affect the behavior of
the user.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we demonstrated the capabilities of our RL system to recommend insights with the
objective of (1) improving the user’s life quality and (2) satisfying their interest. From the same
observation matrix encoding the history of the selected insights, the policy network is able to reach
completely different objectives by a simple modification of the reward function. From an abstract
representation of the insights, it is able to understand the impact of the recommendation encoded
in the insights’ features and efficiently select the most relevant. Furthermore, the random nature of
the simulation ensures the robustness of the selection policy, using generic and reusable principles
based on very simple assumptions. This framework allows our recommender system to generate and
select domain-dependent insights limiting item presentation complexity and time spend for rating
while keeping reliability in ratings.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Charles Abraham and Susan Michie. A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in inter-
  ventions. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, American
  Psychological Association, 27:379–87, 06 2008. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.27.3.379.
M. Mehdi Afsar, Trafford Crump, and Behrouz Far. Reinforcement learning based recommender
 systems: A survey, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.06286.
Rakesh Agrawal and John C Shafer. Parallel mining of association rules. IEEE Transactions on
  knowledge and Data Engineering, 8(6):962–969, 1996.
Hagai Attias. A variational bayesian framework for graphical models. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
  Syst, 12, 09 2000.
David Blei and Michael Jordan. Variational inference for dirichlet process mixtures. Bayesian
  Analysis, 1, 03 2006. doi: 10.1214/06-BA104.
Daniel J. Buysse, Charles F. Reynolds, Timothy H. Monk, Susan R. Berman, and David J.
  Kupfer. The pittsburgh sleep quality index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and re-
  search. Psychiatry Research, 28(2):193–213, 1989. ISSN 0165-1781. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/0165-1781(89)90047-4. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/0165178189900474.
Albert Gatt and Emiel Krahmer. Survey of the state of the art in natural language generation: Core
  tasks, applications and evaluation. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:65–170, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algo-
  rithms and applications, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05905.
Aki Härmä and Rim Helaoui. Probabilistic scoring of validated insights for personal health services.
  2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–6, 2016.
A. Johnson, T. Pollard, and R. Mark. Mimic-iii clinical database (version 1.4), 2016. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.13026/C2XW26.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning, 2015.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971.
Vadim Liventsev, Aki Härmä, and Milan Petković. Towards effective patient simulators. Frontiers in
  Artificial Intelligence, 4, 2021. ISSN 2624-8212. doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.798659. URL https:
  //www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frai.2021.798659.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforce-
  ment learning. 2016. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1602.01783. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1602.01783.
Cataldo Musto, Pierpaolo Basile, Pasquale Lops, Marco de Gemmis, and Giovanni Semeraro.
  Introducing linked open data in graph-based recommender systems. Information Processing
  & Management, 53(2):405–435, 2017. ISSN 0306-4573. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.
  2016.12.003. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0306457316306847.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dhanya Pramod and Prafulla Bafna. Conversational recommender systems techniques, tools, ac-
  ceptance, and adoption: A state of the art review. Expert Systems with Applications, 203:
  117539, 2022. ISSN 0957-4174. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.117539. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417422008612.


Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.


Elsa Riachi, Muhammad Mamdani, Michael Fralick, and Frank Rudzicz. Challenges for reinforce-
  ment learning in healthcare, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.05612.


S.J. Roberts, D. Husmeier, I. Rezek, and W. Penny. Bayesian approaches to gaussian mixture model-
  ing. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 20(11):1133–1142, 1998.
  doi: 10.1109/34.730550.


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.


Allmin Susaiyah, Aki Härmä, Ehud Reiter, Rim Helaoui, Milan Petkoviĉ, et al. Towards a gener-
  alised framework for behaviour insight mining. In SmartPHIL: 1st Workshop on Smart Personal
  Health Interfaces. ACM, 2020.


Allmin Pradhap Singh Susaiyah, Aki Härmä, Ehud Reiter, and Milan Petkovic. Neural scoring of
  logical inferences from data using feedback. Int. J. Interact. Multim. Artif. Intell., 6:90–99, 2021.


Sebastian Varges and Chris Mellish. Instance-based natural language generation. Natural Language
  Engineering, 16(3):309–346, 2010.


Dujia Yang, Xiaowei Qin, Xiaodong Xu, Chensheng Li, and Guo Wei. Sample efficient reinforce-
  ment learning method via high efficient episodic memory. IEEE Access, 8:129274–129284, 2020.
  doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3009329.


Kenny J. Young, Richard S. Sutton, and Shuo Yang. Integrating episodic memory into a reinforce-
  ment learning agent using reservoir sampling. ArXiv, abs/1806.00540, 2018.


Chao Yu, Jiming Liu, and Shamim Nemati. Reinforcement learning in healthcare: A survey, 2019.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08796.


Yangyang Zhao, Zhenyu Wang, Changxi Zhu, and Shihan Wang. Efficient dialogue complementary
  policy learning via deep Q-network policy and episodic memory policy. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4311–4323, Online
  and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.354. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.354.



                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX



A.1   E XTRACTION ALGORITHM


Algorithm 1 Extraction algorithm
 1: procedure EXTRACT AND BUILD(states)
 2:    for day in week do
 3:        for s in states do
 4:            start, stop, duration ← FILTER DATA(day, s) ▷ All activation times of s on day
 5:            start gaussians, stop gaussians ← COMPUTE GAUSSIANS(start, stop)
 6:            ADD TO TRANSITION (Idle, s, day, start gaussians, 3.5, SIZE (duration))
 7:            ADD TO TRANSITION (s, Idle, day, stop gaussians, MAX (duration), 1)
    procedure COMPUTE GAUSSIANS(start, stop)
 2:    n components ← 24
       start gaussians ← FIT BGMM(start, n components)
 4:    stop gaussians ← FIT BGMM(stop, n components)
       return start gaussians, stop gaussians
    procedure ADD TO TRANSITION(start state, end state, day, gaussians, horizon, duration)
       state machine[start state][end state][day].start gaussians ← gaussians
 3:    state machine[start state][end state][day].horizon ← horizon
       state machine[start state][end state][day].proportion ← proportion


A.2   P OLICY NETWORK


As for the user simulation, lots of efforts were put on the environment to keep it as reusable as pos-
sible to follow the general framework presented in Figure 1. To code this framework, we developed
our solution using the library Stable Baselines 3 (Raffin et al., 2021), again simplifying the reusabil-
ity of our concepts. However, the main drawback of our standard DRL approach is still the need for
a lot of training. For this reason, we decided to use the policy network PPO, described in Schulman
et al. (2017), as it was demonstrated to be scalable to large models, allow parallel implementation
for training and is more efficient than A2C in terms of sample complexity. The clipped surrogate
objective of PPO in equation 8 makes it a perfect fit to avoid instability that could be caused by the
sparse reward function we are using for user feedback.


                LCLIP (θ) = Et [min(rt (θ)At (θ), clip(rt (θ, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At (θ)))]                (8)


with θ the weights of the neural network, t the current time step, A the advantage function and ϵ a
hyperparameter.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3   A DDITIONAL RESULTS


Figure 7: Resulting user’s behavior with different insights selection policies during one test simula-
tion.


In the figure 7 is presented how behavior of the user, sleep time and wake time, evolves over the
simulation time. On the upper plot we can see that the PSQI, EXE, FULL LIN and RANDOM
policies are selecting enough insights recommending to sleep early in order to keep a reasonable
sleep time between 22:00 and 22:30. On the other end, without recommendations about sleep time
as for the BASELINE or for FULL, the user is sleeping on average after 23:00. by the end of the
simulation. On the lower plot we can see that the PSQI, FULL and FULL LIN policies are the ones
recommending the most insights about wake time as the user is waking up after 06:00 as early as
March, when it is only in June for EXE and RANDOM.

A.4   F UTURE WORK

We will be deploying this system in patient monitoring and personal health monitoring applications
to study and explore insights from patient and personal health. Further work is needed on how to
automatically encode the relative impact of each insight on the behavior of the user. Experiments
will be conducted both on the relevance of the user simulation system and capabilities of the policy
network to adapt to different user behaviors and reward functions. In this study, the same simulation
was used during all the training, it would require to train the policy with different users to make it
learn how to give good recommendations for different types of lifestyle.
For a matter of simplicity for this preliminary study, only four interests were possible for the user. As
the policy was almost perfectly suited for these four interests, we can extrapolate that it would also
work if there were more topics of interest with enough training time. Nevertheless, a real user might
only be interested in five to ten of those subjects. We believe it would be possible to take this into
account by using a weighted random sampling of interests during the training of the policy network,
suited to the likelihood of interest of the specific user, instead of a uniform random sampling.


                                                   13
