Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


VARIATIONAL L ATENT B RANCHING M ODEL
FOR O FF -P OLICY E VALUATION

 Qitong Gao∗                 Ge Gao†                Min Chi†                Miroslav Pajic∗



                                             A BSTRACT

          Model-based methods have recently shown great potential for off-policy evaluation
          (OPE); offline trajectories induced by behavioral policies are fitted to transitions of
          Markov decision processes (MDPs), which are used to rollout simulated trajectories
          and estimate the performance of policies. Model-based OPE methods face two
          key challenges. First, as offline trajectories are usually fixed, they tend to cover
          limited state and action space. Second, the performance of model-based methods
          can be sensitive to the initialization of their parameters. In this work, we propose
          the variational latent branching model (VLBM) to learn the transition function
          of MDPs by formulating the environmental dynamics as a compact latent space,
          from which the next states and rewards are then sampled. Specifically, VLBM
          leverages and extends the variational inference framework with the recurrent state
          alignment (RSA), which is designed to capture as much information underlying the
          limited training data, by smoothing out the information flow between the variational
          (encoding) and generative (decoding) part of VLBM. Moreover, we also introduce
          the branching architecture to improve the model’s robustness against randomly
          initialized model weights. The effectiveness of the VLBM is evaluated on the
          deep OPE (DOPE) benchmark, from which the training trajectories are designed
          to result in varied coverage of the state-action space. We show that the VLBM
          outperforms existing state-of-the-art OPE methods in general.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) allows for evaluation of reinforcement learning (RL) policies without
online interactions. It is applicable to many domains where on-policy data collection could be
prevented due to efficiency and safety concerns, e.g., healthcare (Gao et al., 2022c;a; Tang & Wiens,
2021), recommendation systems (Mehrotra et al., 2018; Li et al., 2011), education (Mandel et al.,
2014), social science (Segal et al., 2018) and optimal control (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019;
Gao et al., 2020a; 2019; 2020b). Recently, as reported in the deep OPE (DOPE) benchmark (Fu et al.,
2020b), model-based OPE methods, leveraging feed-forward (Fu et al., 2020b) and auto-regressive
(AR) (Zhang et al., 2020a) architectures, have shown promising results toward estimating the return
of target policies, by fitting transition functions of MDPs. However, model-based OPE methods
remain challenged as they can only be trained using offline trajectory data, which often offers limited
coverage of state and action space. Thus, they may perform sub-optimally on tasks where parts of the
dynamics are not fully explored (Fu et al., 2020b). Moreover, different initialization of the model
weights could lead to varied evaluation performance (Hanin & Rolnick, 2018; Rossi et al., 2019),
reducing the robustness of downstream OPE estimations. Some approaches in RL policy optimization
literature use latent models trained to capture a compact space from which the dynamics underlying
MDPs are extrapolated; this allows learning expressive representations over the state-action space.
However, such approaches usually require online data collections as the focus is on quickly navigating
to the high-reward regions (Rybkin et al., 2021), as well as on improving coverage of the explored
state and action space (Zhang et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020a) or sample efficiency (Lee et al.,
2020).
In this work, we propose the variational latent branching model (VLBM), aiming to learn a compact
and disentangled latent representation space from offline trajectories, which can better capture the
    ∗
   Duke University, USA. Emails: {qitong.gao, miroslav.pajic}@duke.edu.
    †
   North Carolina State University, USA. Emails: {ggao5, mchi}@ncsu.edu
Code available at https://github.com/gaoqitong/vlbm.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


dynamics underlying environments. VLBM enriches the architectures and optimization objectives for
existing latent modeling frameworks, allowing them to learn from a fixed set of offline trajectories.
Specifically, VLBM considers learning variational (encoding) and generative (decoding) distributions,
both represented by long short-term memories (LSTMs) with reparameterization (Kingma & Welling,
2013), to encode the state-action pairs and enforce the transitions over the latent space, respectively.
To train such models, we optimize over the evidence lower bound (ELBO) jointly with a recurrent
state alignment (RSA) term defined over the LSTM states; this ensures that the information encoded
into the latent space can be effectively teased out by the decoder. Then, we introduce the branching
architecture that allows for multiple decoders to jointly infer from the latent space and reach a
consensus, from which the next state and reward are generated. This is designed to mitigate the
side effects of model-based methods where different weight initializations could lead to varied
performance (Fu et al., 2020b; Hanin & Rolnick, 2018; Rossi et al., 2019).
We focus on using the VLBM to facilitate OPE since it allows to better distinguish the improvements
made upon learning dynamics underlying the MDP used for estimating policy returns, as opposed
to RL training where performance can be affected by multiple factors, e.g., techniques used for
exploration and policy optimization. Moreover, model-based OPE methods is helpful for evaluating
the safety and efficacy of RL-based controllers before deployments in the real world (Gao et al.,
2022b), e.g., how a surgical robot would react to states that are critical to a successful procedure.
The key contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: (i) to the best of our knowledge, the
VLBM is the first method that leverages variational inference for OPE. It can be trained using offline
trajectories and capture environment dynamics over latent space, as well as estimate returns of target
(evaluation) policies accurately. (ii) The design of the RSA loss term and branching architecture
can effectively smooth the information flow in the latent space shared by the encoder and decoder,
increasing the expressiveness and robustness of the model. This is empirically shown in experiments
by comparing with ablation baselines. (iii) Our method generally outperforms existing model-based
and model-free OPE methods, for evaluating policies over various D4RL environments (Fu et al.,
2020a). Specifically, we follow guidelines provided by the DOPE benchmark (Fu et al., 2020b), which
contains challenging OPE tasks where the training trajectories include varying levels of coverage of
the state-action space, and target policies are designed toward resulting in state-action distributions
different from the ones induced by behavioral policies.

2     VARIATIONAL L ATENT B RANCHING M ODEL
In this section, we first introduce the objective of OPE and the variational latent model (VLM)
we consider. Then, we propose the recurrent state alignment (RSA) term as well as the branching
architecture that constitute the variational latent branching model (VLBM).

2.1     OPE O BJECTIVE
We first introduce the MDP used to characterize the environment. Specifically, an MDP can be
defined as a tuple M = (S, A, P, R, s0 , γ), where S is the set of states, A the set of actions,
P : S × A → S is the transition distribution usually captured by probabilities p(st |st−1 , at−1 ),
R : S × A → R is the reward function, s0 is the initial state sampled from the initial state distribution
p(s0 ), γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discounting factor. Finally, the agent interacts with the MDP following
some policy π(a|s) which defines the probabilities of taking action a at state s. Then, the goal of
OPE can be formulated as follows. Given trajectories collected by a behavioral policy β, ρβ =
{[(s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 ), . . . , (sT −1 , aT −1 , rT −1 , sT )](0) , [(s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 ), . . . ](1) , . . . |at ∼ β(at |st )}1 , es-
timate the expected total return over the unknown state-action visitation distribution ρπ of the target
(evaluation) policy π – i.e., for T being the horizon,
                                                              X
                                                                    T
                                                                           t
                                          E(s,a)∼ρπ ,r∼R                 γ R(st , at ) .                                           (1)
                                                                     t=0


2.2     VARIATIONAL L ATENT M ODEL

We consider the VLM consisting of a prior p(z) over the latent variables z ∈ Z ⊂ Rl , with Z repre-
senting the latent space and l the dimension, along with a variational encoder qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )
   1
     We slightly abuse the notation ρβ , to represent either the trajectories or state-action visitation distribution
under the behavioral policy, depending on the context.


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and a generative decoder pϕ (zt , st , rt−1 |zt−1 , at−1 ), parameterized by ψ and ϕ respectively. Basics
of variational inference are introduced in Appendix F.

Latent Prior p(z0 ). The prior specifies the distribution from which the latent variable of the initial
stage, z0 , is sampled. We configure p(z0 ) to follow a Gaussian with zero mean and identity covariance
matrix, which is a common choice under the variational inference framework (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Lee et al., 2020).

Variational         Encoder        for       Inference
qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ). The         encoder     is
used to approximate the intractable                                           ""          "!        %"    "#    %!   . . . $$%'        "$ $$%&
posterior,          p(zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )        =
     p(zt−1 ,at−1 ,zt ,st )
R
       p(zt−1 ,at−1 ,zt ,st )dzt
                                 , where the de-                              $"               $!          $#           !$%&            $$
 zt ∈Z
nominator requires integrating over the
unknown latent space. Specifically, the encoder                        ℎ"            ℎ!              ℎ#          ...           ℎ$
can be decomposed into two parts, given that
         qψ (z0:T |s0:T , a0:T −1 )                                                  #"              #!          ...           " $%&
                     T
                                                                                                     Inference Process
                     Y
   =qψ (z0 |s0 )           qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st );     (2)
                     t=1                                                                             Generative Process
here, qψ (z0 |s0 ) encodes the initial state s0 Figure 1: Architecture of variational latent model
in to the corresponding latent variable z0 , (VLM) we consider.
then, qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) enforces the transi-
tion from zt−1 to zt conditioned on at−1 and st . Both distributions are diagonal Gaussians2 , with
means and diagonal of covariance matrices determined by multi-layered perceptron (MLP) (Bishop,
2006) and long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) respectively. The
weights for both neural networks are referred to as ψ in general.
Consequently, the inference process for zt can be summarized as
                   z0ψ ∼ qψ (z0 |s0 ),       hψ        ψ      ψ
                                              t = fψ (ht−1 , zt−1 , at−1 , st ),                    ztψ ∼ qψ (zt |hψ
                                                                                                                   t ),                      (3)
where fψ represents the LSTM layer and hψ
                                        t the LSTM recurrent (hidden) state. Note that we use ψ
in superscripts to distinguish the variables involved in this inference process, against the generative
process introduced below. Moreover, reparameterization can be used to sample z0ψ and ztψ , such that
gradients of sampling can be back-propagated, as introduced in (Kingma & Welling, 2013). Overview
of the inference and generative processes are illustrated in Fig. 1.

Generative Decoder for Sampling pϕ (zt , st , rt−1 |zt−1 , at−1 ). The decoder is used to interact
with the target policies and acts as a synthetic environment during policy evaluation, from which the
expected returns can be estimated as the mean return of simulated trajectories. The decoder can be
represented by the multiplication of three diagonal Gaussian distributions, given that
                                                         T
                                                         Y                    T
                                                                              Y
              pϕ (z1:T , s0:T , r0:T −1 |z0 , π) =             pϕ (st |zt )         pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 )pϕ (rt−1 |zt ),                     (4)
                                                         t=0                  t=1
with at ∼ π(at |st ) at each time step. Specifically, pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) has its mean and covariance
determined by an LSTM, enforcing the transition from zt−1 to zt in the latent space given action
at−1 . In what follows, pϕ (st |zt ) and pϕ (rt−1 |zt ) generate the current state st and reward rt−1 given
zt , whose mean and covariance are determined by MLPs. As a result, the generative process starts
with sampling the initial latent variable from the latent prior, i.e., z0ϕ ∼ p(z0 ). Then, the initial state
sϕ0 ∼ pϕ (s0 |z0ϕ ) and action a0 ∼ π(a0 |sϕ0 ) are obtained from pϕ and target policy π, respectively;
the rest of generative process can be summarized as
                        hϕt = fϕ (hϕt−1 , zt−1
                                           ϕ
                                               , at−1 ),            h̃ϕt = gϕ (hϕt ),           ztϕ ∼ pϕ (h̃ϕt ),
                        sϕt ∼ pϕ (st |ztϕ ),       ϕ
                                                  rt−1 ∼ pϕ (rt−1 |ztϕ ),                 at ∼ π(at |sϕt ),                                  (5)
   2
     Assume that different dimensions of the states are non-correlated with each other. Otherwise, the states can
be projected to orthogonal basis, such that non-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix will be zeros.


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: (Left) Recurrent state alignment (RSA) applied over the recurrent hidden states between
inference and generative process illustrated separately. (Right) Single-step forward pass of the varia-
tional latent branching model (VLBM), the training objectives for each branch and final predictions.
where fϕ is the LSTM layer producing recurrent state hϕt . Then, an MLP gϕ is used to generate
mapping between hϕt and h̃ϕt that will be used for recurrent state alignment (RSA) introduced below,
to augment the information flow between the inference and generative process.
Furthermore, to train the elements in the encoder (3) and decoder (5), one can maximize the evidence
lower bound (ELBO), a lower bound of the joint log-likelihood p(s0:T , r0:T −1 ), following
                        h XT                        XT
  LELBO (ψ, ϕ) =Eqψ              log pϕ (st |zt ) +       log pϕ (rt−1 |zt ) − KL qψ (z0 |s0 )||p(z0 )
                             t=0                      t=1
                                 XT                                                           i
                              −          KL qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )||pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) ;         (6)
                                          t=1

here, the first two terms represent the log-likelihood of reconstructing the states and rewards, and the
last two terms regularize the approximated posterior. The proof can be found in Appendix E.

2.3      R ECURRENT S TATE A LIGNMENT
The latent model discussed above is somewhat reminiscent of the ones used in model-based RL
policy training methods, e.g., recurrent state space model (RSSM) used in PlaNet (Hafner et al.,
2019) and Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020a;b), as well as similar ones in Lee et al. (2020); Lu et al.
(2022). Such methods rely on a growing experience buffer for training, which is collected online
by the target policy that is being concurrently updated (with exploration noise added); however,
OPE aims to extrapolate returns from a fixed set of offline trajectories which may result in limited
coverage of the state and action space. Consequently, directly applying VLM for OPE can lead to
subpar performance empirically; see results in Sec. 3. Moreover, the encoder above plays a key
role of capturing the temporal transitions between latent variables, i.e., pψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) from
(2). However, it is absent in the generative process, as the decoder leverages a separate network to
determine the latent transitions, i.e., pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ). Moreover, from the ELBO (6) above it can
be seen that only the KL-divergence terms are used to regularize these two parts, which may not be
sufficient for OPE as limited offline trajectories are provided. As a result, we introduce the RSA term
as part of the training objective, to further regularize pψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) and pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ). A
graphical illustration of RSA can be found in Fig. 2.3
Specifically, RSA is defined as the mean pairwise squared error between hψ
                                                                         t from the encoder (3)
and h̃ϕt from the decoder (5), i.e.,
                               N T           M −1 M
                            1 X X M (M − 1) h X X                                                              2 i
LRSA (h̃ϕt , hψ
              t ; ψ, ϕ) =                                            (h̃ϕt [j] − h̃ϕt [k]) − (hψ        ψ
                                                                                               t [j] − ht [k])     ;
                            N i=1 t=0 2       j=1            k=j+1
                                                                                                               (7)

here, we assume that both LSTM recurrent states have the same dimension h̃ϕt , hψ             M
                                                                                      t ∈ R , with
 (·)
ht [j] referring to the j-th element of the recurrent state, and N the number of training trajectories.
Here, we choose the pairwise squared loss over the classic mean squared error (MSE), because MSE
could be too strong to regularize hψ       ϕ
                                   t and h̃t which support the inference and generative processes
respectively and are not supposed to be exactly the same. In contrast, the pairwise loss (7) can
   3
       Rewards and actions are omitted for conciseness of the presentation.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


promote structural similarity between the LSTM recurrent states of the encoder and decoder, without
strictly enforcing them to become the same. Note that this design choice has been justified in Sec. 3
through an ablation study by comparing against models trained with MSE. In general, the pairwise
loss has also been adopted in many domains for similar purposes, e.g., object detection (Gould
et al., 2009; Rocco et al., 2018), ranking systems (Doughty et al., 2018; Saquil et al., 2021) and
contrastive learning (Wang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020). Similarly, we apply the pairwise loss over
hψ        ϕ                             ψ      ϕ
  t and h̃t , instead of directly over ht and ht , as the mapping gϕ (from equation 5) could serve as a
regularization layer to ensure optimality over LRSA without changing hψ         ϕ
                                                                           t , ht significantly.

As a result, the objective for training the VLM, following architectures specified in (3) and (5), can
be formulated as

               max LV LM (ψ, ϕ) = max LELBO (ψ, ϕ) − C · LRSA (h̃ϕt , hψ    t ; ψ, ϕ) ,             (8)
                   ψ,ϕ                         ψ,ϕ

with C > 0 and C ∈ R being the constant balancing the scale of the ELBO and RSA terms.

2.4      B RANCHING FOR G ENERATIVE D ECODER
The performance of model-based methods can vary upon different design factors (Fu et al., 2020b;
Hanin & Rolnick, 2018). Specifically, Rossi et al. (2019) has found that the convergence speed and
optimality of variational models are sensitive to the choice of weight initialization techniques. More-
over, under the typical variational inference setup followed by the VLM above, the latent transitions
reconstructed by the decoder, pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ), are only trained through regularization losses in (6)
and (7), but are fully responsible for rolling out trajectories during evaluation. Consequently, in this
sub-section we introduce the branching architecture for decoder, with the goal of minimizing the
impact brought by random weight initialization of the networks, and allowing the decoder to best
reconstruct the latent transitions pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) as well as st ’s and rt−1 ’s correctly. Specifically,
the branching architecture leverages an ensemble of B ∈ Z+ decoders to tease out information from
the latent space formulated by the encoder, with final predictions sampled from a mixture of the
Gaussian output distributions from (5). Note that the classic setup of ensembles is not considered,
i.e., train and average over B VLMs end-to-end; because in this case B different latent space exist,
each of which is still associated with a single decoder, leaving the challenges above unresolved. This
design choice is justified by ablations studies in Sec. 3, by comparing VLBM against a (classic)
ensemble of VLMs.
Branching Architecture. Consider the generative process involving B branches of the decoders
parameterized by {ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB }. The forward architecture over a single step is illustrated in Fig. 2.4
Specifically, the procedure of sampling ztϕb and sϕt b for each b ∈ [1, B] follows from (5). Recall that
by definition pϕb (st |ztϕb ) follows multivariate Gaussian with mean and diagonal of covariance matrix
determined by the corresponding MLPs, i.e., µ(sϕt b ) = ϕM       LP    ϕb              ϕb      M LP
                                                             b,µ (zt ) and Σdiag (st ) = ϕb,Σ (zt ).
                                                                                                       ϕb

In what follows, the final outcome sϕt can be sampled following diagonal Gaussian with mean and
variance determined by weighted averaging across all branches using weights wb ’s, i.e.,
                                                  X                          X
      sϕt ∼ pϕ (st |ztϕ1 , . . . , ztϕB ) = N µ =    wb · µ(sϕt b ), Σdiag =   wb2 · Σdiag (sϕt b ) . (9)
                                                               b                                   b

The objective below can be used to jointly update, wb ’s, ψ and ϕb ’s, i.e.,
   max LV LBM (ψ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB , w1 , . . . , wB )
  ψ,ϕ,w
            T
            X                                                  X                                              X
= max              log pϕ (sϕt |ztϕ1 , . . . , ztϕB ) − C1 ·               LRSA (h̃ϕt b , hψ
                                                                                           t ; ψ, ϕb ) + C2       LELBO (ψ, ϕb ) ,
  ψ,ϕ,w
             t=0                                                   b                                          b
                                   X
  s.t.    w1 , . . . , wB > 0 ,          wb = 1 and constants C1 , C2 > 0.                                                   (10)
                                     b

Though the first term above already propagates through all wb ’s and ϕb ’s, the third term and constraints
over wb ’s regularize ϕb in each individual branch such that they are all trained toward maximizing
   4
       For simplicity, the parts generating rewards are omitted without lost of generality.


                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the likelihood pϕb (sϕt b |ztϕb ). Pseudo-code for training and evaluating the VLBM can be found in
                                                                    v2
Appendix C. Further, in practice, one can define wb = ϵ+Pb v2 , with vb ∈ R the learnable variables
                                                             b b
and 0 < ϵ ≪ 1, ϵ ∈ R, the constant ensuring denominator to be greater than zero, to convert (10)
into unconstrained optimization and solve it using gradient descent. Lastly, note that complementary
latent modeling methods, e.g., latent overshooting from Hafner et al. (2019), could be adopted in (10).
However, we keep the objective straightforward, so that the source of performance improvements can
be isolated.

3       E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate the VLBM, we follow
the guidelines from the deep OPE
(DOPE) benchmark (Fu et al., 2020b).
Specifically, we follow the D4RL
branch in DOPE and use the Gym-
Mujoco and Adroit suites as the test
base (Fu et al., 2020a). Such environ-
ments have long horizons and high-
dimensional state and action space,
which are usually challenging for
model-based methods. The provided
offline trajectories for training are
collected using behavioral policies
at varied scale, including limited ex- Figure 3: Mean rank correlation, regret@1 and MAE over
ploration, human teleoperation etc., all the 32 Gym-Mujoco and Adroit tasks, showing VLBM
which can result in different levels of achieves state-of-the-art performance overall.
coverage over the state-action space. Also, the target (evaluation) policies are generated using online
RL training, aiming to reduce the similarity between behavioral and target policies; it introduces
another challenge that during evaluation the agent may visit states unseen from training trajectories.
Environmental and Training Setup. A total of 8 environments are provided by Gym-Mujoco and
Adroit suites (Fu et al., 2020b;a). Moreover, each environment is provided with 5 (for Gym-Mujoco)
or 3 (for Adroit) training datasets collected using different behavioral policies, resulting in a total of
32 sets of env-dataset tasks5 – a full list can be found in Appendix A. DOPE also provides 11
target policies for each environment, whose performance are to be evaluated by the OPE methods.
They in general result in varied scales of returns, as shown in the x-axes of Fig. 7. Moreover, we
consider the decoder to have B = 10 branches, i.e., {pϕ1 , . . . , pϕ10 }. The dimension of latent space
is set to be 16, i.e., z ∈ Z ⊂ R16 . Other implementation details can be found in Appendix A.
Baselines and Evaluation Metrics. In addition to the five baselines reported from DOPE, i.e.,
importance sampling (IS) (Precup, 2000), doubly robust (DR) (Thomas & Brunskill, 2016), variational
power method (VPM) (Wen et al., 2020), distribution correction estimation (DICE) (Yang et al., 2020),
and fitted Q-evaluation (FQE) (Le et al., 2019), the effectiveness of VLBM is also compared against
the state-of-the-art model-based OPE method leveraging the auto-regressive (AR) architecture (Zhang
et al., 2020a). Specifically, for each task we train an ensemble of 10 AR models, for fair comparisons
against VLBM which leverages the branching architecture; see Appendix A for details of the AR
ensemble setup. Following the DOPE benchmark (Fu et al., 2020b), our evaluation metrics includes
rank correlation, regret@1, and mean absolute error (MAE). VLBM and all baselines are trained
using 3 different random seeds over each task, leading to the results reported below.
Ablation. Four ablation baselines are also considered, i.e., VLM, VLM+RSA, VLM+RSA(MSE)
and VLM+RSA Ensemble. Specifically, VLM refers to the model introduced in Sec. 2.2, trained
toward maximizing only the ELBO, i.e., (6). Note that, arguably, VLM could be seen as the general-
ization of directly applying latent-models proposed in existing RL policy optimization literature (Lee
et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020a;b; Lu et al., 2022); details can be found in Sec. 4 below. The
VLM+RSA ablation baseline follows the same model architecture as VLM, but is trained to optimize
over both ELBO and recurrent state alignment (RSA) as introduced in (8), i.e., branching is not used
comparing to VLBM. The design of these two baselines can help analyze the effectiveness of the RSA
    5
        From now on the dataset names are abbreviated by their initials, e.g., Ant-M-R refers to Ant-Medium-Replay.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Mean rank correlation, regret@1 and MAE over all datasets, for each Mujoco environment.


Figure 5: Mean rank correlation, regret@1 and MAE over all datasets, for each Adroit environment.
loss term and branching architecture introduced in Sec. 2.3 and 2.4. Moreover, VLM+RSA(MSE)
uses mean squared error to replace the pairwise loss introduced in (7), and the VLM+RSA Ensemble
applies classic ensembles by averaging over B VLM+RSA models end-to-end, instead of branching
from decoder as in VLBM. These two ablation baselines can help justify the use of pairwise loss for
RSA, and the benefit of using branching architecture over classic ensembles.
Results. Fig. 3 shows the mean overall performance
attained by VLBM and baselines over all the 32 Gym-
Mujoco and Adroit tasks. In general VLBM leads to
significantly increased rank correlations and decreased
regret@1’s over existing methods, with MAEs maintained
at the state-of-the-art level. Specifically, VLBM achieves
state-of-the-art performance in 31, 29, and 15 (out of 32)
tasks in terms of rank correlation, regret@1 and MAE,
respectively. Performance for each task can be found in
Tables 1- 6 at the end of Appendices. Note that results
                                                             Figure 6: Distribution of all branching
for IS, VPM, DICE, DR, and FQE are obtained directly
                                                             weights, wb ’s, over all VLBMs trained
from DOPE benchmark (Fu et al., 2020b), since the same
                                                             on the 32 tasks.
experimental setup is considered. Fig. 4 and 5 visualize
the mean performance for each Gym-Mujoco and Adroit environment respectively, over all the
associated datasets. It can be also observed that the model-based and FQE baselines generally
perform better than the other baselines, which is consistent with findings from DOPE.
The fact that VLM+RSA outperforming the VLM ablation baseline, as shown in Fig. 4, illustrates the
need of the RSA loss term to smooth the flow of information between the encoder and decoder, in
the latent space. Moreover, one can observe that VLM+RSA(MSE) sometimes performs worse than
VLM, and significantly worse than VLM+RSA in general. Specifically, it has be found that, compared
to VLM and VLM+RSA respectively, VLM+RSA(MSE) significantly worsen at least two metrics
in 7 and 12 (out of 20) Gym-Mujoco tasks; detailed performance over these tasks can be found in
Tables 1- 6 at the end of Appendices. Such a finding backs up the design choice of using pairwise loss
for RSA instead of MSE, as MSE could be overly strong to regularize the LSTM recurrent states of
the encoder and decoder, while pairwise loss only enforces structural similarities. Moreover, VLBM
significantly improves rank correlations and regrets greatly compared to VLM+RSA, illustrating the
importance of the branching architecture. In the paragraph below, we show empirically the benefits
brought in by branching over classic ensembles.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: t-SNE visualization over the latent space, capturing encoded state-action visitations induced
from all target policies. Each point is colored by the corresponding policy from which it is generated.
Policies in the legend are sorted in the order of increasing performance.

Branching versus Classic Ensembles. Fig. 4 shows that the VLM+RSA Ensemble does not
improve performance over the VLM+RSA in general, and even leads to worse overall rank correlations
and regrets in Walker2d and Hopper environments. This supports the rationale provided in Sec. 2.4
that each decoder still samples from different latent space exclusively, and averaging over the output
distributions may not help reduce the disturbance brought in by the modeling artifacts under the
variational inference framework, e.g., random weight initializations (Hanin & Rolnick, 2018; Rossi
et al., 2019). In contrast, the VLBM leverages the branching architecture, allowing all the branches to
sample from the same latent space formulated by the encoder. Empirically, we find that the branching
weights, wb ’s in (9), allows VLBM to kill branches that are not helpful toward reconstructing the
trajectories accurately, to possibly overcome bad initializations etc. Over all the the 32 tasks we
consider, most of VLBMs only keep 1-3 branches (out of 10), i.e., wb < 10−5 for all other branches.
The distribution of all wb ’s, from VLBMs trained on the 32 tasks, are shown in Fig. 6; one can
observe that most of the wb ’s are close to zero, while the others generally fall in the range of (0, 0.25]
and [0.75, 1).
AR ensembles also lead to compelling rank cor-
relations and regrets, but attains much smaller
margins in MAEs over other baselines in gen-
eral; see Fig. 3. From Fig. 7, one can observe
that it tends to significantly under-estimate most
of the high-performing policies. Scatter plots
for the other tasks can be found in Appendix A,
which also show this trend. The reason could
be that its model architecture and training objec-
tives are designed to directly learn the transitions
of the MDP; thus, may produce biased predic-
tions when the target policies lead to visitation Figure 7: Correlation between the estimated (y-
of the states that are not substantially presented axis) and true returns (x-axis), across different
in training data, since such data are obtained us- model-based OPE methods and environments.
ing behavioral policies that are sub-optimal. In
contrast, the VLBM can leverage RSA and branching against such situations, thus outperforming AR
ensembles in most of the OPE tasks in terms of all metrics we considered. Interestingly, Fig. 7 also
shows that latent models could sometimes over-estimate the returns. For example, in Hopper-M-E and
Walker2d-M-E, VLM tends to over-estimate most policies. The VLBM performs consistently well in
Hopper-M-E, but is mildly affected by such an effect in Walker2d-M-E, though over fewer policies
and smaller margins. It has been found that variational inference may fall short in approximating true
distributions that are asymmetric, and produce biased estimations (Yao et al., 2018). So the hypothesis
would be that the dynamics used to define certain environments may lead to asymmetry in the true
posterior p(zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ), which could be hard to be captured by the latent modeling framework
we consider. More comprehensive understanding of such behavior can be explored in future work.
However, the VLBM still significantly outperforms VLM overall, and achieves top-performing rank
correlations and regrets; such results illustrate the VLBM’s improved robustness as a result of its
architectural design and choices over training objectives.
t-SNE Visualization of the Latent Space. Fig. 8 illustrates t-SNE visualization of the latent space
by rolling out trajectories using all target policies respectively, followed by feeding the state-action
pairs into the encoder of VLBM which maps them into the latent space. It shows the encoded
state-action pairs induced from policies with similar performance are in general swirled and clustered
together, illustrating that VLBM can learn expressive and disentangled representations of its inputs.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4    R ELATED W ORK
Latent Modeling in RL. Though variational inference has rarely been explored to facilitate model-
based OPE methods so far, there exist several latent models designed for RL policy optimization that
are related to our work, such as SLAC (Lee et al., 2020), SOLAR (Zhang et al., 2019), LatCo (Rybkin
et al., 2021), PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2019), Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020a;b). Below we discuss
the connections and distinctions between VLBM and the latent models leveraged by them, with a
detailed overview of these methods provided in Appendix G. Specifically, SLAC and SOLAR learn
latent representations of the dynamics jointly with optimization of the target policies, using the latent
information to improve sample efficiency. Similarly, LatCo performs trajectory optimization over
the latent space to allow for temporarily bypassing dynamic constraints. As a result, latent models
used in such methods are not designed toward rolling out trajectories independently, as opposed to
the use of VLBM in this paper. PlaNet and Dreamer train the recurrent state space model (RSSM)
using a growing experience dataset collected by the target policy that is being concurrently updated
(with exploration noise added), which requires online data collection. In contrast, under the OPE
setup, VLBM is trained over a fixed set of offline trajectories collected over unknown behavioral
policies. Moreover, note that the VLM baseline is somewhat reminiscent of the RSSM and similar
ones as in Lee et al. (2020); Lu et al. (2022), however, experiments above show that directly using
VLM for OPE could lead to subpar performance. On the other hand, though MOPO (Yu et al., 2020),
LOMPO (Rafailov et al., 2021) and COMBO (Yu et al., 2021) can learn from offline data, they
focus on quantifying the uncertainty of model’s predictions toward next states and rewards, followed
by incorporating them into policy optimization objectives to penalize for visiting regions where
transitions are not fully captured; thus, such works are also orthogonal to the use case of OPE.
OPE. Classic OPE methods adopt IS to estimate expectations over the unknown visitation distribu-
tion over the target policy, resulting in weighted IS, step-wise IS and weighted step-wise IS (Precup,
2000). IS can lead to estimations with low (or zero) bias, but with high variance (Kostrikov &
Nachum, 2020; Jiang & Li, 2016), which sparks a long line of research to address this challenge.
DR methods propose to reduce variance by coupling IS with a value function approximator (Jiang
& Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Farajtabar et al., 2018). However, the introduction of such
approximations may increase bias, so the method proposed in Tang et al. (2019) attempts to balance
the scale of bias and variance for DR. Unlike IS and DR methods that require the behavioral policies
to be fully known, DICE family of estimators (Zhang et al., 2020c;b; Yang et al., 2021; 2020; Nachum
et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2020) and VPM (Wen et al., 2020) can be behavioral-agnostic; they directly
capture marginalized IS weights as the ratio between the propensity of the target policy to visit
particular state-action pairs, relative to their likelihood of appearing in the logged data. There also
exist FQE methods which extrapolate policy returns from approximated Q-functions (Hao et al.,
2021; Le et al., 2019; Kostrikov & Nachum, 2020). Existing model-based OPE methods are designed
to directly fit MDP transitions using feed-forward (Fu et al., 2020b) or auto-regressive (Zhang et al.,
2020a) models, and has shown promising results over model-free methods as reported in a recent
benchmark (Fu et al., 2020b). However, such model-based approaches could be sensitive to the
initialization of weights (Hanin & Rolnick, 2018; Rossi et al., 2019) and produce biased predictions,
due to the limited coverage over state and action space provided by offline trajectories (Fu et al.,
2020b). Instead, VLBM mitigates such effects by capturing the dynamics over the latent space, such
that states and rewards are evolved from a compact feature space over time. Moreover, RSA and the
branching can lead to increased expressiveness and robustness, such that future states and rewards
are predicted accurately. There also exist OPE methods proposed toward specific applications (Chen
et al., 2022; Saito et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023; 2022b).
5    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We have developed the VLBM which can accurately capture the dynamics underlying environments
from offline training data that provide limited coverage of the state and action space; this is achieved
by using the RSA term to smooth out the information flow from the encoders to decoders in the
latent space, as well as the branching architecture which improve VLBM’s robustness against random
initializations. We have followed evaluation guidelines provided by the DOPE benchmark, and
experimental results have shown that the VLBM generally outperforms the state-of-the-art model-
based OPE method using AR architectures, as well as other model-free methods. VLBM can also
facilitate off-policy optimizations, which can be explored in future works. Specifically, VLBM can
serve as a synthetic environment on which optimal controllers (e.g., linear–quadratic regulator) can
be deployed. On the other hand, similar to Dreamer and SLAC, policies can be updated jointly with
training of VLBM, but without the need of online interactions with the environment during training.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is sponsored in part by the AFOSR under award number FA9550-19-1-0169, and by the
NSF CNS-1652544, CNS-1837499, DUE-1726550, IIS-1651909 and DUE-2013502 awards, as well
as the National AI Institute for Edge Computing Leveraging Next Generation Wireless Networks,
Grant CNS-2112562.

R EFERENCES
Christopher M Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer, 2006.
Minmin Chen, Can Xu, Vince Gatto, Devanshu Jain, Aviral Kumar, and Ed Chi. Off-policy actor-
 critic for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender
 Systems, pp. 338–349, 2022.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Bo Dai, Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Lihong Li, Csaba Szepesvári, and Dale Schuurmans. Coindice:
  Off-policy confidence interval estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9398–9411, 2020.
Hazel Doughty, Dima Damen, and Walterio Mayol-Cuevas. Who’s better? who’s best? pairwise deep
  ranking for skill determination. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 6057–6066, 2018.
Mehrdad Farajtabar, Yinlam Chow, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. More robust doubly robust
 off-policy evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1447–1456. PMLR,
 2018.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020a.
Justin Fu, Mohammad Norouzi, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, Alexander Novikov, Mengjiao Yang,
  Michael R Zhang, Yutian Chen, Aviral Kumar, Cosmin Paduraru, et al. Benchmarks for deep
  off-policy evaluation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Ge Gao, Qitong Gao, Xi Yang, Miroslav Pajic, and Min Chi. A reinforcement learning-informed pat-
  tern mining framework for multivariate time series classification. In International Joint Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2022a.
Ge Gao, Song Ju, Markel Sanz Ausin, and Min Chi. Hope: Human-centric off-policy evaluation for
  e-learning and healthcare. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
  Systems (AAMAS), 2023.
Qitong Gao, Davood Hajinezhad, Yan Zhang, Yiannis Kantaros, and Michael M Zavlanos. Reduced
  variance deep reinforcement learning with temporal logic specifications. In Proceedings of the
  10th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems, pp. 237–248, 2019.
Qitong Gao, Michael Naumann, Ilija Jovanov, Vuk Lesi, Karthik Kamaravelu, Warren M Grill,
  and Miroslav Pajic. Model-based design of closed loop deep brain stimulation controller using
  reinforcement learning. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 11th International Conference on Cyber-Physical
  Systems (ICCPS), pp. 108–118. IEEE, 2020a.
Qitong Gao, Miroslav Pajic, and Michael M Zavlanos. Deep imitative reinforcement learning for
  temporal logic robot motion planning with noisy semantic observations. In 2020 IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 8490–8496. IEEE, 2020b.
Qitong Gao, Stephen L Schmidt, Karthik Kamaravelu, Dennis A Turner, Warren M Grill, and
  Miroslav Pajic. Offline policy evaluation for learning-based deep brain stimulation controllers. In
  2022 ACM/IEEE 13th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), pp. 80–91.
  IEEE, 2022b.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Qitong Gao, Dong Wang, Joshua D Amason, Siyang Yuan, Chenyang Tao, Ricardo Henao, Majda
  Hadziahmetovic, Lawrence Carin, and Miroslav Pajic. Gradient importance learning for incomplete
  observations. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022c.
Stephen Gould, Tianshi Gao, and Daphne Koller. Region-based segmentation and object detection.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 22, 2009.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. How to start training: The effect of initialization and architecture.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Botao Hao, Xiang Ji, Yaqi Duan, Hao Lu, Csaba Szepesvari, and Mengdi Wang. Bootstrapping
  fitted q-evaluation for off-policy inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4074–4084. PMLR, 2021.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 652–661. PMLR, 2016.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Ilya Kostrikov and Ofir Nachum. Statistical bootstrapping for uncertainty estimation in off-policy
   evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13609, 2020.
Hoang Le, Cameron Voloshin, and Yisong Yue. Batch policy learning under constraints. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3703–3712. PMLR, 2019.
Alex Lee, Anusha Nagabandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Stochastic latent actor-critic: Deep
  reinforcement learning with a latent variable model. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33, 2020.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Xuanhui Wang. Unbiased offline evaluation of contextual-
  bandit-based news article recommendation algorithms. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM Interna-
  tional Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 297–306, 2011.
Cong Lu, Philip J Ball, Tim GJ Rudner, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael A Osborne, and Yee Whye Teh.
  Challenges and opportunities in offline reinforcement learning from visual observations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.04779, 2022.
Travis Mandel, Yun-En Liu, Sergey Levine, Emma Brunskill, and Zoran Popovic. Offline policy
  evaluation across representations with applications to educational games. In AAMAS, volume 1077,
  2014.
Rishabh Mehrotra, James McInerney, Hugues Bouchard, Mounia Lalmas, and Fernando Diaz.
  Towards a fair marketplace: Counterfactual evaluation of the trade-off between relevance, fairness &
  satisfaction in recommendation systems. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference
  on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 2243–2251, 2018.
Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. Dualdice: Behavior-agnostic estimation of
  discounted stationary distribution corrections. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32:2318–2328, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Doina Precup. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy evaluation. Computer Science Department
 Faculty Publication Series, pp. 80, 2000.

Rafael Rafailov, Tianhe Yu, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Chelsea Finn. Offline reinforcement learning
  from images with latent space models. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 1154–1168.
  PMLR, 2021.

Ignacio Rocco, Relja Arandjelović, and Josef Sivic. End-to-end weakly-supervised semantic align-
  ment. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  6917–6925, 2018.

Simone Rossi, Pietro Michiardi, and Maurizio Filippone. Good initializations of variational bayes for
  deep models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5487–5497. PMLR, 2019.

Oleh Rybkin, Chuning Zhu, Anusha Nagabandi, Kostas Daniilidis, Igor Mordatch, and Sergey Levine.
  Model-based reinforcement learning via latent-space collocation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 9190–9201. PMLR, 2021.

Yuta Saito, Takuma Udagawa, Haruka Kiyohara, Kazuki Mogi, Yusuke Narita, and Kei Tateno.
  Evaluating the robustness of off-policy evaluation. In Fifteenth ACM Conference on Recommender
  Systems, pp. 114–123, 2021.

Yassir Saquil, Da Chen, Yuan He, Chuan Li, and Yong-Liang Yang. Multiple pairwise ranking
  networks for personalized video summarization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1718–1727, 2021.

Avi Segal, Kobi Gal, Ece Kamar, Eric Horvitz, and Grant Miller. Optimizing interventions via offline
  policy evaluation: Studies in citizen science. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2018.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Shengpu Tang and Jenna Wiens. Model selection for offline reinforcement learning: Practical
  considerations for healthcare settings. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 2–35.
  PMLR, 2021.

Ziyang Tang, Yihao Feng, Lihong Li, Dengyong Zhou, and Qiang Liu. Doubly robust bias reduction
  in infinite horizon off-policy estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.

Philip Thomas and Emma Brunskill. Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2139–2148. PMLR, 2016.

Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.

Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning
  for self-supervised visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3024–3033, 2021.

Junfeng Wen, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Batch stationary distribution estimation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10203–10213. PMLR, 2020.

Mengjiao Yang, Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Off-policy evaluation via
 the regularized lagrangian. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6551–6561,
 2020.

Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Dale Schuurmans. Offline policy selection
 under uncertainty. In Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yuling Yao, Aki Vehtari, Daniel Simpson, and Andrew Gelman. Yes, but did it work?: Evaluating
  variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5581–5590. PMLR,
  2018.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:14129–14142, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:28954–28967, 2021.
Marvin Zhang, Sharad Vikram, Laura Smith, Pieter Abbeel, Matthew Johnson, and Sergey Levine.
 Solar: Deep structured representations for model-based reinforcement learning. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7444–7453. PMLR, 2019.
Michael R Zhang, Thomas Paine, Ofir Nachum, Cosmin Paduraru, George Tucker, Mohammad
 Norouzi, et al. Autoregressive dynamics models for offline policy evaluation and optimization. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Ruiyi Zhang, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Gendice: Generalized offline estimation of
  stationary values. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Shangtong Zhang, Bo Liu, and Shimon Whiteson. Gradientdice: Rethinking generalized offline
  estimation of stationary values. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11194–
  11203. PMLR, 2020c.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Figure 9: The Gym-Mujoco and Adroit environments considered by the D4RL branch of DOPE.


A        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND R ESULTS

Additional Results and Discussions. Rank correlations, regret@1 and MAEs for all 32 tasks are
documented in Tables 1- 6 below.6 The mean and standard deviation (in subscripts) over 3 random
seeds are reported. Note that in each column, performance of multiple methods may be highlighted in
bold, meaning they all achieve the best performance and do not significantly outperform each other.
The fact that VLBM outperforms the ablation baselines in most cases suggests that the RSA loss
term and branching architecture can effectively increase model expressiveness, and allow to learn the
dynamics underlying the MDP more accurately and robustly from offline data that provide limited
exploration coverage. Yet, smaller margins are attained between the VLBM and VLM+RSA in
Hopper-M-E and Hopper-M. It is likely because Hopper has relatively lower dimensional state space
compared to the other three environments, from which the underlying dynamics can be sufficiently
captured by the VLM+RSA. Fig. 10 and 11 shows the correlation between estimated (y-axis) and true
returns (x-axis) for all the OPE tasks we consider. It can be found that for Halfcheetah-R, -M-R, -M,
most of the model-based methods cannot significantly distinguish the returns across target policies.
The cause could be that the offline trajectories provided for this task are relatively more challenging,
compared to the other OPE tasks. Such an effect appears to affect IS, VPM, DICE, DR and FQE at
larger scale. It can be observed from the scatter plots reported in the DOPE benchmark (Fu et al.,
2020b) that these methods could hardly tell the scale of returns across different target policies; as the
dots almost form a horizontal line in each plot. However, the estimated returns from VLBM and IS
still preserve the rank, which leads to high rank correlations and low regrets.

Implementation Details and Hyper-parameter. The model-based methods are evaluated by
directly interacting with each target policy for 50 episodes, and the mean of discounted total returns
(γ = 0.995) over all episodes is used as estimated performance for the policy. We choose the
neural network architectures as follows. For the components involving LSTMs, which include
qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) and pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ), their architecture include one LSTM layer with 64
nodes, followed by a dense layer with 64 nodes. All other components do not have LSTM layers
involved, so they are constituted by a neural network with 2 dense layers, with 128 and 64 nodes
respectively. The output layers that determine the mean and diagonal covariance of diagonal Gaussian
distributions use linear and softplus activations, respectively. The ones that determine the mean
of Bernoulli distributions (e.g., for capturing early termination of episodes) are configured to use
sigmoid activations. VLBM and the two ablation baselines, VLM and VLM+RSA, are trained using
offline trajectories provided by DOPE, with max_iter in Alg. 1 set to 1,000 and minibatch size
set to 64. Adam optimizer is used to perform gradient descent. To determine the learning rate, we
perform grid search among {0.003, 0.001, 0.0007, 0.0005, 0.0003, 0.0001, 0.00005}. Exponential
decay is applied to the learning rate, which decays the learning rate by 0.997 every iteration. To train
VLBM, we set the constants from equation 10 following C1 = C2 , and perform grid search among
    6
        Some VPM entries are absent since they were not reported in Fu et al. (2020b), nor the code is open-sourced.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


{5, 1, 0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0001}. To train VLM+RSA, the constant C from equation 8
is determined by grid search among the same set of parameters above. L2-regularization with
decay of 0.001 and batch normalization are applied to all hidden layers. Consider that some of
the environments (e.g., Ant, Hopper, Walker2d, Pen) may terminate an episode, before timeout, if
the state meets specific conditions; details for VLBM to capture such early termination behavior is
introduced in Appendix D.

The DOPE Benchmark. The deep OPE (DOPE) benchmark (Fu et al., 2020b) provides stan-
dardized training and evaluation procedure for OPE works to follow, which facilitates fair and
comprehensive comparisons among various OPE methods. Specifically, it utilizes existing environ-
ments and training trajectories provided by D4RL7 and RLUnplugged8 , which are two benchmark
suites for offline RL training, and additionally provide target policies for OPE methods to evaluate.
In the D4RL branch, the training trajectories are originally collected from various sources including
random exploration, human teleoperation, and RL-trained policies with limited exploration; thus,
can provide varied levels of coverage over the state-action space. Moreover, the target policies are
trained using online RL algorithms, which can in general lead to different state-action visitations
than in the training trajectories. We leverage the D4RL branch as our test base, since the OPE tasks
it provides are considered challenging, i.e., the limited coverage introduced by training data, as
well as the discrepancy between the behavioral and target policies. Graphical illustrations of the
Gym-Mujoco and Adroit environments considered are shown in Fig. 9. Details on the environments
and datasets used are shown in Tables 7 and 8, from the perspectives of state and action dimensions,
if episodes can be terminated before timeout, if controls are performed over continuous space, and
the size of the offline trajectories used for training. In contrast, in the RLUnplugged branch, the
training trajectories are always collected using online RL training, which can result in adequate
coverage over the state-action space. The target policies are trained by applying offline RL over the
training trajectories, so that behavioral and target policies can lead to similar state-action visitation
distributions. As discussed in DOPE (Fu et al., 2020b), such tasks are suitable for studies where ideal
data are needed, such as complexity comparisons.

Evaluation Metrics. Following from (Fu et al., 2020b), we consider rank correlation, regret@1
and mean absolute error (MAE) as the evaluation metrics. Specifically, rank correlation measures the
strength and direction of monotonic association between the rank of OPE-estimated returns and true
returns over all target policies. It is is captured by Spearsman’s correlation coefficient between the
ordinal rankings between estimated and true returns. Regret@1 is captured by the difference between
the return of the policy corresponding to the highest return as estimated by OPE and the return of the
policy that actually produces the highest true return. In other words, regret@1 evaluates how worse
the policy resulting in the highest OPE-estimated return would perform than the actual best policy.
The two metrics above evaluate how useful OPE would be to facilitate important applications such as
policy selection. Finally, we also consider MAE which is commonly used in estimation/regression
tasks. Mathematical definitions of these metrics can be found in (Fu et al., 2020b).

Implementation of AR Ensembles. For fair comparisons with VLBM, in experiments we train
an ensemble of the state-of-the-art model-based OPE method, auto-regressive (AR) models (Zhang
et al., 2020a), as one of the baselines. Specifically, we train an ensemble of 10 AR models to learn
p(st+1 , rt |st , at ) following the auto-regressive manner, with each individual model following the
design introduced in (Zhang et al., 2020a), i.e.,
                                   (j)        (j)           (1)        (j−1)
                                 st+1 ∼ p(st+1 |st , at , st+1 , . . . , st+1 ),                            (11)
        (j)
with st+1 representing the element located at the j-th dimension of the state variable, and D the
dimension of state space. The reward is treated as an additional dimension of the states, i.e.,
                      (1)            (D)
rt ∼ p(rt |st , at , st+1 , . . . , st+1 ). However, in the original literature (Zhang et al., 2020a) it does not
introduce in details regarding which specific ensemble architecture is used (e.g., overall averaging
or weighted averaging). As a result, we choose the same weighted averaging procedure as used in
VLBM branching, to sort out the influence of different ensemble architectures and facilitate fair
comparisons. Specifically, a total of 10 AR models, parameterized by {θ1 , . . . , θ10 }, along with 10
   7
       https://github.com/rail-berkeley/d4rl
   8
       https://github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/master/rl_unplugged


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


weight variables {w1θ , . . . , w10
                                 θ
                                    | i wiθ = 1}, are trained. Similar to weighted averaging architecture
                                     P
                                                                                   (j)
used in VLBM, i.e., equation 9, the mean and variance of the prediction st+1 , captured by normal
                    2
distribution N (µ, σ ), follow
                           X10                   (j)
                                                              X10                   (j)
                   µ=                wiθ · µθi (st+1 ), σ 2 =      (wiθ )2 · σθ2i (st+1 ),           (12)
                            i=1                               i=1
            (j)             (j)
where µθi (st+1 ) and σθ2i (st+1 ) are the mean and variance produced from each individual AR model
in the ensemble.

Training Resources. Training of the proposed method, and baselines, are facilitated by Nvidia
Quadro RTX 6000, NVIDIA RTX A5000, and NVIDIA TITAN XP GPUs.

License. The use of DOPE9 and D4RL (Fu et al., 2020a) follow the Apache License 2.0.


   9
       https://github.com/google-research/deep_ope


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Scatter plots between OPE-estimated (y-axis) and true (x-axis) returns over all 20 Gym-
Mujoco tasks that are considered. Part 1.



                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Scatter plots between OPE-estimated (y-axis) and true (x-axis) returns over all 20 Gym-
Mujoco tasks that are considered. Part 2.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    M ORE t-SNE V ISUALIZATIONS


Figure 12: t-SNE visualization over the latent space captured by VLM, illustrating encoded state-
action visitations induced from all target policies. Each point is colored by the corresponding policy
from which it is generated. Policies in the legend are sorted in the order of increasing performance.


Figure 13: t-SNE visualization over the latent space captured by VLM+RSA(MSE), illustrating
encoded state-action visitations induced from all target policies. Each point is colored by the
corresponding policy from which it is generated. Policies in the legend are sorted in the order of
increasing performance.
Figures 12 and 13 above visualize the latent space captured by two ablation baselines, VLM and
VLM+RSA(MSE), respectively. It can be observed that comparing to the latent space captured by
VLM are not disentangled well compared to VLBM (shown in Figure 8), as the state-action pairs
induced by policies with different levels of performance are generally cluster together without explicit
boundaries. Such a finding illustrated the importance of the use of RSA loss (7) empirically, as it
can effectively regularize pψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) and allows the encoder to map the MDP states to
an expressive and compact latent space from which the decoder can reconstruct states and rewards
accurately. Moreover, Figure 13 shows that the latent representations of the state-action pairs captured
by VLM+RSA(MSE) distributed almost uniformly over the latent space. This justifies the rationale
provided in Sec. 2.3 where MSE is too strong to regularize the hidden states of the encoder and
decoder, and is also consistent with the results reported in Figure 3 that MSE+RSA(MSE) performs
worse than VLM in general.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    A LGORITHMS FOR TRAINING AND EVALUATING VLBM

Algorithm 1 Train VLBM.
Input: Model weights ψ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB , w1 , . . . , wB , offline trajectories ρβ , and learning rate α.
Begin:
 1: Initialize ψ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB , w1 , . . . , wB
 2: for iter in 1 : max_iter do
 3:    Sample a trajectory [(s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 ), . . . , (sT −1 , aT −1 , rT −1 , sT )] ∼ ρβ
 4:    z0ψ ∼ qψ (z0 |s0 )
 5:    z0ϕb ∼ p(z0 ), for all b ∈ [1, B]
 6:    Run forward pass of VLBM following (3), (5) and (9) for t = 1 : T , and collect all variables
       needed to evaluate LV LBM as specified in (10).
 7:    ψ ← ψ + α∇ψ LV LBM
 8:    for b in 1 : B do
 9:       ϕb ← ϕb + α∇ϕb LV LBM
10:       wb ← wb + α∇wb LV LBM
11:    end for
12: end for



Algorithm 2 Evaluate VLBM.
Input: Trained model weights ψ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB , w1 , . . . , wB
Begin:
 1: Initialize the list that stores the accumulated returns over all episodes R = []
 2: for epi in 1 : max_epi do
 3:    Initialize the variable r = 0 that tracks the accumulated return for the current episode
 4:    Initialize latent states from the prior, i.e., z0ϕb ∼ p(z0 ) for all b ∈ [1, B]
 5:    Initialize LSTM hidden states hϕ0 b = 0 for all b ∈ [1, B]
 6:    Sample sϕ0 b ∼ pϕ (s0 |ztϕb ) for all b ∈ [1, B] and generate initial MDP state sϕ0 following (9)
 7:    for t in 1 : T do
 8:       Determine the action following the target policy π, i.e., at−1 ∼ π(at−1 |sϕt−1 )
 9:       for b in 1 : B do
10:          Update hϕt b , h̃ϕt b , ztϕb , sϕt b , rt−1
                                                     ϕb
                                                         following (5).
11:       end for
12:       Generate the next state s ϕt following (9), as well as the reward rt−1                     ϕ
                                                                                                             ∼

                      ϕ1           ϕB                       P            ϕb             P 2             ϕb
          pϕ (rt−1 |zt , . . . , zt ) = N µ =                  b wb · µ(rt−1 ), Σdiag =  b wb · Σdiag (rt−1 )

                                   ϕ
13:      Update r ← r + γ t−1 rt−1 , with γ being the discounting factor
14:   end for
15:   Append r into R
16: end for
17: Average over all elements in R, which serves as the estimated return over π


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    E ARLY T ERMINATION OF E NVIRONMENTS
Given that some Gym-Mujoco environments, including Ant, Hopper, Walker2d and Pen, may
terminate an episode before reaching the maximum steps, if the state violates specific constraints.
Below we introduce how VLM and VLBM can be enriched to capture such early termination
behaviors.

VLM For VLM, we introduce an additional component dϕt ∼ pϕ (dt |ztϕ ) to the generative pro-
cess equation 5, where dϕt is a Bernoulli variable determining if an episode should be terminated at its
t-th step. Specifically, pϕ (dt |ztϕ ) follows Bernoulli distribution, with mean determined by an MLP
with sigmoid activation applied to the output layer. As a result, the generative process now follows
                     hϕt = fϕ (hϕt−1 , zt−1
                                        ϕ
                                            , at−1 ),    h̃ϕt = gϕ (hϕt ),       ztϕ ∼ pϕ (h̃ϕt ),
           sϕt ∼ pϕ (st |ztϕ ),    ϕ
                                  rt−1 ∼ pϕ (rt−1 |ztϕ ),     dϕt ∼ pϕ (dt |ztϕ ),       at ∼ π(at |sϕt ).     (13)
Moreover, we add in a new term to VLM’s training objective, in order to update the component
introduced above during training, i.e.,
                                                       XT
                   Learly_term
                     V LM      (ψ, ϕ) = LV LM (ψ, ϕ) +       log pϕ (dt |zt ),          (14)
                                                                       t=0

with LV LM (ψ, ϕ) being the original objective of VLM, as presented in equation 8.

VLBM For VLBM, the termination of an episode is determined following, i.e.,
                                                               X
           dϕt ∼ pϕ (dt |ztϕ1 , . . . , ztϕB ) = Bernoulli(µ =   wb · µd (dϕt b )),                            (15)
                                                                             b

where µd (dϕt b ) = ϕM  LP  ϕb                  ϕb
                     b,µd (zt ) is the mean of dt produced from the b-th branch of the decoder, and
                                               ϕb       ϕb
ϕM   LP
  b,µd is the corresponding MLP that maps zt to µd (dt ). To update the components involved in
the procedure above, we introduce a new term to the VLBM’s objective, i.e.,
             LVearly_term
                 LBM      (ψ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB , w1 , · · · , wB )                                              (16)
                                                                 XT
            =LV LBM (ψ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕB , w1 , · · · , wB ) +            log pϕ (dϕt |ztϕ1 , . . . , ztϕB ),   (17)
                                                                   t=0

with LV LBM being the original objective of VLBM, as presented in equation 10.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     B OUND D ERIVATION
We now derive the evidence lower bound (ELBO) for the joint log-likelihood distribution, i.e.,
  log pϕ (s0:T , r0:T −1 )                                                                                        (18)
      Z
= log            pϕ (s0:T , z1:T , r0:T −1 )dz                                                                    (19)
        z1:T ∈Z
      Z
                 pϕ (s0:T , z1:T , r0:T −1 )
= log                                        qψ (z0:T |s0:T , a0:T −1 )dz                                         (20)
        z1:T ∈Z qψ (z0:T |s0:T , a0:T −1 )
≥Eqψ [log p(z0 ) + log pϕ (s0:T , z1:T , r0:T −1 |z0 ) − log qψ (z0:T |s0:T , a0:T −1 )]                          (21)
      h                                     XT
=Eqψ log p(z0 ) + log pϕ (s0 |z0 ) +                log pϕ (st , zt , rt−1 |zt−1 , at−1 )
                                                t=1
                                      XT                                      i
              − log qψ (z0 |s0 ) −             log qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )                                     (22)
                                          t=1
      h                                                        XT
=Eqψ log p(z0 ) − log qψ (z0 |s0 ) + log pϕ (s0 |z0 ) +                  log pϕ (st |zt )pϕ (rt−1 |zt )pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 )
                                                                    t=1
                 XT                                      i
              −           log qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )                                                          (23)
                     t=1
      h XT                           XT
=Eqψ             log pϕ (st |zt ) +           log pϕ (rt−1 |zt )
             t=0                         t=1
                                              XT                                                                 i
              − KL qψ (z0 |s0 )||p(z0 ) −                  KL qψ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )||pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) .
                                                     t=1
                                                                                                                 (24)
Note that the transition from equation 20 to equation 21 follows Jensen’s inequality.


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F   BASICS OF VARIATIONAL I NFERENCE
Classic variational auto-encoders (VAEs) are designed to generate synthetic data that share similar
characteristics than the ones used for training (Kingma & Welling, 2013). Specifically, VAEs learn
an approximated posterior qψ (z|x) and a generative model pϕ (x|z), over the prior p(z), with x being
the data and z the latent variable. It’s true posterior pϕ (z|x) is intractable, i.e.,
                                                 pϕ (x|z)p(z)
                                     pϕ (z|x) =               ;                              (25)
                                                     pϕ (x)
                                                             R
since the marginal likelihood in the denominator, pϕ (x) = z pϕ (x|z)p(z)dz, requires integration
over the unknown latent space. For the same reason, VAEs cannot be trained to directly maximize
the marginal log-likelihood, max log pϕ (x). To resolve this, one could maximize a lower bound of
pϕ (x), i.e.,
                          max −KL(qψ (z|x)||p(z)) + Eqψ [log pϕ (x|z)],                         (26)
                           ψ,ϕ

which is the evidence lower bound (ELBO).

Reparameterization. During training, it is required to sample from qψ (z|x) and pϕ (x|z) constantly.
The reparameterization technique is introduced in (Kingma & Welling, 2013), to ensure that the
gradients can flow through such sampling process during back-propagation. For example, if both
distributions (qψ (z|x) and pϕ (x|z)) follow diagonal Gaussians, with mean and diagonal covariance
determined by MLPs, i.e.,

                      z ∼ qψ (z|x) = N µ = ψµM LP (x), Σ = ψΣ       M LP
                                                                         (x) ,                 (27)

                       x ∼ pϕ (x|z) = N µ = ϕM    µ
                                                    LP
                                                       (z), Σ = ϕM  Σ
                                                                      LP
                                                                         (z) ;                 (28)

here, ψµM LP , ψΣ
                M LP
                     , ϕM
                        µ
                          LP
                             , ϕM
                                Σ
                                  LP
                                     are the MLPs that generate the means and covariances. The
sampling processes above can be captured by reparameterization, i.e.,
                                  z = ψµM LP (x) + ψΣ
                                                    M LP
                                                         (x) · ϵ,                               (29)
                                  x = ϕM
                                       µ
                                         LP
                                            (z) + ϕM
                                                   Σ
                                                     LP
                                                        (z) · ϵ,                                (30)
with ϵ ∼ N (0, I). Consequently, the gradients over ψ and ϕ can be calculated following the chain
rule, and used for back-propagation during training. We direct readers to (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
for a comprehensive review of reparameterization.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
Overview of latent-model based RL methods. In SLAC, latent representations are used to
improve the sample efficiency of model-free RL training algorithms, by jointly modeling and learning
dynamics and controls over the latent space. Similarly, SOLAR improves data efficiency for multi-task
RL by first learning high-level latent representations of the environment, which can be shared across
different tasks. Then, local dynamics models are inferred from the abstraction, with controls solved
by linear-quadratic regulators. PlaNet and Dreamer further improve the architecture and training
objectives of latent models, allowing them to look ahead multiple steps and plan for longer horizon.
There also exist LatCo which directly performs trajectory optimization over the latent space, allowing
the agent to temporarily bypass dynamical constraints and quickly navigate to the high-reward regions
in early training stage. To summarize, methods above leverage latent representations to gain sufficient
exploration coverage and quickly navigate to high-reward regions, improving sample efficiency
for policy optimization. Note that they mostly require online interactions with the environment to
formulate a growing experience replay buffer for policy learning, which have different goals than
OPE which requires learning from a fixed set of offline trajectories.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Ant           Ant            Ant           Ant           Ant
      Rank Corr.
                         -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
      IS                 .14.41        −.21.35        −.17.32       .07.39        .26.34
      VPM                −.42.38       −.28.28        −.2.31        −.26.29       .24.31
      DICE               −.13.37       −.33.4         −.36.28       −.24.39       −.21.35
      DR                 −.28.32       .35.35         .66.26        .45.32        .01.33
      FQE                −.13.32       .37.35         .65.25        .57.28        .04.33
      AR Ensemble        .40.12        .44.25         .56.01        .54.16        .48.17
      VLM                .28.14        .39.16         .37.03        .37.19        .36.07
      VLM+RSA (MSE)      .33.11        .29.13         .35.22        .30.42        .17.14
      VLM+RSA            .40.03        .53.19         .42.12        .53.19        .40.11
      VLM+RSA Ens.       .62.16        .76.02         .65.07        .62.13        0..60
      VLBM               .79.01        .81.05         .65.06        .59.14        .78.24
                         Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah    Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah
      Rank Corr.
                         -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
      IS                 .01.35        −.06.37        .80.11        .59.26        −.24.36
      VPM                .18.35        −.47.29        -             −.07.36       .27.36
      DICE               −.44.30       −.08.35        −.26.07       −.15.41       −.70.22
      DR                 .77.17        .62.27         .32.32        .32.37        −.02.38
      FQE                .78.15        .62.27         .34.17        .26.37        −.11.41
      AR Ensemble        .65.11        .65.07         .60.09        .59.14        .60.06
      VLM                .75.19        .45.06         .33.1         .64.06        .43.09
      VLM+RSA (MSE)      .54.31        .49.03         .6.08         .47.11        .13.27
      VLM+RSA            .80.17        .54.08         .65.21        .61.03        .51.08
      VLM+RSA Ens.       .71.14        .66.08         .64.02        .60.05        .45.17
      VLBM               .88.01        .74.13         .81.13        .64.04        .60.06
                         Walker2d      Walker2d       Walker2d      Walker2d      Walker2d
      Rank Corr.
                         -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
      IS                 .22.37        .24.33         −.25.35       .65.24        −.05.38
      VPM                .17.32        .49.37         .44.21        −.52.25       −.42.34
      DICE               −.37.27       −.34.34        .12.38        .55.23        −.19.36
      DR                 .26.34        .19.33         .02.37        −.37.39       .16.29
      FQE                .35.33        .25.32         −.09.36       −.19.36       .21.31
      AR Ensemble        .54.11        .25.33         .55.14        .38.17        .36.29
      VLM                .57.13        .16.13         .18.30        .39.18        .44.18
      VLM+RSA (MSE)      .27.28        .20.25         .09.18        .10.11        .36.19
      VLM+RSA            .56.11        .57.11         .46.08        .43.14        .59.29
      VLM+RSA Ens.       .62.17        .57.25         .43.20        −.14.09       .39.14
      VLBM               .70.13        .55.17         .66.15        .60.07        .72.14
                         Hopper        Hopper         Hopper        Hopper        Hopper
      Rank Corr.
                         -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
      IS                 .37.27        .35.26         −.55.26       −.16.03       .23.34
      VPM                .21.32        -              .13.37        −.16.03       −.46.20
      DICE               −.08.32       .08.14         .19.33        .27.28        −.13.39
      DR                 −.41.27       −.08.30        −.31.34       .05.17        −.19.36
      FQE                −.33.30       .01.08         −.29.33       .45.13        −.11.36
      AR Ensemble        .23.30        .14.29         .53.03        .28.18        .26.10
      VLM                −.05.22       .22.11         .34.08        .46.21        .36.03
      VLM+RSA (MSE)      −.18.24       .05.09         .51.20        .43.18        .58.14
      VLM+RSA            .15.28        .26.10         .51.11        .53.06        .55.19
      VLM+RSA Ens.       .09.21        .13.12         −.01.3        .66.07        .63.16
      VLBM               .28.16        .32.10         .70.03        .75.07        .77.04

Table 1: Rank correlation between estimated and ground-truth returns for all Gym-Mujoco tasks.
Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training, with standard deviations
shown in subscripts.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Door       Door         Door      Pen         Pen         Pen
        Rank Corr.
                       human      cloned       expert    human       cloned      expert
        IS             −.12.35    .66.22       .76.17    .28.28      .71.08      −.45.31
        VPM            -          −.29.36      .65.23    -           -           .08.33
        DICE           −.02.20    .18.31       −.06.32   .17.33      −.07.26     −.53.30
        DR             .01.18     .60.28       .76.13    −.36.29     .39.25      .52.28
        FQE            .07.09     .55.27       .89.09    −.31.21     .06.42      −.01.33
        AR Ens.        .58.06     .52.13       .61.07    .33.07      .42.08      .60.09
        VLBM           .80.14     .78.18       .93.03    .34.17      .82.07      .58.15
                       Hammer     Hammer       Hammer    Relocate    Relocate    Relocate
        Rank Corr.
                       human      cloned       expert    human       cloned      expert
        IS             .39.07     .58.27       .64.24    −.23.07     −.22.18     .52.23
        VPM            -          −.77.22      .39.31    -           -           .39.31
        DICE           .11.18     .35.38       −.42.31   −.23.16     .22.16      −.27.34
        DR             −.04.25    −.70.20      .49.31    .65.19      .10.16      −.40.24
        FQE            .14.10     −.15.33      .29.34    .62.11      .15.17      −.57.28
        AR Ens.        .44.12     .40.20       .53.11    .42.23      .30.10      .54.23
        VLBM           .34.14     .58.18       .70.20    .68.17      .80.04      .58.17

Table 2: Rank correlation between estimated and ground-truth returns for all Adroit tasks. Results
are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training, with standard deviations shown in
subscripts.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Ant           Ant            Ant           Ant           Ant
  Regret@1
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   .47.32        .46.18         .61.18        .16.23        .56.22
  VPM                  .88.22        .32.24         .4.21         .72.43        .15.24
  DICE                 .62.15        .60.16         .43.1         .64.13        .50.29
  DR                   .43.22        .37.13         .12.18        .05.09        .28.15
  FQE                  .43.22        .36.14         .12.18        .05.09        .28.15
  AR Ensemble          .18.09        .17.20         .050          .31.20        .03.02
  VLM                  .38.24        .07.02         .20.25        .08.02        .14.16
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        .050.         .26.21         .28.4         .48.33        .43.44
  VLM+RSA              .18.09        .13.12         .14.16        .17.24        .07.02
  VLM+RSA Ens.         .13.08        .050.          .03.02        .03.02        .52.37
  VLBM                 .050.         .050.          .050.         .11.09        0.0.
                       Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah    Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah
  Regret@1
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   .15.08        .73.42         .05.05        .13.10        .31.11
  VPM                  .14.09        .80.34         .33.19        .25.09        .12.07
  DICE                 .32.40        .38.37         .82.29        .30.07        .81.30
  DR                   .11.08        .14.07         .37.15        .33.18        .31.10
  FQE                  .12.07        .14.07         .38.13        .36.16        .37.08
  AR Ensemble          .02.03        .11.07         .13.10        .07.05        .04.05
  VLM                  .11.04        .12.06         .25.01        .04.03        .230.
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        .09.08        .22.09         .20.06        .09.08        .27.05
  VLM+RSA              .08.02        .17.05         .09.12        .02.03        .230.
  VLM+RSA Ens.         .13.05        .19.13         .07.09        .02.03        .69.44
  VLBM                 .14.04        .09.02         0.0.          .07.09        .15.07
                       Walker2d      Walker2d       Walker2d      Walker2d      Walker2d
  Regret@1
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   .43.26        .13.07         .70.39        .02.05        .74.33
  VPM                  .09.19        .24.42         .08.06        .46.31        .88.20
  DICE                 .35.36        .78.27         .27.43        .18.12        .39.33
  DR                   .06.07        .30.12         .25.09        .68.23        .15.20
  FQE                  .06.07        .22.14         .31.10        .24.20        .15.21
  AR Ensemble          .13.11        .17.19         .16.15        .14.16        .16.02
  VLM                  .10.05        .51.25         .30.39        .33.38        .08.07
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        .49.16        .39.30         .43.35        .860.         .31.29
  VLM+RSA              .10.07        .11.02         .18.15        .34.37        .08.04
  VLM+RSA Ens.         .11.04        .14.16         .02.02        .860.         .58.20
  VLBM                 .05.04        .05.01         .03.04        .14.16        .06.06
                       Hopper        Hopper         Hopper        Hopper        Hopper
  Regret@1
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   .06.03        .10.12         .38.28        .880.         .05.05
  VPM                  .13.10        -              .10.14        -             .26.10
  DICE                 .20.08        .16.08         .18.19        .16.13        .30.15
  DR                   .34.35        .34.39         .32.32        .34.24        .41.17
  FQE                  .41.20        .42.08         .32.32        .18.23        .36.22
  AR Ensemble          .07.05        .23.11         .14.09        .06.02        .12.11
  VLM                  .76.18        .35.22         .22.22        .14.15        .07.02
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        .42.34        .510.          .33.39        .26.13        .06.04
  VLM+RSA              .62.38        .18.23         .13.12        .25.15        .33.39
  VLM+RSA Ens.         .31.18        .510.          .47.36        .03.02        .06.04
  VLBM                 .10.03        .10.03         .11.11        .040.         .03.04

Table 3: Regret@1 for all Gym-Mujoco tasks. Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random
seeds used for training, with standard deviations shown in subscripts.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Door        Door       Door        Pen        Pen         Pen
         Regret@1
                      human       cloned     expert      human      cloned      expert
         IS           .45.40      .02.07     .01.04      .17.15     .14.09      .31.10
         VPM          .69.24      .81.33     .03.03      .28.12     .36.18      .25.13
         DICE         .10.27      .65.45     .37.27      .04.09     .12.08      .33.20
         DR           .05.09      .11.08     .05.07      .09.08     .13.06      .05.07
         FQE          .05.08      .11.06     .03.03      .07.05     .12.07      .11.14
         AR Ens.      .08.10      .44.31     .10.09      .09.08     .14.05      .08.07
         VLBM         .03.04      .03.04     .02.03      .29.07     .08.06      .09.02
                      Hammer      Hammer     Hammer      Relocate   Relocate    Relocate
         Regret@1
                      human       cloned     expert      human      cloned      expert
         IS           .19.30      .03.15     .01.04      .63.41     .63.41      .18.14
         VPM          .18.29      .72.39     .04.07      .77.18     .11.29      .76.23
         DICE         .04.08      .67.48     .24.34      .97.11     .96.18      .97.07
         DR           .46.23      .78.38     .09.09      .17.15     .18.27      .98.08
         FQE          .46.23      .36.39     .05.04      .17.14     .29.42      1.00.06
         AR Ens.      .08.06      .05.05     0.0.        .26.33     .63.35      .26.33
         VLBM         .080.       0.0.       .01.01      .08.08     .02.02      .07.07

Table 4: Regret@1 for all Adroit tasks. Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used
for training, with standard deviations shown in subscripts.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Ant           Ant            Ant           Ant           Ant
  MAE
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   605104        604102         594104        603101        606103
  VPM                  607108        604106         570109        612105        57099
  DICE                 558108        471100         49590         583110        53092
  DR                   584114        32666          34566         42172         404106
  FQE                  583122        31967          34564         41079         398111
  AR Ensemble          55181         62914          57435         6421          57561
  VLM                  33115         31520          31031         4866          6632
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        34313         3244           3063          46321         6618
  VLM+RSA              3517          31423          30525         4483          6654
  VLM+RSA Ens.         24220         31237          34580         4646          66720
  VLBM                 2024          26955          33143         2652          59811
                       Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah    Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah   Halfcheetah
  MAE
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   1404152       1400146        1217123       1409154       1405155
  VPM                  945164        1427111        1374153       1384148       1411154
  DICE                 944161        1078132        1382130       1440158       1446156
  DR                   102595        1015103        1222134       1001129       949126
  FQE                  103195        1014101        1211130       1003132       938125
  AR Ensemble          1226222       48024          55364         84664         153716
  VLM                  520242        52649          62453         147827        14901
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        469159        42649          68939         143210        14890
  VLM+RSA              414155        44650          622153        147320        14926
  VLM+RSA Ens.         25320         773139         1306113       146841        152522
  VLBM                 20122         45630          51750         1281170       14952
                       Walker2d      Walker2d       Walker2d      Walker2d      Walker2d
  MAE
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   40562         43662          42860         42760         43061
  VPM                  36768         42561          42660         42464         44058
  DICE                 43760         32260          27331         37451         41957
  DR                   519179        21746          36874         29654         34774
  FQE                  453142        23342          35079         31373         35473
  AR Ensemble          530102        4084           4446          327106        38342
  VLM                  53830         38012          25017         16046         4528
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        52130         34020          36119         23614         44315
  VLM+RSA              52241         35886          2539          1257          326161
  VLM+RSA Ens.         5389          38623          20138         16811         44124
  VLBM                 51724         28872          24433         15628         26222
                       Hopper        Hopper         Hopper        Hopper        Hopper
  MAE
                       -E            -M-E           -M            -M-R          -R
  IS                   10629         36047          40548         43811         41245
  VPM                  44243         -              43344         -             43844
  DICE                 25954         26640          21541         3982          12216
  DR                   42699         23477          30785         29814         28950
  FQE                  28276         25228          28373         2957          26142
  AR Ensemble          36916         29211          39342         47734         45434
  VLM                  14831         13619          21022         1389          38266
  VLM+RSA (MSE)        24640         18610          23229         12412         41515
  VLM+RSA              2702          14015          11728         11716         41220
  VLM+RSA Ens.         25323         14942          23362         11517         30647
  VLBM                 2668          1404           12647         12421         38527

Table 5: MAE between estimated and ground-truth returns for all Gym-Mujoco tasks. Results are
obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training, with standard deviations shown in
subscripts.

                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Door        Door        Door        Pen         Pen         Pen
        MAE
                    human       cloned      expert      human       cloned      expert
        IS          870173      891188      648122      3926128     1707128     4547222
        VPM         862163      1040188     879182      1569215     2324129     2325136
        DICE        1108199     69779       856134      4193244     1454219     2963279
        DR          37965       42473       1353218     2846200     132398      2013564
        FQE         38960       43881       134384      2872170     1232105     1057281
        AR Ens.     7343        8267        223616      216112      1981106     1803226
        VLBM        710152      9331        60084       1637286     669270      1002262
                    Hammer      Hammer      Hammer      Relocate    Relocate    Relocate
        MAE
                    human       cloned      expert      human       cloned      expert
        IS          73521118    74031126    3052608     638217      632215      2731147
        VPM         71051107    74591114    73121117    806166      586135      620214
        DICE        5677936     4169839     3963758     4526474     1347485     1095221
        DR          5768751     6101679     3485590     606116      412124      1193350
        FQE         6000612     5415558     2950728     593113      439125      1351393
        AR Ens.     689727      724012      30578       8237        6626        21384
        VLBM        6184479     7267402     2682146     62425       388183      2021270

Table 6: MAE between estimated and ground-truth returns for all Adroit tasks. Results are obtained
by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               State Dim.   Action Dim.   Early Term.   Continuous Ctrl.   Dataset      Dataset Size
                                                                            random         999,427
                                                                           medium-
 Ant               27            8            Yes              Yes                         301,698
                                                                            replay
                                                                            medium         999,175
                                                                           medium-
                                                                                          1,998,158
                                                                            expert
                                                                             expert        999,036
                                                                            random         999,000
                                                                           medium-
 Halfcheetah       17            6            No               Yes                         201,798
                                                                            replay
                                                                            medium         999,000
                                                                           medium-
                                                                                          1,998,000
                                                                            expert
                                                                             expert        999,000
                                                                            random         999,999
                                                                           medium-
 Hopper            11            3            Yes              Yes                         401,598
                                                                            replay
                                                                            medium         999,998
                                                                           medium-
                                                                                          1,998,966
                                                                            expert
                                                                             expert        999,061
                                                                            random         999,999
                                                                           medium-
 Walker2d          17            6            Yes              Yes                         301,698
                                                                            replay
                                                                            medium         999,322
                                                                           medium-
                                                                                          1,998,318
                                                                            expert
                                                                             expert        999,000

Table 7: Summary of the Gym-Mujoco environments and datasets used to train VLBM and baselines.

               State Dim.   Action Dim.   Early Term.   Continuous Ctrl.   Dataset    Dataset Size
                                                                           human          4,975
   Pen            45            24           Yes              Yes
                                                                           cloned       496,264
                                                                           expert       494,248
                                                                           human          6,704
   Door           39            28            No              Yes
                                                                           cloned       995,642
                                                                           expert       995,000
                                                                           human         11,285
   Hammer         46            26            No              Yes
                                                                           cloned       996,394
                                                                           expert       995,000
                                                                           human          9,917
   Relocate       39            30            No              Yes
                                                                           cloned       996,242
                                                                           expert       995,000

  Table 8: Summary of the Adroit environments and datasets used to train VLBM and baselines.


                                                   31
