Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N O R EASON FOR N O S UPERVISION :
I MPROVED G ENERALIZATION IN S UPERVISED M ODELS
 Mert Bulent Sariyildiz1,2         Yannis Kalantidis1                               Karteek Alahari2                     Diane Larlus1
1
    NAVER LABS Europe                  2
                                           Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK



                                              A BSTRACT
         We consider the problem of training a deep neural network on a given classification
         task, e.g., ImageNet-1K (IN1K), so that it excels at both the training task as well
         as at other (future) transfer tasks. These two seemingly contradictory properties
         impose a trade-off between improving the model’s generalization and maintaining
         its performance on the original task. Models trained with self-supervised learning
         tend to generalize better than their supervised counterparts for transfer learning;
         yet, they still lag behind supervised models on IN1K. In this paper, we propose
         a supervised learning setup that leverages the best of both worlds. We extensively
         analyze supervised training using multi-scale crops for data augmentation and an
         expendable projector head, and reveal that the design of the projector allows us to
         control the trade-off between performance on the training task and transferability.
         We further replace the last layer of class weights with class prototypes computed
         on the fly using a memory bank and derive two models: t-ReX that achieves a new
         state of the art for transfer learning and outperforms top methods such as DINO
         and PAWS on IN1K, and t-ReX* that matches the highly optimized RSB-A1
         model on IN1K while performing better on transfer tasks.
         Code and pretrained models: https://europe.naverlabs.com/t-rex


1    I NTRODUCTION                                                                                             t-ReX
                                                            Mean Transfer Acc. (Log odds)


                                                                                            1.3
Deep convolutional neural networks trained on large                                                DINO PAWS
                                                                                                                        New SotA
annotated image sets like ImageNet-1K (IN1K) (Rus-                                                                     (this paper)
sakovsky et al., 2015) have shown strong generaliza-                                        1.2     SL-MLP
tion properties. This motivated their application to                                              (+multi-crop)      LOOK
a broad range of transfer tasks including the recog-                                                              (+multi-crop)
                                                                                                                                  t-ReX*
nition of concepts that are not encountered during                                          1.1

training (Donahue et al., 2014; Razavian et al., 2014).                                            Previous            SupCon
                                                                                                    SotA
Recently, models trained in a self-supervised learning                                       1
                                                                                                                           RSB-A1
(SSL) framework have become popular due to their
ability to learn without manual annotations, as well as                                             75    76      77     78     79    80
their capacity to surpass supervised models in the con-                                              ImageNet-1K Accuracy (%)
text of transferable visual representations. SSL mod-     Figure 1: We present t-ReX and t-ReX*,
els like MoCo (He et al., 2020), SwAV (Caron et al.,      two ResNet50 models trained with an im-
2020), BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) or DINO (Caron et al.,   proved supervised learning setup on Ima-
2021) exhibit stronger transfer learning performance      geNet (IN1K), with strong performance on
than models (Wightman et al., 2021) trained on the        both transfer learning (y-axis, averaged over
same data with annotations (Sariyildiz et al., 2021).     13 tasks) and IN1K (x-axis).
This achievement is on the one hand exciting, as SSL approaches do not require an expensive and error-
prone annotation process, but also seemingly counter-intuitive (Wang et al., 2022b) as it suggests that
access to additional information, i.e., image labels, actually hinders the generalization properties of a
model. Models learned via SSL are however not able to match their supervised counterparts on IN1K
classification, i.e., on the concepts seen during training. Top-performing SSL and semi-supervised
methods like DINO (Caron et al., 2021) or PAWS (Assran et al., 2021) still result in 3-5% lower top-1
accuracy compared to optimized supervised models such as RSB-A1 (Wightman et al., 2021).


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this paper, we argue that access to more information (in the form of manual annotations)
should not hurt generalization, and we seek to improve the transferability of encoders learned in
a supervised manner, while retaining their state-of-the-art performance on the supervised training
task. The mismatch observed between IN1K and transfer performance suggests that this goal is
not trivial. It has been shown, for example, that popular regularization techniques such as Label
Smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016), Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) or CutMix (Yun et al., 2019),
which improve IN1K performance, actually lead to less transferable representations (Kornblith et al.,
2021; Sariyildiz et al., 2021), and that representations learned on top of models underfitting their
original task transfer better (Zhang et al., 2022).
We identify two key training components from the most successful SSL approaches that may lead
to more transferable representations: multi-crop data augmentation (Caron et al., 2020) and the use
of an expendable projector head, i.e., an auxiliary module added after the encoder during training
and discarded at test time (Chen et al., 2020a). We study the impact of these two components on the
transfer performance together with the performance on the training task, and present novel insights on
the role of the projector design in this context. Furthermore, inspired by recent work on supervised
learning (Feng et al., 2022; Khosla et al., 2020), we introduce Online Class Means, a memory-efficient
variant of the Nearest Class Means classifier (Mensink et al., 2012) that computes class prototypes
in an “online” manner with the help of a memory queue. This further increases performance. We
perform an extensive analysis on how each component affects the learned representations, and look at
feature sparsity and redundancy as well as intra-class distance. We also study the training dynamics
and show that class prototypes and classifier weights change in different ways across iterations.
We single out the two ResNet50 instantiations that perform best at one of the two dimensions (transfer
learning and IN1K), denoted as t-ReX and t-ReX*. t-ReX exceeds the state-of-the-art transfer
learning performance of DINO (Caron et al., 2021) or PAWS (Assran et al., 2021) and still performs
much better than these two on IN1K classification. t-ReX* outperforms the state-of-the-art results of
RSB-A1 (Wightman et al., 2021) on IN1K while generalizing better to transfer tasks. We visualize the
performance of these two selected models, together with those of other top-performing configurations
from our setup in Fig. 1, and compare it to state-of-the-art supervised, semi-supervised and self-
supervised learning methods, across two dimensions: IN1K accuracy and mean transfer accuracy
across 13 transfer tasks. This intuitively conveys how the proposed training setup pushes the envelope
of the training-versus-transfer performance trade-off (from the “Previous SotA” region, to the “New
SotA” one in Fig. 1) and offers strong pretrained visual encoders that future approaches could build on.
Contributions. We propose a supervised training setup that incorporates multi-crop data
augmentation and an expendable projector and can produce models with favorable performance
both on the training task of IN1K and on diverse transfer tasks. We thoroughly ablate this setup
and reveal that the design of the projector allows to control the performance trade-off between these
two dimensions, while a number of analyses of the features and class weights give insights on how
each component of our setup affects the training and learned representations. We also introduce
Online Class Means, a prototype-based training objective that increases performance even further
and gives state-of-the-art models for transfer learning (t-ReX) and IN1K (t-ReX*).



2    R ELATED WORK

Visual representations learned by deep networks for IN1K classification can transfer to other tasks and
datasets (Donahue et al., 2014; Razavian et al., 2014). This generalization capability of networks has
motivated researchers to propose practical approaches for measuring transfer learning (Goyal et al.,
2019; Pándy et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2019) or contribute to a formal understanding of generalization
properties (Kornblith et al., 2019; Tripuraneni et al., 2020; Yosinski et al., 2014). Recent work in this
context (Kornblith et al., 2021; Sariyildiz et al., 2021) shows that the best representations for IN1K are
not necessarily the ones transferring best. For instance, some regularization techniques or loss func-
tions improving IN1K classification lead to underwhelming transfer results. A parallel line of work
based on self-supervised learning (Caron et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a; Grill et al., 2020) focuses
on training models without manual labels, and demonstrates their strong generalization capabilities to
many transfer datasets, clearly surpassing their supervised counterparts (Sariyildiz et al., 2021). Yet,
as expected, SSL models are no match to the supervised models on the IN1K classification task itself.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    global crop       local crops


                                    ResNet50   Projector Class weights                                   Linear      Log.
                                                         or prototypes                                  classifier   Reg.


                  toucan
    (a) Supervised learning using multi-crop and a projector.                (b) Transfer learning with a frozen model.

Figure 2: Our proposed supervised learning setup borrows multi-crop (Caron et al., 2020) and
projectors (Chen et al., 2020a) from SSL to train on IN1K (left). The projector g is discarded after
training, and the ResNet backbone f is used as a feature extractor in combination with a linear
classifier trained for each task, e.g., for texture classification on DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014) (right).
A few approaches tackle the task of training supervised models that also transfer well and share
motivation with our work. SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020) extends SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a) using
image labels to build positive pairs. As such, its formulation is close to neighborhood component
analysis (NCA) (Goldberger et al., 2004). It circumvents the need for large batches by adding a
momentum and a memory similar to MoCo (He et al., 2020). Supervised-MoCo (Zhao et al., 2021)
filters out false negatives in the memory bank of MoCo using image labels, while LOOK (Feng et al.,
2022) modifies the NCA objective to only consider the closest neighbors of each query image. We
experimentally observe that our model design leads to better transfer than all these works.
In this work, we propose an effective training setup, which leverages multi-crop augmentation (Caron
et al., 2020) and an expendable projector head (Chen et al., 2020a), two key components in many
successful SSL approaches. Creating multiple augmented versions (a.k.a. crops) of images in a batch
was first proposed by Hoffer et al. (2020). Caron et al. (2020) further consider crops with different
scales and resolutions in a self-supervised learning setting, creating challenging views of an image
for which the model is encouraged to learn consistent representations (Assran et al., 2021; Caron
et al., 2021). Recent work argues that multi-crop increases representation variance, is useful for
online self-distillation (Wang et al., 2022a), and improves vision and language pretraining (Ko & Gu,
2022). We show that multi-crop over different resolutions works out-of-the-box also for supervised
training on IN1K.
Using features from intermediate layers of networks has been considered before, e.g., for training
object detectors (Lin et al., 2017) and image classification models (Lee et al., 2015), or evaluating the
transferability of individual layers (Zhang et al., 2016; Gidaris et al., 2018) or groups of layers (Evci
et al., 2022). However, selecting optimal layers for each problem is infeasible due to the computa-
tional nature of this selection. SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a) proposed instead to rely on an expendable
projector, a design that is now common practice in SSL (Zhou et al., 2022; Zbontar et al., 2021), and
is starting to be adopted by supervised approaches like SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020) and LOOK (Feng
et al., 2022). The impact of these projectors on the representation quality has only seldomly been
studied. Wang et al. (2022b) have looked at the impact of projectors, but only for transfer and in
isolation. Our work goes one step further and studies how projectors affect performance both on
the training task and for transfer. We ablate many projector designs and study them jointly with
multi-crop. Through our study, we uncover how useful projectors are at navigating the trade-off
between training and transfer performance, leading to state-of-the-art results on both dimensions.


3    A N IMPROVED TRAINING SETUP FOR SUPERVISED LEARNING

We now present an improved training setup for learning supervised models that achieve high perfor-
mance on both IN1K classification and a diverse set of transfer tasks.
Our setup trains a model (or encoder) fθ , parameterized by θ. This model encodes an image I into a
transferable representation x ∈ Rd . We follow the common protocol (Feng et al., 2022; Kornblith
et al., 2021) and train all variants of our model on IN1K using a ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) encoder.
This choice of encoder is influenced by recent observations (Wightman et al., 2021) that carefully
optimized ResNet50 models perform on par with the best Vision Transformers (ViTs, Beyer et al.
(2022)) of comparable size on IN1K. After training our models, we perform transfer learning. We


                                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


freeze the model’s parameters so they are only used to produce transferable representations (x), to be
appended with a linear classifier for each transfer task (e.g., IN1K or any other dataset, see Fig. 2b).
Our improved training setup enriches the standard supervised learning paradigm with multi-crop
augmentation and an expendable projector head (see Fig. 2a). We train our models with one of the
two following training objectives: the standard softmax cross entropy loss that learns class weights,
or an online variant of nearest class means that is based on class prototypes computed on-the-fly from
a memory bank. We detail all the proposed improvements below.
Multi-crop data augmentation. Caron et al. (2020) leveraged many image crops of multiple scales
and different resolutions when learning invariance to data augmentation in the context of SSL. Their
data augmentation pipeline, termed multi-crop, is defined over two sets of global and local crops that
respectively retain larger and smaller portions of an image. These crops are processed at different
resolutions. We adapt this component to our supervised setup. Given an input image I, we define two
scale parameters, for global and local crops, which determine the size ratio between random crops and
the image I. We follow Caron et al. (2021) and resize global and local crops to 224 × 224 and 96 × 96,
respectively. We extract multiple global and local crops, respectively Mg and Ml . Fig. 2a illustrates
one global Mg = 1 and four local Ml = 4 crops. In Sec. 4, we explore the use of multi-crop for
supervised learning, and study the effect of different hyper-parameters under that setting.
Expendable projector head. To countervail the lack of annotations, SSL approaches tackle proxy
tasks, such as learning augmentation invariance. In order to prevent the encoder from learning
representations that overfit to a potentially unimportant pretext task, SSL architectures often introduce
an expendable projector between the encoder and the loss function. On the contrary, for supervised
learning, performance on the training task is a major goal in its own right. Here, we aim to learn
supervised models that perform well on the training and on transfer tasks. These two requirements
are not aligned and it is necessary to find a trade-off (Kornblith et al., 2021).
We argue that one can control this trade-off using an additional projector
in the context of supervised learning. Similar to SSL methods (Chen
et al., 2020a;b; Chen & He, 2021) and to the recent SL-MLP (Wang                    -normalization
et al., 2022b) we introduce a Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) projector as
part of our supervised training pipeline. Let gϕ : Rd → Rdb denote this        Fully-connected ( )
projector, parameterized by ϕ. gϕ is composed of an MLP with L hidden         L
layers of dh dimensions followed by a linear projection to a bottleneck of     BatchNorm + GELU
db dimensions. Each hidden layer is composed of a sequence of a linear
fully-connected layer, batch-normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) and         Fully-connected ( )
a GeLU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) non-linearity. We further apply
ℓ2 -normalization to the output of gϕ and optionally also to the input.             -normalization
We illustrate this architecture in Fig. 3. Note that SL-MLP (Wang et al.,
2022b) uses a similar head but with only one hidden layer and no input
or output ℓ2 -normalization, so SL-MLP can be seen as a special case Figure 3: Architecture of
of our projector architecture. We compare to their design in Sec. 4 and the projector gϕ .
investigate how the number and dimension of hidden layers among other
design choices affect the transfer performance of the learned models, verifying and extending the
findings of Wang et al. (2022b). On top of this, we study transfer performance in juxtaposition to
performance on the training task, and derive the novel insight that projector design allows to control
the trade-off between performance on the training task and transferability.
Cosine softmax cross-entropy loss. Incorporating both the components described above in a standard
supervised learning paradigm, we can train with the standard softmax cross entropy loss using class
labels. The training pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2a. It uses multi-crop data augmentation on each
input image I to produce M = Mg + Ml crops Ij , j = 1, . . . , M . Each crop is individually input
to the network composed of the encoder followed by the projector, and produces an embedding
zj = gϕ (fθ (Ij )). To predict class labels, we multiply embeddings with trainable class weights
W = {wc ∈ Rdb }C    c=1 , where C is the number of classes. We train the whole pipeline using the
cosine softmax loss as it was shown to improve IN1K performance (Kornblith et al., 2021):


                          \lossce = - \frac {1}{M} \sum _{j=1}^{M} \sum _{c=1}^C \vec {y}_{[c]} \log \frac {\exp (\vec {z_j}^\top \bar {\netw }_c / \tau ) }{\sum _{k=1}^C \exp (\vec {z_j}^\top \bar {\netw }_k / \tau )}, \label {eq:ce_cos_mc_pr}    (1)


                                                                                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where y ∈ {0, 1}C is the C-dim one-hot label vector corresponding to image I, τ is a temperature
hyper-parameter and w̄c = wc /∥wc ∥. Note that projector outputs z are already ℓ2 -normalized.
Online Class Means. Motivated by the recent success of momentum encoders as a way of maintaining
online memory banks for large-scale training (He et al., 2020), we revisit the prototype-based Nearest
Class Means (NCM) approach of Mensink et al. (2012) and introduce a memory-efficient variant that
computes class prototypes in an “online” manner with the help of a memory queue.
Concretely, following Mensink et al. (2012), we define uc to be the class prototype or class mean
for class c, i.e., the mean of all embeddings from that class, and define U = {uc }C
                                                                                   c=1 . Given that
we jointly learn class means and the embeddings, computing the exact mean at each iteration is
computationally prohibitive. Instead, we formulate an online version of NCM that uses a memory
bank Q which stores ℓ2 -normalized embeddings z output by the projector, similar to the memory
bank from MoCo (He et al., 2020). Given the memory Q, we do not learn class weights, but instead
compute a prototype for each class, on-the-fly, as the average of the embeddings in the memory
which belong to that class. Formally, if Qc denotes samples in memory that belong to class c, and
Nc = |Qc |, the loss function becomes:

   \lossocm = - \frac {1}{M} \sum _{j=1}^{M} \sum _{c=1}^C \vec {y}_{[c]} \log \frac {\exp (\vec {z_j}^\top \bar {\vec {u}}_c / \tau ) }{\sum _{k=1}^C \exp (\vec {z_j}^\top \bar {\vec {u}}_k / \tau )}, \text { with } \bar {\vec {u}}_c = \frac {\vec {u}_c}{\norm {\vec {u}_c}} \text { and } \vec {u}_c = \frac {1}{N_c} \sum _{\vec {z} \in \mathcal {Q}_c} \vec {z}. \label {eq:ocm}  (2)


We refer to the above training objective as Online Class Means or OCM. To make sure the embeddings
stored in the memory remain relevant as the encoder is updated during training, we follow MoCo (He
et al., 2020) and store in memory embeddings from an exponential moving average (EMA) model
trailing fθ and gϕ . As we show in our analysis in Sec. 4.2, estimating class prototypes using only the
relatively small subset of samples in the memory bank leads to class prototypes that drift more across
iterations compared to SGD-optimized class weights that converge faster. Further details as well as
other variants are discussed in Appendix A.

4            E XPERIMENTS
In Sec. 4.1, we exhaustively study the design of the main components of our setup, i.e., multi-crop
augmentation, projectors, and OCM. This leads to a summary of our main findings. We then analyze
the learned representations, class weights, and prototypes in Sec. 4.2. There, we explore how each
component affects several facets like feature sparsity and redundancy, average coding length, as well
as intra-class distance. We also study training dynamics like gradient similarity for multi-crop or
how prototypes and classifier weights change across iterations for OCM. Finally, in Sec. 4.3 we plot
the performance of multiple variants of the proposed training setup on the training-versus-transfer
performance plane, empirically verifying its superiority over the previous state of the art.
Protocol. All our models are trained on the training set of ImageNet-1K (IN1K) (Russakovsky et al.,
2015). Due to the computational cost of training models on IN1K, each configuration is trained
only once. Given an IN1K-trained model, we discard all the training-specific modules (e.g., the
projector gϕ , the class weights W), and use the encoder fθ as a feature extractor, similar to Kornblith
et al. (2019); Sariyildiz et al. (2021). For each dataset we evaluate on, we learn a linear logistic
regression classifier with the pre-extracted features and independently optimize each classifier’s
hyper-parameters for every model and every evaluation dataset using Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al.,
2011) and Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) (see details in Appendix B). We repeat this process 5 times
with different random seeds and report the average accuracy (variance is negligible). Note that the
feature extractor is never fine-tuned, and, because we start from pre-extracted features, no additional
data augmentation is used when learning the linear classifiers.1 This protocol is illustrated in Fig. 2b.
Evaluation datasets and measures. We measure performance on the training task by evaluating
classification accuracy on the IN1K validation set. To evaluate transfer learning, we measure
classification performance on 13 datasets: the 5 ImageNet-CoG datasets (Sariyildiz et al., 2021)
   1
     Although in their evaluation Caron et al. (2021); Zhai et al. (2019) train linear classifiers with data aug-
mentation or fine-tune the encoder while training classifiers, we found that such protocols make a proper
hyper-parameter validation computationally prohibitive. We instead follow the linear evaluation protocol
from Kornblith et al. (2019) and Sariyildiz et al. (2021).


                                                                                                                                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Impact of the number of local crops Table 1: Impact of the projector size on per-
(Ml ) on the performance on IN1K (left) and formance, via the number of hidden layers L
transfer datasets (right) when varying the number (left) and hidden units dh (right). The default
of hidden layers L in the projector and Mg =1. configuration: L=1, dh =2048, db =256 and with
                                                  ℓ2 -normalization of the input (highlighted rows).
ImageNet-1K Acc. (%)

    80


                                                 Mean Transfer Acc.
                             1.3                  We use Mg =1 and Ml =8 (“Base+Mc”).


                                                    (Log odds)
                       78                                             1.2                                      IN1K Transfer    dh IN1K Transfer
                                        L=1                           1.1               L=1            Base     76.6  0.10     512 80.0  0.82
                       76               L=2                                             L=2          Base+Mc    79.7  0.25     1024 80.0 1.06
                                        L=3                           1.0               L=3
                                                                                                      L=1      79.8  1.15      2048 79.8 1.15
                       74                                             0.9                             L=2      78.6  1.31      4096 79.8 1.20
                            0 2 4 6 8                                       0 2 4 6 8                 L=3      77.5  1.33      8192 79.4 1.22
                             Local Crops (Ml )                               Local Crops (Ml )

that measure concept generalization, and 8 commonly used smaller-scale datasets: Aircraft (Maji
et al., 2013), Cars196 (Krause et al., 2013), DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014), EuroSAT (Helber et al.,
2019), Flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008), Pets (Parkhi et al., 2012), Food101 (Bossard et al.,
2014) and SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2010). We report two metrics: Top-1 accuracy on IN1K and
transfer accuracy via log-odds (Kornblith et al., 2019) averaged over the 13 transfer datasets. Note
that we provide details on the datasets, the exact log-odds formulation, and per dataset results in
the Appendix, respectively in Tab. 4, Appendix B.3, and Tab. 7. Appendices C.7 and C.8 present
additional evaluations on IN1K-Sketch (Wang et al., 2019), IN1K-v2 (Recht et al., 2019) and two
long-tail datasets: i-Naturalist 2018 and 2019 (Van Horn et al., 2018).
Implementation details. fθ is a ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) encoder, trained for 100 epochs
with mixed precision in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) using 4 GPUs where batch norm layers are
synchronized. We use an SGD optimizer with 0.9 momentum, a batch size of 256, 1e-4 weight decay
and a learning rate of 0.1 × batch size/256, which is linearly increased during the first 10 epochs and
then decayed with a cosine schedule. We set τ = 0.1 and, unless otherwise stated, we use the data
augmentation pipeline from DINO (Caron et al., 2021) with 1 global and 8 local crops (Mg = 1 and
Ml = 8). A detailed list of the training hyper-parameters is given in the Appendix (Tab. 3). Training
one of our models takes up to 3 days with 4 V100 GPUs depending on its projector configuration.


4.1                         A NALYSIS OF COMPONENT DESIGN AND HYPER - PARAMETERS

Multi-crop data augmentation. We first study the effect of the number of local crops on IN1K and
transfer performance. We train supervised models using Eq. (1) with 1 global and 2, 4, 6 or 8 local
crops, and projectors composed of 1, 2 or 3 hidden layers, and report results in Fig. 4. Our main
observations are: a) training with local crops improves the performance on both IN1K and transfer
tasks, and b) although increasing the number of local crops generally helps, performance saturates
with 8 local crops. We set Mg = 1 and Ml = 8 for all subsequent evaluations. Further ablations
using different scale and resolution parameters are presented in Appendix C.3.
Note that using local crops increases the effective batch size, which, in turn, increases training time.
We therefore conduct two experiments to see if a longer training or a larger batch size would lead to
similar gains. We train two models using a single crop sampled from a wide scale range (i.e., able to
focus on both large and small image regions), one with 9×larger batch size, the other for 800 epochs.
Unlike multi-crop, these models bring no significant gain (see Tab. 8 in the Appendix for details).
Expendable projector head. We study the impact of different architectural choices and hyper-
parameters for the projector. We vary the number of hidden layers (L), the dimension of the hidden
(dh ) and bottleneck (db ) layers, and whether or not to ℓ2 -normalize the projector input (ℓ2 ). We start
from a default configuration: L = 1, dh = 2048, db = 256 and with ℓ2 -normalized inputs. We ablate
each parameter separately by training models optimizing Eq. (1). We use multi-crop in all cases.
The most interesting results from this analysis are presented in Tab. 1. We see that the number of
hidden layers (L) is an important hyper-parameter that controls the trade-off between IN1K and
transfer performance. Adding a projector head with a single hidden layer not only improves the
already strong IN1K performance of multi-crop (Base+Mc in Tab. 1), but also significantly boosts
its average transfer performance. More hidden layers seem to increase transfer performance, at
the cost of a decrease in IN1K accuracy. The same can be said about the dimension of the hidden


                                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                              100
                         1                                                                            Base

Intra-class Dist.
                                                                                                      +Mc                     80


                                                                                                               Sparsity (%)
                    0.9                                                                               +Pr                     60
                    0.8                                                                               +Mc+Pr
                                                                                                                              40
                    0.7
                                                                                                                              20
                    0.6
                                                                                                                               0
                                    74      76    78       80   0    0.4   0.8              1.2                                       74              76    78      80   0        0.5   1
                                    ImageNet-1K Acc. (%) Mean Transfer Acc. (LO)                                                    ImageNet-1K Acc. (%) Mean Transfer Acc. (LO)

Figure 5: Average intra-class ℓ2 -distance between samples from the same class (left) and sparsity as
the percentage of feature dimensions close to zero (right), on IN1K and averaged over transfer datasets.
Gray and Orange arrows denote changes due to adding multi-crop and projectors, respectively.
                                                                                            1
                                     2.5k                                                             Base (BS=2K)


                                                                                                                                    Frobenius Norm
                    Coding Length


                                                                           Gradient Sim.
                                       2k                                                  0.8                                                        100
                                                                                                      Base+Mc
                                     1.5k                                                  0.6
                                       1k                                                  0.4                                                       10−2        Prototypes ∆U
                                     0.5k                                                  0.2                                                                   Weights ∆W
                                                                                                                                                     10−4
                                                 se

                                                       r

                                                                c

                                                                     Pr


                                                                                                  0     50             100                                  0                50         100
                                                      +P

                                                           +M
                                             Ba


                                                                    c+
                                                                +M


                                                                                                      Epoch                                                              Epoch
Figure 6: (left) Average coding length per sample (Yu et al., 2020) over all transfer datasets. (middle)
Average similarity between class weight gradients ∇wc LCE during training. (right) Change in class
weights W and prototypes U at every iteration across all classes (see text for details) for models
trained using Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), respectively.
layer, yet we further see that a larger dh significantly increases transfer performance, and moderately
decreases IN1K accuracy. On the contrary, we observe that the bottleneck dimension db and input
ℓ2 -normalization only have a small influence on IN1K and transfer performance (see Appendix C.4).
Overall, our observations verify and significantly extend the ones recently presented by Wang et al.
(2022b). We not only study the design of projectors jointly with multi-crop, but also analyse transfer
performance jointly with performance on IN1K, revealing a trade-off between the two, that is fully
controlled through the design of the project head.
Online class means. There are two main hyper-parameters in OCM: the size of the memory bank and
the momentum of the EMA models that populate the memory bank and provide the embeddings for
class prototypes. We explored momentum values 0 and 0.999 (in the former, we directly use fθ and
gϕ to compute prototypes) and see that trailing EMA is essential for maintaining high performance,
i.e., momentum = 0 performs poorly, aligning with the observations for MoCo (He et al., 2020).
However, unlike MoCo or other recent methods such as LOOK (Feng et al., 2022), OCM does not
require a large memory bank to achieve the highest performance. We experimented with memory
sizes between 2048 and 65546, and found that 8192 works best (see Fig. 12b in Appendix).


4.2                                 A NALYSIS OF LEARNED FEATURES , CLASS WEIGHTS AND PROTOTYPES

We now investigate how different components of our setup affect training or the learned representa-
tions. We analyse the features produced, class weights and prototypes from the following models: a)
Base: a model trained using cosine softmax loss without multi-crop and projector, b) Base (BS=2K):
Base but with 9×larger batch size, c) Base+Mc: Base with multi-crop, d) Base+Pr: Base with a
projector, e) Base+Mc+Pr, and f) OCM: a model trained using Eq. (2); details in Appendix C.6.
Intra-class distance. We start by analysing the ℓ2 -normalized features for the four models, Base,
Base+Mc, Base+Pr and Base+Mc+Pr, by computing the average ℓ2 -distance between samples from
the same class (i.e., intra-class distance). We see in Fig. 5 (left) that multi-crop reduces intra-class
distance on IN1K, while projectors increase it. Not surprisingly, this correlates with training task
performance, i.e., lower intra-class distance translates to better performance on IN1K. On the transfer
datasets, however, we found no strong correlation between the two, i.e., transfer performance does
not necessarily depend on intra-class distance.
Sparsity. In Fig. 5 (right) we report feature sparsity ratio, i.e., the percentage of feature dimensions
close to zero for ℓ2 -normalized features from the four models. We see that: a) the average sparsity

                                                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                  t-ReX
                                               New SotA
 Mean Transfer Acc. (Log odds)   1.3          (this paper)
                                       DINO                   PAWS


                                 1.2                  SL-MLP
                                                    (+multi-crop)
                                                                                     LOOK
                                                                                  (+multi-crop)
                                              Previous
                                               SotA
                                 1.1


                                                                                                   SupCon               t-ReX*
                                         t-ReX1               t-ReX2              t-ReX3
                                  1
                                         t-ReX1 -OCM          t-ReX2 -OCM         t-ReX3 -OCM                  RSB-A1
                                         75              76              77            78                 79             80
                                                                     ImageNet-1K Accuracy (%)
Figure 7: Comparison on the training task vs transfer task performance for ResNet50. We
report IN1K (Top-1 accuracy) and transfer performance (log odds) averaged over 13 datasets (5
ImageNet-CoG levels, Aircraft, Cars196, DTD, EuroSAT, Flowers, Pets, Food101 and SUN397)
for a large number of our models trained with the supervised training setup presented in Sec. 3.
Models on the convex hull are denoted by stars. We compare to the following state-of-the-art (SotA)
models: Supervised: RSB-A1, SupCon, SL-MLP and LOOK with multi-crop; self-supervised:
DINO; semi-supervised: PAWS.
ratio on the transfer datasets is inversely correlated with performance, i.e., linear classifiers trained
on less sparse features achieve better transfer performance, and b) projectors dramatically reduce
sparsity. We find this last observation intuitive: features from the layer right before the cross-entropy
loss are encouraged to be as close to a one-hot vector as possible and therefore sparse. Introducing
projectors in between allows the encoder to output less sparse features, which improves transfer.
Coding length. To further investigate our observations on sparsity, we follow Yu et al. (2020) and
compute the average coding length per sample on the transfer datasets (see Fig. 6 (left)). We see that
projectors largely increase the “information content” of representations. This was also verified by
analysing singular values per dimension for models with and without projectors. We observed that
the feature variance is more uniformly distributed over dimensions when a projector is used (see Ap-
pendix C.6). These observations might explain why projectors reduce overfitting to IN1K concepts.
Gradient similarity. To understand why using multi-crop increases performance for the same batch
size, we examine the gradients of class weights ∇W LCE for two models that have the same effective
batch size, with and without multi-crop. At each training iteration, we compute the average cosine
similarity between individual gradients of every pair of class weights ∇Wci LCE and ∇Wcj LCE for
any ci ̸= cj . As we see from Fig. 6 (middle), cosine similarity increases substantially with multi-crop.
In other words, on average, classifier gradients (and therefore the class weights themselves) are more
entangled. We attribute this to the fact that some of the local crops (e.g., the ones that mostly cover
background and hence are not really discriminative for the class at hand) are harder to classify. This
leads to a harder task and gradients of higher variance (shown also in Fig. 16 in the Appendix).
Change in class weights and prototypes. To understand the differences between the training
objectives in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), we measure how much class weights W and prototypes U change
during the training phase. In Fig. 6 (right), we plot the average change over all classes by computing
the Frobenius norm between before and after each iteration, i.e., ∆W = ∥W̄t − W̄t−1 ∥2 and
∆U = ∥Ūt − Ūt−1 ∥2 , where t is the training iteration, and W̄ and Ū are the class weight wc
and prototype uc ℓ2 -normalized per class and concatenated, respectively. Interestingly, we observe
that prototypes U change orders of magnitude more than class weights W throughout training. We
believe this is because we compute class prototypes using only the small subset of images from our
memory bank. The average number of samples per class on IN1K is 1281, whereas, on average we
have only 8 per class in the memory bank. We argue that this prevents OCM from overfitting, leading
to higher IN1K performance, as we show next.


                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3   P USHING THE ENVELOPE OF TRAINING - VERSUS - TRANSFER PERFORMANCE

In this section we report and analyse results from more than 100 different models trained on IN1K, all
different instantiations of the proposed training setup. We varied hyper-parameters such as the number
of hidden layers in the expandable projector head or the training objective. The most important results
are depicted in Fig. 7, while an extended version of this figure is presented in Fig. 10 in the Appendix.
Previous state of the art. RSB-A1 (Wightman et al., 2021) is a highly optimized supervised
ResNet50 model with top performance on IN1K. The self-supervised DINO model (Caron et al.,
2021) has shown top transfer learning performance, while also performing well on IN1K. The
semi-supervised PAWS (Assran et al., 2021) model matches DINO in transfer performance,
with improved IN1K accuracy. To our knowledge, RSB-A1 and DINO/PAWS are the current
state-of-the-art ResNet50 models for IN1K classification and transfer learning respectively. We
also compare to three recent supervised models: SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020), LOOK (Feng et al.,
2022) and SL-MLP (Wang et al., 2022a). For all models except LOOK and SL-MLP, we evaluate
the models provided by the authors. Due to the absence of official code we reproduced LOOK and
SL-MLP ourselves, enhancing them with multi-crop. Our reproductions achieve higher performance
than the one reported in the original papers. In both cases, we use a projector with 1 hidden layer.
Notations. Models trained with the basic version of the proposed training setup, i.e., using multi-crop,
a projector with L hidden layers and a cosine softmax cross-entropy loss are reported as t-ReXL . For
models using the OCM training objective we append -OCM. Models on the “envelope” (i.e., the con-
vex hull) of Fig. 7 are highlighted with a star (exact configurations are in the Appendix: Tabs. 3 and 7).
Main results. Our main observations from results presented in Fig. 7 can be summarized as follows.
• Pushing the envelope. Many variants from our supervised training setup “push” the envelope
  beyond the previous state of the art, across both axes. Several of these models improve over the
  state of the art on one or the other axis, but no single model outperforms all the others on both
  dimensions. As the number of hidden layers of the projector increases, models gradually move from
  the lower right to the upper left corner of the plane. This shows again that increasing the projector
  complexity improves transfer performance at the cost of IN1K (training task) performance.
• No reason for no supervision. A large number of supervised variants outperform the DINO method
  with respect to transfer learning, while also being significantly better on IN1K. We therefore show
  that training with label supervision does not necessarily require to sacrifice transfer learning
  performance and one should use label information if available.
• State-of-the-art IN1K performance with three simple modifications. A number of t-ReX1 models
  outperform the highly optimized RSB-A1 on IN1K, essentially by using only three components
  over the “vanilla” supervised learning process that is considered standard practice: a) cosine
  softmax with temperature, b) multi-crop data augmentation, and c) an expendable projector.
• Training with class prototypes brings further gain. Given the same projector configuration,
  training models with the OCM objective (Eq. (2)) has a small advantage over training with cosine
  softmax (Eq. (1)). We see that 4 of the 6 points on the convex hull in Fig. 7 are t-ReX-OCM models.
  This suggests that using class prototypes is a viable alternative to learning class weights end-to-end.
• Introducing t-ReX and t-ReX*. We single out the two instantiations that respectively excel on
  the transfer learning and IN1K axes, i.e., t-ReX3 -OCM and t-ReX1 -OCM. We rename them
  t-ReX and t-ReX*, respectively. We envision these two transferable ResNet50 models and their
  corresponding training setups to serve as strong supervised baselines for future research on transfer
  learning and IN1K. All the hyper-parameters for these two models are in Tab. 3 in the Appendix.


5     C ONCLUSION

We present a supervised training setup that leverages components from self-supervised learning,
and improves generalization without conceding on the performance of the original task, i.e., IN1K
classification. We also show that substituting class weights with prototypes used an online class
mean classifier over a small memory bank boosts performance even further. We extensively analyze
the design choices and parameters of those models, and show that many variants push the envelope
on the IN1K-transfer performance plane. This validates our intuition that image-level supervision,
if available, can be beneficial to both IN1K classification and transfer tasks.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Acknowledgements. This work was supported in part by MIAI@Grenoble Alpes (ANR-19-P3IA-
0003), and the ANR grant AVENUE (ANR-18-CE23-0011).

R EFERENCES
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A next-generation
  hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proc. ICKDDM, 2019.

Mahmoud Assran, Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, Nicolas Ballas, and Michael
  Rabbat. Semi-supervised learning of visual features by non-parametrically predicting view assignments with
  support samples. In Proc. ICCV, 2021.

Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, and Alexander Kolesnikov.          Better plain ViT baselines for ImageNet-1k.
  arXiv:2205.01580, 2022.

Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101 – Mining discriminative components with
  random forests. In Proc. ECCV, 2014.

Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Unsupervised
  learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
  Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proc. ICCV, 2021.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive
   learning of visual representations. In Proc. ICML, 2020a.

Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proc. CVPR, 2021.

Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum contrastive
  learning. arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b.

Mircea Cimpoi, Subhransu Maji, Iasonas Kokkinos, Sammy Mohamed, and Andrea Vedaldi. Describing textures
  in the wild. In Proc. CVPR, 2014.

Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Eric Tzeng, and Trevor Darrell. Decaf:
   A deep convolutional activation feature for generic visual recognition. In Proc. ICML, 2014.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
  Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In Proc. ICLR, 2021.

Utku Evci, Vincent Dumoulin, Hugo Larochelle, and Michael C Mozer. Head2toe: Utilizing intermediate
  representations for better transfer learning. In Proc. ICML, 2022.

Yutong Feng, Jianwen Jiang, Mingqian Tang, Rong Jin, and Yue Gao. Rethinking supervised pre-training for
  better downstream transferring. In Proc. ICLR, 2022.

Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by predicting image
  rotations. In Proc. ICLR, 2018.

Jacob Goldberger, Geoffrey E Hinton, Sam Roweis, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Neighbourhood components
   analysis. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2004.

Priya Goyal, Dhruv Mahajan, Abhinav Gupta, and Ishan Misra. Scaling and benchmarking self-supervised
   visual representation learning. In Proc. ICCV, 2019.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya, Carl
   Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
   Remi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. In
   Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
  Proc. CVPR, 2016.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised
  visual representation learning. In Proc. CVPR, 2020.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset and deep
  learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. JSTAEORS, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
Elad Hoffer, Itay Hubara, and Daniel Soudry. Fix your classifier: the marginal value of training the last weight
   layer. In Proc. ICLR, 2018.
Elad Hoffer, Tal Ben-Nun, Itay Hubara, Niv Giladi, Torsten Hoefler, and Daniel Soudry. Augment your batch:
  Improving generalization through instance repetition. In Proc. CVPR, 2020.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
  internal covariate shift. In Proc. ICML, 2015.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron Maschinot,
  Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
Byungsoo Ko and Geonmo Gu. Large-scale bilingual language-image contrastive learning. arXiv:2203.14463,
  2022.
Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc Le. Do better imagenet models transfer better? In Proc. CVPR,
  2019.
Simon Kornblith, Ting Chen, Honglak Lee, and Mohammad Norouzi. Why do better loss functions lead to less
  transferable features? In Proc. NeurIPS, 2021.
Jonathan Krause, Jia Deng, Michael Stark, and Fei-Fei Li. Collecting a large-scale dataset of fine-grained cars.
  In Proc. ICCV-W, 2013.
Chen-Yu Lee, Saining Xie, Patrick Gallagher, Zhengyou Zhang, and Zhuowen Tu. Deeply-supervised nets. In
  Proc. AISTATS, 2015.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie. Feature
  pyramid networks for object detection. In Proc. CVPR, 2017.
Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization. MP, 45(1),
  1989.
Yi Ma, Harm Derksen, Wei Hong, and John Wright. Segmentation of multivariate mixed data via lossy data
   coding and compression. PAMI, 29(9), 2007.
Subhransu Maji, Esa Rahtu, Juho Kannala, Matthew Blaschko, and Andrea Vedaldi. Fine-grained visual
  classification of aircraft. arXiv:1306.5151, 2013.
Sébastien Marcel and Yann Rodriguez. Torchvision the machine-vision package of torch. In Proc. ACM-ICM,
  2010.
Thomas Mensink, Jakob Verbeek, Florent Perronnin, and Gabriela Csurka. Metric learning for large scale image
  classification: Generalizing to new classes at near-zero cost. In Proc. ECCV, 2012.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number of classes.
 In Proc. ICVGIP, 2008.
Michal Pándy, Andrea Agostinelli, Jasper Uijlings, Vittorio Ferrari, and Thomas Mensink. Transferability
  estimation using Bhattacharyya class separability. In Proc. CVPR, 2022.
Omkar M. Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and C. V. Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In Proc. CVPR, 2012.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary
  DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Proc. NeurIPS,
  2019.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
  Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
  Python. JMLR, 12, 2011.
Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. CNN features off-the-shelf:
  An astounding baseline for recognition. In Proc. CVPR-W, 2014.


                                                      11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers generalize
  to imagenet? In Proc. ICML, 2019.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej
  Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual
  Recognition Challenge. IJCV, 115(3), 2015.

Mert Bulent Sariyildiz, Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, and Erman Ayday. Key protected classification for collabora-
  tive learning. PR, 2020.

Mert Bulent Sariyildiz, Yannis Kalantidis, Diane Larlus, and Karteek Alahari. Concept generalization in visual
  representation learning. In Proc. ICCV, 2021.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A
  simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. JMLR, 15(1), 2014.

Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking the inception
  architecture for computer vision. In Proc. CVPR, 2016.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The importance of task
  diversity. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.

Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam, Pietro Perona,
  and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In Proc. CVPR, 2018.

Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representations by
  penalizing local predictive power. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2019.

Xiao Wang, Haoqi Fan, Yuandong Tian, Daisuke Kihara, and Xinlei Chen. On the importance of asymmetry for
  siamese representation learning. In Proc. CVPR, 2022a.

Yizhou Wang, Shixiang Tang, Feng Zhu, Lei Bai, Rui Zhao, Donglian Qi, and Wanli Ouyang. Revisiting the
  transferability of supervised pretraining: an MLP perspective. In Proc. CVPR, 2022b.
Ross Wightman, Hugo Touvron, and Hervé Jégou. Resnet strikes back: An improved training procedure in timm.
  In Proc. NeurIPS-W, 2021.

Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Sun database: Large-scale
   scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In Proc. CVPR, 2010.

Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features in deep neural
   networks? In Proc. NeurIPS, 2014.

Yaodong Yu, Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Chong You, Chaobing Song, and Yi Ma. Learning diverse and discriminative
  representations via the principle of maximal coding rate reduction. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.

Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo. CutMix:
  Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. In Proc. ICCV, 2019.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised learning via
   redundancy reduction. In Proc. ICML, 2021.

Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Alexander Kolesnikov, Pierre Ruyssen, Carlos Riquelme, Mario Lucic, Josip Djo-
  longa, Andre Susano Pinto, Maxim Neumann, Alexey Dosovitskiy, et al. A large-scale study of representation
  learning with the visual task adaptation benchmark. arXiv:1910.04867, 2019.

Jianyu Zhang, David Lopez-Paz, and Léon Bottou. Rich feature construction for the optimization-generalization
   dilemma. In Proc. ICML, 2022.

Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei Efros. Colorful image colorization. In Proc. ECCV, 2016.

Nanxuan Zhao, Zhirong Wu, Rynson W. H. Lau, and Stephen Lin. What makes instance discrimination good for
  transfer learning? In Proc. ICLR, 2021.
Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan Yuille, and Tao Kong. ibot: Image BERT
   pre-training with online tokenizer. In Proc. ICLR, 2022.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

C ONTENTS

A Further details on the improved supervised training setup                                         13
    A.1 Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
    A.2 Online Class Means (OCM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          14
    A.3 Variant: Random orthogonal classifiers (t-ReXL -orth) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
    A.4 Variant: Online Component Analysis (t-ReX-OCA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            16

B Further details on the evaluation process                                                         17
    B.1 Hyper-parameters for IN1K training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
    B.2 Evaluation datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
    B.3 Evaluation metrics: the average log odds transferability score . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
    B.4 Evaluation protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
    B.5 Hyper-parameters for t-ReX and t-ReX* on transfer datasets . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
    B.6 List of publicly available pretrained models used for comparisons . . . . . . . . .         19

C Extended results and evaluations                                                                  20
    C.1 Results per dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
    C.2 Extended version of Fig. 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    C.3 Extended ablations on multi-crop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    C.4 Extended ablations on the projector design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
    C.5 Extended ablations for Online Class Means (OCM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           22
    C.6 Extended analyses of learned features, class weights and prototypes . . . . . . . .         23
    C.7 Results on IN1K-v2 and IN1K-Sketch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24
    C.8 Results on class-imbalanced transfer datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24

D Limitations                                                                                       26


A     F URTHER DETAILS ON THE IMPROVED SUPERVISED TRAINING SETUP

A.1   DATA AUGMENTATION

Our training setup for improving the generalization performance of supervised models (described
in Sec. 3 of the main paper) includes the multi-crop augmentation initially proposed in SwAV (Caron
et al., 2020). In our experiments, we use the multi-crop implementation from DINO (Caron et al.,
2021), which consists of three augmentation branches (two for global crops and one for local crops).
The pipeline of this multi-crop augmentation is illustrated in Fig. 8a. We also illustrate the pipelines
of the “vanilla” PyTorch and SimSiam augmentations that are used in some of our ablation studies
in Fig. 8b and Fig. 8c respectively. For our experiments with two global crops, i.e., when Mg = 2
in Fig. 11, we use all three branches. In all the other experiments, which have only one global crop
Mg = 1, we use two of the branches: the second global crop and the one for local crops. Tab. 2
summarizes the parameters of the augmentation operations used in our experiments.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  (DINO)                                                                     (PyTorch)               (SimSiam)
   1st Global                2nd Global              Locals

                                     Normalize
                                 with mean and std

            Normalize           RandomSolarization           Normalize                                      Normalize
        with mean and std                                with mean and std                              with mean and std


           GaussianBlur        RandomGaussianBlur      RandomGaussianBlur                              RandomGaussianBlur


       RandomGrayscale          RandomGrayscale         RandomGrayscale                                 RandomGrayscale


       RandomColorJitter        RandomColorJitter       RandomColorJitter           Normalize              ColorJitter
                                                                                with mean and std

      RandomHorizontalFlip    RandomHorizontalFlip    RandomHorizontalFlip    RandomHorizontalFlip    RandomHorizontalFlip


      RandomResizedCrop        RandomResizedCrop       RandomResizedCrop       RandomResizedCrop       RandomResizedCrop
         size=(224x224)           size=(224x224)           size=(96x96)          size=(224x224)           size=(224x224)
        scale=(0.4, 1.00)        scale=(0.4, 1.00)       scale=(0.05, 0.4)      scale=(0.08, 1.00)       scale=(0.2, 1.00)


                (a) DINO augmentations with multi-crop                          (b) PyTorch             (c) SimSiam

Figure 8: Data-augmentation pipelines considered in our work. We use the multi-crop augmentation
implemented in DINO (Caron et al., 2021) (a) as part of our improved training setup that is presented
in Sec. 3 of the main paper. We also compare to the PyTorch (Marcel & Rodriguez, 2010; Paszke et al.,
2019) (b) and SimSiam (Chen & He, 2021) (c) augmentations in our ablations, see Appendix C.3. The
parameters of the operations in (a) are given in Tab. 2. We use the default values for the operations
in (b) and (c). These pipelines are implemented using torchvision (Marcel & Rodriguez, 2010) and
Python Imaging Library. Accordingly, the operation and parameter names follow the conventions
from these open-source libraries.

Table 2: Default parameters of the DINO augmentations used in our experiments. We imple-
ment the RandomGaussianBlur and RandomSolarization using Python Imaging Library, and use the
torchvision (Marcel & Rodriguez, 2010) implementations for the remaining ones. For RandomGaus-
sianBlur, “radius” denotes a range from which we uniformly sample radius values. Note that some of
these operations involve other parameters, and in these cases we use their default values. The scale
parameter of RandomResizedCrop is different for t-ReX, see Tab. 3 for details.
Augmentation Operation             Parameters
RandomResizedCrop for global crops size=(224 × 224), scale=(0.4, 1.0)
RandomResizedCrop for local crops size=(96 × 96), scale=(0.05, 0.4)
RandomHorizontalFlip               probability=0.5
RandomColorJitter                  probability=0.8, brightness=0.4, contrast=0.4, saturation=0.2, hue=0.1
RandomGrayScale                    probability=0.2
RandomGaussianBlur                 probability=0.2, radius=(0.1, 2.0)
RandomSolarization                 probability=0.2, threshold=128
Normalization                      mean=(0.485, 0.456, 0.406), std=(0.229, 0.224, 0.225)

A.2      O NLINE C LASS M EANS (OCM)

In Sec. 3 of the main paper, we introduce the “online” version of the Nearest Class Mean classi-
fier (Mensink et al., 2012), referred to as Online Class Mean (OCM). In this section, we give a
schematic illustration of this model and describe its implementation details.
Illustrations of the different loss functions. In Fig. 9 we visualize the supervised models. We train
it using the two loss functions defined in Sec. 3 of the main paper. Fig. 9a and Fig. 9b correspond
to the models for Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) of the main paper, respectively. As seen from Fig. 9b, and as
explained in Sec. 3 of the main paper, OCM follows SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020) and LOOK (Feng
et al., 2022) and uses the momentum network and memory queue proposed in He et al. (2020). We
explain them in detail below.
Momentum encoder fξ and projector gζ . To keep a memory bank of slowly evolving features,
we keep an exponential moving average (EMA) of the encoder fθ and projector gϕ parameters.
Concretely, momentum encoder fξ and momentum projector gζ , whose parameters are respectively


                                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                softmax


                                  softmax


                                                              memory bank


                                                                  ema


                           (a) For Eq. (1)               (b) For Eq. (2), OCM

Figure 9: The supervised models we train using our proposed setup. Ig and Ig,l represent only
global crops or both global and local crops. Our t-ReX and t-ReX* variants have the form shown
in Fig. 9b, with projector configurations L = 1 (for t-ReX*) and L = 3 (for t-ReX), dh = 2048,
db = 256, input ℓ2 -normalization enabled, memory bank size Q = 8192 and with no predictor, i.e.,
hψ is an identity mapping.

EMA of θ and ϕ, are defined as: ξ ← m × ξ + (1 − m) × θ and ζ ← m × ζ + (1 − m) × ϕ, where
m = 0.999 is the momentum parameter. As shown in Fig. 9b, we only feed global crops Ig through
these momentum networks fξ and gζ during training. Both global and local crops Ig,l are passed
through the encoder fθ and projector gϕ .
Expendable predictor hψ after projector gϕ . In several SSL methods with dual-network architec-
tures, e.g., BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) and SimSiam (Chen & He, 2021), breaking the architectural
symmetry, by adding a multi-layer perceptron to one of the branches, was shown to improve the
generalization of representations. Following this practice, we also experimented with training OCM
models optionally using an expendable predictor head hψ : Rdb → Rdb with parameters ψ, added
after the projector head gϕ (as shown in Fig. 9b). These predictor heads contain fully-connected,
batch-normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) and GeLU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) layers, fol-
lowed by another fully-connected layer and ℓ2 -normalization. The first (resp. second) fully-connected
layer maps from Rdb to Rdp (resp. Rdp to Rdb ). In our experiments dp is generally 2048 dimensions.
See Appendix C.5 for a discussion on the impact of predictors on performance; Note that neither
t-ReX nor t-ReX* is trained with an expendable predictor head hψ .
Memory bank. The original NCM (Mensink et al., 2012) formulation require access to the entire
dataset at each SGD training iteration, which is not possible in our case. To circumvent this, we use a
memory queue Q which stores ℓ2 -normalized momentum projector outputs Q = {gζ (fξ (Ig ))} for
global crops. In OCM, we compute   P a “prototype” for each class c, as the mean over all memory
points from that class uc = 1/Nc z∈Qc z, where Qc denotes samples in the queue that belong to
class c and Nc = |Qc |. Then, for a given training crop Ij (can be either a global or local crop), we
compute its predictor outputs hψ (gϕ (fθ (Ij ))) and obtain class prediction scores by taking the inner
product between this predictor output and the set of all class prototypes U = {uc }1000 c=1 as defined
in Eq. (2) of the main paper. In Appendix C.5 we study the impact that the size of the memory bank
has on IN1K and transfer performance.
Class prototype neighbors. In Tab. 12 we provide a visualization of the top-5 nearest prototypes for
a random set of classes for t-ReX*.

A.3   VARIANT: R ANDOM ORTHOGONAL CLASSIFIERS ( T-R E XL -orth)

In Sec. 3 of the main paper, we propose the OCM variant where class weights W are replaced
by class means U = {uc }C  c=1 which are obtained in an online manner using a memory bank
(see also Appendix A.2 for details). Inspired by Hoffer et al. (2018); Sariyildiz et al. (2020), we


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t-ReX
                                               New SotA
 Mean Transfer Acc. (Log odds)   1.3          (this paper)
                                       DINO                                                                PAWS


                                 1.2                              SL-MLP
                                                                (+multi-crop)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                LOOK
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (+multi-crop)
                                              Previous
                                               SotA
                                 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SupCon
                                         t-ReX1                                                                  t-ReX2                                                                                        t-ReX3
                                         t-ReX1 -OCM                                                             t-ReX2 -OCM                                                                                   t-ReX3 -OCM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t-ReX*
                                  1      t-ReX1 -orth                                                            t-ReX2 -orth                                                                                  t-ReX3 -orth
                                         t-ReX1 -OCA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RSB-A1
                                        75                                              76                                                   77            78                                                                                                                                                     79                  80
                                                                                                                                         ImageNet-1K Accuracy (%)

Figure 10: Extended version of Fig. 7 of the main paper, featuring the t-ReX-OCA and t-ReXL -orth
variants. We additionally plot six t-ReXL -orth variants with and without projector input ℓ2 -norm
and L = [1, 2, 3], and four t-ReX-OCA variants with different temperature parameter τ values and
L = 1. We report IN1K (top-1 accuracy) and transfer performance (log odds) averaged over 13
datasets (see Tab. 4 for the list) for a large number of our models trained with the supervised training
setup presented in Sec. 3 of the main paper. Models on the convex hull are denoted by stars. We
compare to the following state-of-the-art (SotA) models: Supervised RSB-A1 (Wightman et al., 2021),
SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020), and SL-MLP (Wang et al., 2022a) and LOOK (Feng et al., 2022) with
multi-crop; Self-supervised DINO (Caron et al., 2021); Semi-supervised PAWS (Assran et al., 2021).

explore another variant of our setup where class weights W = {wc }1000
                                                                     c=1 are initialized with random
orthogonal vectors and kept frozen while the encoder fθ and projector gϕ networks are trained. Our
motivation is that such vectors may lead to higher class separation obtaining higher accuracy on the
training task, as also noted by Kornblith et al. (2021).
To this end, without using momentum networks, a predictor head or a memory bank, we simply
optimize Eq. (1) in the main paper with “fixed” class weights, and denote these models with the
t-ReXL -orth notation. Due to our limited computational budget, we train 6 t-ReXL -orth variants with
and without projector input ℓ2 -norm, L = [1, 2, 3], dh = 2048 and db = 256, and plot their IN1K
and average transfer accuracies along with the others from the main paper in Fig. 10. We observe that
none of those six models were able to expand the envelope of training-versus-transfer performance.

A.4                              VARIANT: O NLINE C OMPONENT A NALYSIS ( T-R E X-OCA)

Recent supervised learning methods like SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020) or LOOK (Feng et al., 2022) are
variants of the soft k-NN loss introduced in Neighborhood Component Analysis (NCA) (Goldberger
et al., 2004). We therefore explore a variant of our training setup where the loss directly minimizes the
log NCA probabilities. Specifically, as in the OCM variant, we use a memory bank Q which stores
ℓ2 -normalized embeddings z output by the projector instead of using the full dataset to compute the
soft k-NN, as the latter would be intractable. This variant then optimizes the following loss:


                                                   \lossoca = - \frac {1}{M} \sum _{j=1}^{M} \sum _{c=1}^C \vec {y}_{[c]} \log \frac {\sum _{\vec {z}_c \in \mathcal {Q}_c} \exp (\vec {z}_j^\top \vec {z}_c / \tau ) }{\sum _{\vec {z}_n \in \mathcal {Q}} \exp (\vec {z}_j^\top \vec {z}_n / \tau ) }, \label {eq:oca}                      (3)


where M is the number of crops, C is the number of classes, y ∈ {0, 1}C is the C-dim one-hot label
vector, τ is temperature for NCA probabilities and Qc denotes samples in the memory bank that
belong to class c. Since this is an “online” variant of the NCA objective, we refer to this training
objective as Online Component Analysis or OCA. Similar to OCM, we use momentum networks in
OCA, i.e., momentum encoder fξ and projector gζ . For more details, see Appendix A.2.


                                                                                                                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We experimentally show in Fig. 10 that our t-ReX-OCA models achieve a balance between IN1K
and transfer performances, i.e., they are towards the middle of the envelope in Fig. 10. Moreover, in
our evaluations we see that this variant is better overall than LOOK+multi-crop. Note that the main
difference between LOOK+multi-crop and the t-ReX-OCA variants is that the former restricts the
soft k-NN loss (Goldberger et al., 2004) to the close neighborhood of each training sample in the
memory bank. Our observation suggests that relying on more points in the memory bank is beneficial
for learning better representations. We further observed that for this variant the size of the memory
bank |Q| does not severely affect the performance of learned representations, but the smoothness
of NCA probabilities computed in Eq. (3) does. Therefore, it is important to tune the temperature
parameter τ for a given memory bank size to carefully control this smoothness.

B     F URTHER DETAILS ON THE EVALUATION PROCESS
B.1   H YPER - PARAMETERS FOR IN1K TRAINING

As we discuss in the previous section, we train supervised models on IN1K with different objectives
and architecture configurations. We observe that the hyper-parameters for IN1K training that we
share in Tab. 3 work well for the most effective models we studied.

B.2   E VALUATION DATASETS

Once we train our models on IN1K, we evaluate their encoder representations fθ (I) by training linear
logistic regression (Log.Reg.) classifiers on 13 transfer datasets which include 5 ImageNet-CoG
levels (Sariyildiz et al., 2021) and 8 commonly used small-scale datasets: Aircraft (Maji et al.,
2013), Cars196 (Krause et al., 2013), DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014), EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019),
Flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008), Pets (Parkhi et al., 2012), Food101 (Bossard et al., 2014)
and SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2010). To test the generalization of models to IN1K concepts, we use the
three test sets of IN1K-v2 (Recht et al., 2019) and out of domain images of IN1K-Sketch (Wang
et al., 2019). Finally, to test performance on long-tail classification tasks, we use iNaturalist 2018 and
2019 (Van Horn et al., 2018). Statistics of all these datasets are provided in Tab. 4.
When a val split is not provided for a dataset, we randomly split its train set into two, following
the size of train and val splits from either Feng et al. (2022) or Grill et al. (2020). We also
created different train/val splits when tuning hyper-parameters with different seeds, thus further
increasing the robustness of our scores. Other notes on the datasets are as follows:
   (i) For DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014) (resp. EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019)), there are 10 official
       train/val/test (resp. train/test) splits. Following Feng et al. (2022); Grill et al.
       (2020), we use the first split.
  (ii) For EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019), we are not aware of either an official dataset split or the exact
       splits used in prior work, e.g., by Feng et al. (2022). So, we create random train/val/test
       splits following the number of samples in each split from Feng et al. (2022), ensuring that the
       val and test splits are balanced to contain the same number of samples for each class.
 (iii) For iNaturalist 2018 and 2019 (Van Horn et al., 2018), we use the official val split as the
       test split and create a random val split each time with a different seed.
 (iv) We use the Log.Reg. classifier trained on IN1K for predicting image labels in the three test
       sets of IN1K-v2 or the test set of IN1K-Sketch. This is because IN1K-v2 and IN1K-Sketch are
       only composed of test sets and no training data is provided for them.

B.3   E VALUATION METRICS : THE AVERAGE LOG ODDS TRANSFERABILITY SCORE

Following Kornblith et al. (2019), we compute log odds over all transfer datasets and use their average
as a transferability score. This is the main metric we report in the different plots of the main paper.
Denoting ncorrect and nincorrect as the number of correct and incorrect predictions for a dataset, we
compute the accuracy p and log odds score as follows:
                             p = \frac {n_\text {correct}}{n_\text {correct} + n_\text {incorrect}}, \quad \text {log odds} = \log \frac {p}{1 - p}.    (4)
Then we report log odds averaged over all transfer datasets. See Appendix C.2 for per-dataset top-1
accuracies and average log odd scores for the models we compare in the main paper.


                                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Hyper-parameters for training our models on IN1K. Hyper-parameters shared by all
models are given on the top part while the ones specific to t-ReX and t-ReX* are shown on the
bottom part. Note that neither t-ReX nor t-ReX* is trained with an expendable predictor head hψ .
             Configuration                   Value for all models
             Optimizer                               SGD
             Base learning rate                       0.1
             Learning rate rule               0.1 ×  batch size/256

             Learning rate warmup             Linear, 10 epochs
             Learning rate decay rule         Cosine schedule
             Weight decay                           0.0001
             Momentum                                 0.9
             Number of GPUs                             4
             Batch size per GPU                        64
             Batch size total                         256
             Epochs                                   100
             Synchronized batch norms                  ✓
             Mixed precision                           ✓
             τ in Eqs. (1) and (2)                    0.1
             Augmentation pipeline from             DINO
             Number of Global crops (Mg )              1
             Number of Local crops (Ml )                8
             Global crop resolution                   224
             Global crop scale range               (0.4, 1)
             Local crop resolution                     96
             Local crop scale range              (0.05, 0.4)
                                                  Value for t-ReX      Value for t-ReX*
              Projector input ℓ2 -norm                   ✓                     ✓
              Projector L                                 3                    1
              Projector dh                              2048                 2048
              Projector db                              256                   256
              Global crop scale range                 (0.25, 1)             (0.4, 1)
              Local crop scale range                (0.05, 0.25)          (0.05, 0.4)
              Memory bank size |Q|                      8192                 8192
              Loss function used for training          LOCM                  LOCM

B.4    E VALUATION PROTOCOLS

We perform image classification on each evaluation dataset with logistic regression (Log.Reg.)
classifiers following one of the two protocols proposed by Sariyildiz et al. (2021) (for the 5 CoG
levels) or by Kornblith et al. (2019) (for the 8 small-scale datasets). In all cases, we first extract and
store a (single) feature vector for each image and then learn the Log.Reg. classifiers on top of those
features. Our classifiers are therefore trained without data augmentation, and this is why we report
lower performance for the RSB model than the one presented by Wightman et al. (2021). We extract
image representations from the encoders fθ by resizing an image with bicubic interpolation such that
its shortest side is 224 pixels and then taking a central crop of size 224 × 224 pixels. The protocols
for training Log.Reg. classifiers on the 5 CoG levels and on the other 8 datasets are different and
detailed below.

Log.Reg. on the ImageNet-CoG levels. We apply ℓ2 -normalization to the pre-extracted features
using the publicly-available source code of Sariyildiz et al. (2021), and then train Log.Reg. classifiers


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Datasets used for training (IN1K) and evaluating (the others) the quality of visual representa-
tions. We report top-1 accuracy for each dataset. Further implementation details on the utilization of
the datasets are in Appendix A.1. CCAS-4.0 denotes the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 international license.
                                      # Train  # Val        # Test      Val     Test
          Dataset        # Classes                                                          License
                                      samples samples      samples   provided provided
                                              For training models
      IN1K                   1000 1281167         –         50000       –         ✓      Research-only
                                     For evaluating models on IN1K concepts
      IN1K-v2                1000        –         –    3 × 10000      –          ✓      Research-only
      IN1K-Sketch            1000        –         –         50889     –          ✓      Research-only
                                   For evaluating models on transfer tasks
      CoG L1                 1000 895359 223445            50000        –          ✓     Research-only
      CoG L2                 1000 892974 222814            50000        –          ✓     Research-only
      CoG L3                 1000 876495 218708            50000        –          ✓     Research-only
      CoG L4                 1000 886013 221115            50000        –          ✓     Research-only
      CoG L5                 1000 873630 218024            50000        –          ✓     Research-only
      Aircraft                100      3334     3333        3333        ✓          ✓     Research-only
      Cars196                 196      5700     2444        8041        –          ✓     Research-only
      DTD                      47      1880     1880        1880        ✓          ✓       Unclear
      EuroSAT                  10    13500      5400        8100        –           –    Research-only
      Flowers                 102      1020     1020        6149        ✓          ✓       Unclear
      Pets                     37      2570     1110        3669        –          ✓      CCAS-4.0
      Food101                 101    68175      7575       25250        –          ✓       Unclear
      SUN397                  397    15880      3970       19850        –          ✓     Research-only
                            For evaluating models on long-tail classification tasks
      iNaturalist 2018       8142 437513           –       24426        –          ✓     Research-only
      iNaturalist 2019       1010 265213           –        3030        –          ✓     Research-only

using SGD with momentum = 0.9 and batch size = 1024 for 100 epochs. To treat each model as fairly
as possible, we set the learning rate and weight decay hyper-parameters using train/val splits
(val splits are randomly sampled using 20% of the original train splits). We use Optuna (Akiba
et al., 2019) and sample 30 different pairs. We train the final classifiers with these hyper-parameters
on the union of the train and val splits, and report top-1 accuracy on the test splits. We repeat
this process 5 times with different seeds and report averaged results.

Log.Reg. on the smaller-scale transfer datasets. Following Kornblith et al. (2019), we train
Log.Reg. classifiers with pre-extracted features using L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989). To this end,
we use the implementation in Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). We set the inverse regularization
coefficient (“C”) on each dataset using Optuna and their train/val splits over 25 trials. If a dataset
does not have a fixed validation set, then we repeat hyper-parameter selection 5 times with different
seeds and report the average result.

B.5   H YPER - PARAMETERS FOR T-R E X AND T-R E X* ON TRANSFER DATASETS

In Tab. 5 we present the hyper-parameters found by Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) for the Log.Reg.
classifiers trained on the transfer datasets for t-ReX and t-ReX*.

B.6   L IST OF PUBLICLY AVAILABLE PRETRAINED MODELS USED FOR COMPARISONS

In Sec. 4.3 of the main paper, we compare our models to several prior works which are state-of-the-art
either for IN1K classification or for transfer learning. These include self-supervised DINO (Caron
et al., 2021), semi-supervised PAWS (Assran et al., 2021) and supervised SupCon (Khosla et al.,
2020), RSB-A1 (Wightman et al., 2021), LOOK (Feng et al., 2022) and SL-MLP (Wang et al., 2022b).
Additionally, we evaluated another self-supervised model Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021) but
found it to be inferior to DINO on both IN1K and transfer datasets. For all the models except
LOOK and SL-MLP, we evaluate the best ResNet50 encoders trained on IN1K by their respective
authors. Since there was neither publicly-available model nor source code for these two models,
we reproduced the methods ourselves and found that they can perform significantly better when


                                                      19
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Table 5: Hyper-parameters for evaluating our t-ReX and t-ReX* models using Log.Reg. classifiers
 on transfer datasets found by Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019). “Learning rate” and “Weight decay” are
 the parameters of the SGD optimizer used for training Log.Reg. classifiers as in the ImageNet-CoG
 protocol Sariyildiz et al. (2021). C is the inverse regularization coefficient used when training
 Log.Reg. classifiers with L-BFGS implemented in Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011).


                                                                                                                                                                     SAT


                                                                                                                                                                                                               01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       97
                                                                                                                                                     96


                                                                                                                                                                                           ers
                                                                  L1


                                                                                  L2


                                                                                           L3


                                                                                                     L4


                                                                                                               L5


                                                                                                                                            taf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                    Cars1
                                          IN1K


                                                                                                                                        Aircr


                                                                                                                                                             DTD


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Food
                                                                                                                                                                                          Flow


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SUN
                                                                                                                                                                    Euro
                                                            CoG


                                                                                CoG


                                                                                         CoG


                                                                                                   CoG


                                                                                                              CoG


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pets
                    Configuration
                    Learning rate 12.8    11.0    10.8   11.0 11.0 11.0        –     –   –   –    –     –                                                                                                      –   –
t-ReX


                    Weight decay 2.4e-10 1.1e-8 7.3e-10 1.1e-8 1.1e-8 1.1e-8   –     –   –   –    –     –                                                                                                      –   –
                    C               –       –      –       –      –      –   42169 5109 1.1 9.1 14678 1778                                                                                                    0.4 1.1
                    Learning rate         16.9    23.6   28.6   21.4                                75.3      75.3                       –     –    –  –    –     –    –   –
t-ReX*


                    Weight decay         1.2e-8 6.3e-10 4.3e-9 1.8e-9                               4e-8      4e-8                       –     –    –  –    –     –    –   –
                    C                       –      –       –      –                                  –         –                       42169 14667 1.1 75 14678 42169 3.2 3.2



 Table 6: Compared models with public ResNet50 encoder weights trained on IN1K by the authors.
                                                                                       Additional
 Model                                             Epochs                                                      Repository URL and License
                                                                                         Notes
 DINO                                                                                                          https://github.com/facebookresearch/dino
                                                         800                       Self-supervised
 (Caron et al., 2021)                                                                                          Apache-2.0
 PAWS                                                                             Semi-supervised       https://github.com/facebookresearch/suncet
                                                         300
 (Assran et al., 2021)                                                        (With 10% of annotations) MIT
                                                                                     Supervised
 SupCon                                                                                              https://github.com/HobbitLong/SupContrast
                                                         800                  (with momentum encoder
 (Khosla et al., 2020)                                                                               BSD-2-Clause
                                                                                 and memory bank)
 RSB-A1                                                                                                        https://github.com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models
                                                         600                           Supervised
 (Wightman et al., 2021)                                                                                       Apache-2.0


 combined with multi-crop. We compare to these enhanced version which we call LOOK+multi-crop
 and SL-MLP+multi-crop. In Tab. 6, we give a list of the compared models with public encoder
 weights.


 C                            E XTENDED RESULTS AND EVALUATIONS

 C.1                          R ESULTS PER DATASET

 In Tab. 7, we report top-1 accuracy on each transfer dataset and on IN1K. Results are obtained by
 Log.Reg. classifiers, for all the models listed in Tab. 6 and for the ones that belong to the “convex
 hull” or envelope, denoted by stars in Fig. 7 of the main paper.
  ImageNet-1K Acc. (%)


                         80                                             1.3                                                            80
                                                                                                                ImageNet-1K Acc. (%)
                                                   Mean Transfer Acc.


                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Transfer Acc.


                                                                        1.2                                                            79
                                                      (Log odds)


                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                                                        (Log odds)


                         78
                                                                        1.1                                                            78                                                  0.0
                         76             Mg =1                                            Mg =1
                                                                        1.0                                                                                 Mg =1                                              Mg =1
                                        Mg =2                                            Mg =2                                         77                                                 −0.1
                                                                                                                                                            Mg =2                                              Mg =2
                         74                                             0.9                                                            76                                                 −0.2
                              0 2 4 6 8                                       0 2 4 6 8                                                     0    2 4 6 8 10                                      0    2 4 6 8 10
                               Local Crops (Ml )                               Local Crops (Ml )                                                Local Crops (Ml )                                    Local Crops (Ml )

 (a) Using vanilla softmax, i.e., encoder features x                                                            (b) Using cosine softmax, following Eq. (1) of
 and class weights {wc }1000
                         c=1 are not ℓ2 -normalized                                                             the main paper, i.e., encoder features x and class
 and τ = 1.0 in Eq. (1) of the main paper.                                                                      weights {wc }1000
                                                                                                                             c=1 are ℓ2 -normalized and τ = 0.1.

 Figure 11: Ablating the number of global and local crops for different softmax losses without
 using a projector head, i.e., gϕ is an identity mapping in Eq. (1) of the main paper.


                                                                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Top-1 Log.Reg. accuracy per dataset. Mean LO is average log odds computed over all
transfer datasets (i.e., all datasets except IN1K). In the main paper, we only plot IN1K and Mean LO
scores for each model. For the datasets without a fixed validation set (see Appendix B.2) we repeat
each evaluation 5 times with different seeds; variance is generally negligible.


                                                                                                                                                             LO
                                                                                                                 SAT


                                                                                                                                              101

                                                                                                                                                     397
                                                                                                  96


                                                                                                                            ers
                                               1


                                                       2


                                                               3


                                                                       4

                                                                             L5

                                                                                       aft
                                                L

                                                        L

                                                                L

                                                                        L


                                                                                             Cars1
                                     IN1K


                                                                                                                                                           Mean
                                                                                  Aircr



                                                                                                       DTD


                                                                                                                                         Food
                                                                                                                       Flow


                                                                                                                                                    S UN
                                                                                                             Euro
                                            CoG

                                                    CoG

                                                            CoG

                                                                    CoG

                                                                            CoG


                                                                                                                                  Pets
Model
                                                   Previous SotA
DINO (Caron et al., 2021)           74.8 71.1 67.2 63.2 62.6 57.6 62.5 67.4 77.7 97.7 95.6 88.9 78.7 66.0 1.256
PAWS (Assran et al., 2021)          76.4 71.2 67.3 63.1 62.1 56.6 63.2 71.6 76.2 96.9 95.8 91.2 77.5 65.4 1.256
SL-MLP (Wang et al., 2022a)         75.1 70.1 66.1 61.6 60.4 54.5 63.1 70.9 75.0 96.7 94.8 91.6 74.9 63.7 1.189
LOOK+multi-crop (Feng et al., 2022) 78.0 70.2 65.9 61.7 60.4 54.7 62.4 71.1 73.5 96.3 94.9 93.3 75.1 64.1 1.195
SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020)        78.8 69.9 64.7 60.6 59.1 53.1 57.3 60.9 74.6 95.7 91.6 92.8 71.9 62.8 1.053
RSB-A1 (Wightman et al., 2021)      79.8 69.9 65.0 60.9 59.3 52.8 47.1 54.0 73.9 95.7 88.7 93.1 71.2 63.3 0.978
                                   Our models on the convex hull in Fig. 7 of the main paper
t-ReX                                 78.0 72.0 68.3 63.9 63.4 57.2 67.3 74.2 77.7 97.5 96.2 92.6 80.1 66.7 1.357
t-ReX-OCM (L=2, Q|=8K)                78.8 72.3 68.2 63.7 63.0 56.8 64.7 70.8 75.8 97.3 95.3 93.2 79.1 66.9 1.305
t-ReX-OCM (L=1, hψ , |Q|=131K)        79.6 71.7 67.3 62.8 61.6 55.3 61.9 68.8 75.2 96.7 94.0 93.6 76.6 66.1 1.224
t-ReX1 (ℓ2 , L=1, dh =4096, db =256) 79.8 71.7 67.1 63.0 61.8 54.8 61.1 66.7 74.4 96.8 93.2 93.5 76.7 66.2 1.201
t-ReX1 (ℓ2 , L=1, dh =2048, db =256) 80.0 71.3 66.4 62.3 60.6 53.9 58.8 67.5 75.2 96.4 91.6 93.4 75.4 65.4 1.150
t-ReX*                                80.2 70.7 66.0 61.5 59.8 53.4 55.5 64.7 73.2 96.2 90.1 93.0 73.2 64.8 1.078


Table 8: Varying the scale and resolution of global and local crops as well as the batch size. We
train models using different minimum and maximum scales for global and local crops, and batch size.
Ml is the number of local crops. We use 1 global crop, i.e., Mg = 1, for each experiment. PyTorch,
Simsiam and DINO augmentation pipelines are from Paszke et al. (2019), Chen & He (2021) and
Caron et al. (2021), respectively. Note that for the experiments presented in this table we train models
using vanilla softmax, see Appendix C.3 for a discussion.
      Augmentation    Global                 Local              Local                                        Batch IN1K Mean Transfer
                                                                         Ml                   Epoch
        Pipeline      Scale                  Scale            Resolution                                     Size Top-1  Log odds
1       PyTorch    (0.08, 1.00)                –                  –      –                      100           256   76.0    1.07
2       SimSiam    (0.20, 1.00)                –                  –      –                      100           256   76.0    1.06
3        DINO         (0.05, 1.00)              –                     –             –           100           256             76.4                    1.08
4        DINO         (0.05, 1.00)              –                     –             –           100          2304             76.5                    1.07
5        DINO         (0.05, 1.00)              –                     –             –           800           256             76.5                    1.13
6        DINO         (0.15, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.15)             96 × 96             8           100           256             78.4                    1.19
7        DINO         (0.25, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.25)             96 × 96             8           100           256             78.6                    1.21
8        DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)             96 × 96             8           100           256             78.9                    1.23
 9       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)           224 × 224             2           100           256             77.5                    1.08
10       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)           192 × 192             2           100           256             77.5                    1.10
11       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)           160 × 160             2           100           256             77.8                    1.13
12       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)           128 × 128             2           100           256             78.1                    1.17
13       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)            96 × 96              2           100           256             78.3                    1.19
14       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)            64 × 64              2           100           256             77.8                    1.17
15       DINO         (0.40, 1.00)     (0.05, 0.40)            32 × 32              2           100           256             74.8                    1.02

C.2     E XTENDED VERSION OF F IG . 7

In Fig. 10 we present an extended version of Fig. 7 in the main paper that further includes results for
the variants presented in Appendices A.3 and A.4.

C.3     E XTENDED ABLATIONS ON MULTI - CROP

In Sec. 4.1 of the main paper, we ablate the hyper-parameters of multi-crop using a projector head.
This is because cosine softmax loss, when used without a projector head, suffers from overfitting
to IN1K, and yields much worse transfer performance, as we show in Fig. 11. Note that this
phenomenon has also been observed by Kornblith et al. (2021) and explained by the fact that cosine
softmax increases class separability of seen concepts in the feature space which reduces transferability.
Therefore, we believe that using cosine softmax loss when training “multi-crop-only” models is
clearly sub-optimal to set multi-crop hyper-parameters. However, we note that, as shown in Sec. 4 of
the main paper, this overfitting of cosine softmax is alleviated by projector heads. In the remaining of


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Extended results for the effect of the projector’s design. We start from a default configu-
ration, i.e., L = 1, dh = 2048, db = 256 and with ℓ2 normalization of the input (corresponding to
highlighted rows in the tables), and ablate L, db and ℓ2 -normalization separately, training models
with Eq. (1). These two tables complement Tab. 1 of the main paper.
                  (a) Bottleneck dimension db            (b) Hidden layer L and input ℓ2 -norm

                      db IN1K Transfer                           L ℓ2 IN1K Transfer
                     128 79.8   1.14                             1 – 79.4    1.17
                                                                 1 ✓ 79.8    1.15
                     256 79.8   1.15                             2 – 78.6    1.33
                     512 79.9   1.16                             2 ✓ 78.6    1.31
                    1024 79.6   1.15                             3 – 77.9    1.35
                    2048 80.0   1.15                             3 ✓ 77.5    1.33


this section, we train “multi-crop-only” models using vanilla softmax, i.e., encoder features x and
class weights {wc }1000
                     c=1 are not ℓ2 -normalized and τ = 1.0 in Eq. (1) of the main paper.

In the main paper, we use (0.05, 0.4) and (0.4, 1.0) as the scale range for local and global crops, i.e., we
sample scale values from these intervals. Tab. 8 provides an ablation on the maximum and minimum
scales for local and global crops, respectively (see rows 6-8 in Tab. 8). We evaluate 3 different values
(0.15, 0.25 and 0.4) for the maximum scale of local crops, which is also set as the minimum scale for
global crops. Although the results are comparable, we see that 0.40 produces slightly better results.
We further verify if the improvements from local crops are due to the fact that a) models are trained
using more variants for each image, or b) the effective batch size is increased during training (as we
use one batch of images for each crop). To test a), we train a model for 800 epochs using single crops
with scale range (0.05, 1.0), and observe that (see row 5 in Tab. 8) it performs comparably to training
models without multi-crop, i.e., it barely improves over training models with PyTorch and SimSiam
augmentations (rows 1 and 2) and performs similar when DINO augmentations are used without
multi-crop (row 3). To test b), we train a model for 100 epochs using single crops with scale range
(0.05, 1.0) but increase batch size by 9× (see row 4). Yet, we again observe no improvements over
training models without local crops.
Finally, we ablate the resolution of local crops (rows 9-15 in Tab. 8). Using two local crops
Ml = 2 and a single global crop Mg = 0, we try several values as for the resolution of local crops
[224 × 224, 192 × 192, 160 × 160, 128 × 128, 96 × 96, 64 × 64, 32 × 32] and find that 96 × 96 works
best on both IN1K and transfer datasets.

C.4    E XTENDED ABLATIONS ON THE PROJECTOR DESIGN

We present additional ablations on the projector design, complementing our discussion in Sec. 4.1
of the main paper. We analyse the effect of the bottleneck layer dimension (db ), and whether or not
to ℓ2 -normalize the projector input (ℓ2 ) to the performance on IN1K and transfer tasks. As we see
in Tab. 9, they have only a small influence on the performance.

C.5    E XTENDED ABLATIONS FOR O NLINE C LASS M EANS (OCM)

Varying the projector and predictor head architecture. In Tab. 1 of the main paper, we study
the impact of the projector head parameters for the models we train with Eq. (1). Here, we replicate
this study for the OCM variant. Specifically, we ablate the L and dh parameters for the OCM model
defined by Eq. (2). We show the results in Fig. 12a, and see that our observation still holds, i.e., in-
creasing the complexity of projector improves transfer performance at the cost of IN1K performance.
We also tested the impact of predictors in OCM models, and observed a similar behavior: Small
predictors improve the transferability of encoder representations by sacrificing IN1K performance;
allowing these variants to move along the envelope. Consequently, training OCM models with no
predictor, i.e., when hψ is an identity mapping in Fig. 9b, improves IN1K performance. Indeed, our
best model on IN1K, i.e., t-ReX*, is a t-ReX1 -OCM variant with no predictor head.
Varying the memory bank size. Fig. 12b shows how the size of the memory bank impacts perfor-
mance for the OCM variant, where we see that even a moderately-sized memory bank of |Q| = 8192,
i.e., containing only 8 points per class on average is sufficient to obtain high performance on both axes.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      1.35                                                                |Q|=1024


 Mean Transfer Acc.


                                                            Mean Transfer Acc.
                                                                                 1.35
                               L=1, dh =2048                                              |Q|=2048

    (Log odds)


                                                               (Log odds)
                               L=1, dh =4096                                              |Q|=4096
                      1.25     L=2, dh =2048                                     1.32     |Q|=8192
                               L=2, dh =4096                                              |Q|=16384
                               L=3, dh =2048                                              |Q|=65536
                      1.15     L=3, dh =4096                                     1.29

                                   77     78     79                                            77               78
                              ImageNet-1K Accuracy (%)                                   ImageNet-1K Accuracy (%)

                       (a) Projector parameters L and dh                                (b) Memory size (|Q|)

Figure 12: OCM ablations for (a) the projector head parameters L and dh when |Q| = 8192 and (b)
the size of memory bank |Q| when L = 3 and dh = 2048.

C.6              E XTENDED ANALYSES OF LEARNED FEATURES , CLASS WEIGHTS AND PROTOTYPES

In Figs. 5 and 6 of the main paper, we compare six models: a) Base: a model trained using cosine
softmax loss without multi-crop and projector, b) Base (BS=2K): Base but with 9×larger batch size,
c) Base+Mc: Base plus multi-crop, d) Base+Pr: Base plus a projector, e) Base+Mc+Pr, and f)
OCM: a model trained using Eq. (2), from multiple aspects to get more insights on how our proposed
training setup improves performance. We extend these analyses below.
When comparing models, we use either features extracted using these models on each dataset, their
class weights, or their prototypes. For the analyses with features, we use only the samples in the test
splits of IN1K and CoG levels, but all the samples in the others (as these datasets are small-scale).
Pairwise ℓ2 -distance. We ℓ2 -normalize features and compute average pairwise ℓ2 -distance either
between samples from the same class (intra-class) or between all samples in a dataset (all-sample).
In Fig. 5 (left) of the main paper, we show intra-class distance for the four models (a, c, d and e) and
for completeness, in Fig. 13 (left), we provide all-sample ℓ2 -distances for them.
Sparsity. We compute sparsity as the percentage of feature dimensions close to zero. To compute this
metric, we apply a threshold ϵ to individual dimensions of ℓ2 -normalized features. In Fig. 5 (right)
of the main paper, we show the results obtained with ϵ = 10−5 , but we found that the conclusions
obtained with a range of ϵ values logarithmically sampled between 10−3 and 10−8 were consistent.
Coding length. We compute average coding length (Ma et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2020) of samples in a
dataset as R(X, ϵ) = 1/2 log det(Id + d/N ϵ2 X⊤ X), where Id is a d-by-d identity matrix, ϵ2 is the
precision parameter set to 0.5 and X ∈ RN ×d is a feature matrix containing N samples each encoded
into a d-dimensional representation (2048 in our case). In Fig. 6 (left) of the main paper, we show
average coding length for the four models (a, c, d and e) obtained on transfer datasets (i.e., coding
length values are further averaged over transfer datasets). In Fig. 14 we show coding length for the
same four models plus DINO Caron et al. (2021) obtained on each dataset, separately. Moreover,
we compute singular values per dimension for models with and without projectors (Base+Pr and
Base+Mc). For each model, we compute singular values on each transfer dataset which are normalized
by their sum so that they sum to 1. We then sort these normalized singular values by decreasing order,
and average them over transfer datasets. As can be seen in Fig. 13 (right), feature variance is more
uniformly distributed over dimensions when a projector is used.
Gradient similarity and variance. To get a better understanding on why multi-crop improves
performance significantly for the same effective batch size, we compare the models Base+Mc and
Base (BS=2K) by analyzing gradients of their class weights ∇W LCE at each SGD update. We
compute absolute cosine similarity between “class gradients” for a pair of classes ci and cj as
|sim(∇wci LCE , ∇wcj LCE )|, where sim(·, ·) denotes cosine similarity. Then we average them over
all class pairs (ci , cj ) ∼ P in a dataset, which is reported in Fig. 6 (middle) of the main paper.
Additionally, in Fig. 16 we show Frobenius norm and standard deviation computed over ∇W LCE .
We observe that norm and variance of gradients increase with multi-crop, which we believe is due to
increasing variance in embeddings as noted by Wang et al. (2022a).


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      1.4                                   1.4                                       Base


All-sample Distance
                                                                                                      +Mc


                                                                                                               Singular Value
                      1.3                                   1.3                                                                 10−2
                                                                                                      +Pr
                      1.2                                   1.2                                       +Mc+Pr
                                                                                                                                10−3
                      1.1                                   1.1

                          1                                   1
                                                                                                                                10−4
                              74         76   78       80         0         0.5        1                                               0          500        1,000
                              ImageNet-1K Acc. (%)                    Mean Transfer Acc. (LO)                                              Feature Dim. Index

Figure 13: (left) All-sample ℓ2 distance vs. performance on IN1K and transfer datasets. These two
sub-plots extend the intra-class distance plots shown in Fig. 5 (left) of the main paper. Gray and
Orange arrows denote changes due to adding multi-crop and projectors, respectively. (right) Singular
values across dimensions, averaged over the transfer datasets. We show the first 1000 dimensions (of
2048) for clarity.

                                                   Base           Base+Pr             Base+Mc        Base+Mc+Pr                  DINO
                                   IN1K                       L1                             L2                          L3                             L4

2000                                          2000                            2000                     2000                                2000


                      0                            0                              0                       0                                   0
                                    L5                      Aircraft                       Cars196                DTD                               EuroSAT
                                                                              2000
2000                                                                                                   2000
                                              1000                                                                                         1000

                      0                            0                              0                       0                                   0
                               Flowers                       Pets                          Food101             SUN397
2000
                                              2000                            2000                     2000


                      0                            0                              0                       0
Figure 14: Average coding length (Yu et al., 2020) obtained on each dataset separately. See Ap-
pendix C.6 for a description of models. In Fig. 5 (middle) of the main paper, we show average coding
length over the transfer datasets (excluding IN1K) for all the models except DINO.

Feature redundancy. In addition to the metrics described above, following Wang et al. (2022b), we
compute “redundancy”    of features X ∈ RN ×d (defined as in the “coding length” paragraph above)
as R = 1/d2 i j |ρ(X:,i , X:,j )|, where , ρ(X:,i , X:,j ) is the Pearson correlation between a pair
             P P
of feature dimensions i and j. In Fig. 15 we show redundancy score for the four models (a, c, d and
e) plus DINO Caron et al. (2021) obtained on each dataset, separately.

C.7                       R ESULTS ON IN1K- V 2 AND IN1K-S KETCH

We compare t-ReX and t-ReX* to the previous state of the art on IN1K-v2 and IN1K-Sketch. As
before, for each model, we use the trained encoder as a feature extractor, and we reuse the linear
classifier trained on IN1K and apply it directly to the test images of IN1K-v2 and IN1K-Sketch. Note
that there are 3 test sets for IN1K-v2, and we evaluate over all of them. Tab. 10 presents our results.
Looking at the mean top-1 accuracy over the three test sets of IN1K-v2, we observe that t-ReX* also
matches the performance of RSB-A1 on IN1K-v2 outperforming all others, showing strong domain
generalization capabilities. On the other hand, SupCon performs the best on IN1K-Sketch, where
t-ReX* is the second best. We think that the contrastive loss used in SupCon might have improved
its out-of-distribution robustness for the training concepts.

C.8                       R ESULTS ON CLASS - IMBALANCED TRANSFER DATASETS

We evaluate the long-tail transfer classification performance of DINO, PAWS, RSB-A1, t-ReX and
t-ReX* on two class-imbalanced datasets, iNaturalist 2018 and iNaturalist 2019 (Van Horn et al.,
2018). For these evaluations, we follow the Log.Reg. protocol from the ImageNet-CoG benchmark


                                                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Base         Base+Pr            Base+Mc         Base+Mc+Pr             DINO
           IN1K                            L1                          L2                         L3                     L4

 0.05                      0.05                          0.05                     0.05                        0.05


 0.00                      0.00                          0.00                     0.00                        0.00
            L5                           Aircraft                    Cars196                     DTD                   EuroSAT
  0.1                       0.1
                                                                                  0.05                         0.1
                                                         0.05

  0.0                       0.0                          0.00                     0.00                         0.0
          Flowers                         Pets                       Food101                    SUN397
  0.1
                                                         0.05
                           0.05                                                   0.05

  0.0                      0.00                          0.00                     0.00
Figure 15: Feature redundancy scores (Wang et al., 2022b) obtained on each dataset separately.
See Appendix C.6 for a description of models.


                                                       Base (BS=2304)            Base+Mc
                           Cosine Similarity                              Std                      Norm
                                                       0.0004                         0.6
                    0.75
                    0.50                                                              0.4
                                                       0.0002
                    0.25                                                              0.2
                            0                    100             0              100         0              100
                                    Epoch                              Epoch                       Epoch
Figure 16: (left) Average cosine similarity between gradients of class weights ∇wc LCE (also shown
in Fig. 6 (middle) of the main paper). (middle and right) Standard deviation and Frobenius norm,
respectively, computed over gradients ∇W LCE . See Appendix C.6 for a description of models.


Table 10: Results on IN1K concepts. For each model, we report results on the original IN1K
“Val” set (the x-axis of Fig. 7), as well as on the test sets of IN1K-sketch (Wang et al., 2019) and
IN1K-v2 (Recht et al., 2019), using in all cases the encoder, and the linear classifier trained on the
original IN1K training set.
                        IN1K IN1K                                  IN1K-v2
 Model                   Val Sketch Matched-frequency Threshold-0.7 Top-images Mean
 DINO                    74.8     19.8            61.9               71.2           76.7        69.9
 PAWS                    76.4     24.2            63.6               73.0           78.3        71.6
 LOOK + multi-crop 78.0           27.8            65.8               75.3           80.7        73.9
 SupCon                  78.8     30.9            66.8               75.5           80.5        74.3
 RSB-A1                  79.8     27.9            68.1               76.6           81.6        75.4
 t-ReX                            78.0       26.8                    65.6                   74.9                80.2          73.6
 t-ReX*                           80.2       29.1                    69.0                   77.5                82.0          76.2


                                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 11: Transfer results on long-tail classification. For each model, we train linear classifiers on
the iNaturalist 2018 and iNaturalist 2019 datasets (Van Horn et al., 2018) with class-imbalanced data.
                            Model iNaturalist 2018 iNaturalist 2019
                            DINO             41.9             51.4
                            PAWS             40.8             49.8
                            RSB-A1           34.9             43.2
                            t-ReX            45.8              54.2
                            t-ReX*           36.0              44.2

(see Appendix B.4). Results are reported in Tab. 11. We see that our t-ReX and t-ReX* models still
outperform RSB-A1 and DINO respectively, despite a challenging long-tail class distribution.

D    L IMITATIONS
Requirement for annotations. Firstly, our training setup is tailored for supervised learning, and
therefore, its performance on both training and transfer tasks depends on the availability of high-
quality and diverse annotations for the training images. Image-level annotation, when involving a
large number of potentially fine-grained classes is an expensive and error-prone process. In this work,
we show that given a large-scale curated and annotated dataset, more precisely given IN1K, which is
composed of 1.28M images annotated for 1000 different concepts, it is possible to learn more generic
representations than self- or semi-supervised models. When only a handful of concepts is annotated,
or when annotations contain too much noise, these conclusions might not be accurate anymore, and
both the pretraining classification task and the transfer tasks results might be degraded. In this case,
self- or semi-supervised approaches might become more relevant. Yet, those scenarios are out of the
scope of our study.
Specific encoder architecture. Secondly, we develop our training setup based on a single encoder
architecture, ResNet50, and do not test it on other architectures. This was motivated by the fact
that ResNet50 is still a very commonly used architecture. Also, we note that our training setup
components, multi-crop, a data-augmentation operator, and the expendable projector, added after the
encoder, are architecture-agnostic so those contributions can be seamlessly applied to any other archi-
tecture of choice. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that our setup would consistently improve other
architecture families, such as Vision Transformers (ViTs) Dosovitskiy et al. (2021). In fact, both com-
ponents were previously successfully used with ViTs for self-supervised learning Caron et al. (2021).
We leave studying the applicability of our training setup to other encoder architectures as future work.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Query concept                    5 nearest concepts (4 samples for each), according to cosine similarity
    Goldfish          Coral reef               Tench           Roch beauty           Axolotl             Snowplow


 Fire salamander    Common newt         Spotted salamander         Eft            Tailed frog          Tree frog


     Peacock            Cock                 Gallinule           Vulture              Hen               Bustard


    Flamingo            Crane               Spoonbill            Pelican        American egret        Black swan


     Papillon      Japanese spaniel         Chihuahua          Pomeranian      Blenheim spaniel       Toy terrier


    Whippet        Italian greyhound      Gazelle hound         Great Dane       Ibizan hound     Russian wolfhound


     Jaguar            Leopard               Cheetah           Snow leopard          Tiger              Cougar


Table 12: Visualization of the nearest neighbors of random class prototypes for t-ReX*. For each
row, the first column is the query concept and the next 5 columns are the closest 5 other concepts
according to cosine distance of their prototypes. All concepts are from IN1K and we show their
images in the validation set.


                                                          27
