Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O FFLINE Q-L EARNING ON D IVERSE M ULTI -TASK
DATA B OTH S CALES A ND G ENERALIZES
                            Aviral Kumar1,2 Rishabh Agarwal1
                    Xinyang Geng2 George Tucker∗,1 Sergey Levine∗,1,2
                      1
                        Google Research, Brain Team 2 UC Berkeley
            {aviralk, young.geng, svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu, {rishabhagarwal, gjt}@google.com



                                              A BSTRACT

            The potential of offline reinforcement learning (RL) is that high-capacity models
           trained on large, heterogeneous datasets can lead to agents that generalize broadly,
           analogously to similar advances in vision and NLP. However, recent works argue
           that offline RL methods encounter unique challenges to scaling up model capacity.
           Drawing on the learnings from these works, we re-examine previous design choices
           and find that with appropriate choices: ResNets, cross-entropy based distributional
           backups, and feature normalization, offline Q-learning algorithms exhibit strong
           performance that scales with model capacity. Using multi-task Atari as a test-
           bed for scaling and generalization, we train a single policy on 40 games with
           near-human performance using up-to 80 million parameter networks, finding that
           model performance scales favorably with capacity. In contrast to prior work, we
           extrapolate beyond dataset performance even when trained entirely on a large
           (400M transitions) but highly suboptimal dataset (51% human-level performance).
           Compared to return-conditioned supervised approaches, offline Q-learning scales
           similarly with model capacity and has better performance, especially when the
           dataset is suboptimal. Finally, we show that offline Q-learning with a diverse
           dataset is sufficient to learn powerful representations that facilitate rapid transfer
           to novel games and fast online learning on new variations of a training game,
           improving over existing state-of-the-art representation learning approaches.

1    I NTRODUCTION
High-capacity neural networks trained on large, diverse datasets have led to remarkable models that
can solve numerous tasks, rapidly adapt to new tasks, and produce general-purpose representations in
NLP and vision (Brown et al., 2020; He et al., 2021). The promise of offline RL is to leverage these
advances to produce polices with broad generalization, emergent capabilities, and performance that
exceeds the capabilities demonstrated in the training dataset. Thus far, the only offline RL approaches
that demonstrate broadly generalizing policies and transferable representations are heavily-based on
supervised learning (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022). However, these approaches are likely to
perform poorly when the dataset does not contain expert trajectories (Kumar et al., 2021b).
Offline Q-learning performs well across dataset compositions in a variety of simulated (Gulcehre et al.,
2020; Fu et al., 2020) and real-world domains (Chebotar et al., 2021; Soares et al., 2021), however,
these are largely centered around small-scale, single-task problems where broad generalization and
learning general-purpose representations is not expected. Scaling these methods up to high-capcity
models on large, diverse datasets is the critical challenge. Prior works hint at the difficulties: on
small-scale, single-task deep RL benchmarks, scaling model capacity can lead to instabilities or
degrade performance (Van Hasselt et al., 2018; Sinha et al., 2020; Ota et al., 2021) explaining why
decade-old tiny 3-layer CNN architectures (Mnih et al., 2013) are still prevalent. Moreover, works
that have scaled architectures to millions of parameters (Espeholt et al., 2018; Teh et al., 2017;
Vinyals et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2021) typically focus on online learning and employ many
sophisticated techniques to stabilize learning, such as supervised auxiliary losses, distillation, and
pre-training. Thus, it is unclear whether offline Q-learning can be scaled to high-capacity models.
    ∗
        Co-senior authors.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Train on potentially sub-optimal     Eval online.       Fine-tune novel games offline
               offline trajectories.                                   or online for novel modes.


                      ResNet encoder              ResNet encoder          ResNet encoder



                          FC layers                  FC layers                FC layers


                         Q-values for              Q-values for
                          Q-values
                           Amidar for               Q-values
                                                     Amidar for             Q-values for
                            Q-values
                             Amidar for               Q-values
                                                       Amidar for           fine-tuning
                              Q-values
                               Amidar for               Q-values
                                                         Amidar for            game
                                Amidar                    Amidar

                   Separate heads for 40 games                          Initialize encoder with
                                                                        pretrained weights.


Figure 1: An overview of the training and evaluation setup. Models are trained offline with potentially
sub-optimal data. We adapt CQL to the multi-task setup via a multi-headed architecture. The pre-trained
visual encoder is reused in fine-tuning (the weights are either frozen or fine-tuned), whereas the downstream
fully-connected layers are reinitialized and trained.

In this paper, we demonstrate that with careful design decisions, offline Q-learning can scale to high-
capacity models trained on large, diverse datasets from many tasks, leading to policies that not only
generalize broadly, but also learn representations that effectively transfer to new downstream tasks and
exceed the performance in the training dataset. Crucially, we make three modifications motivated by
prior work in deep learning and offline RL. First, we find that a modified ResNet architecture (He et al.,
2016) substantially outperforms typical deep RL architectures and follows a power-law relationship
between model capacity and performance, unlike common alternatives. Second, a discretized
representation of the return distribution with a distributional cross-entropy loss (Bellemare et al.,
2017) substantially improves performance compared to standard Q-learning, that utilizes mean
squared error. Finally, feature normalization on the intermediate feature representations stabilizes
training and prevents feature co-adaptation (Kumar et al., 2021a).
To systematically evaluate the impact of these changes on scaling and generalization, we train a
single policy to play 40 Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013; Agarwal et al., 2020), similarly to
Lee et al. (2022), and evaluate performance when the training dataset contains expert trajectories
and when the data is sub-optimal. This problem is especially challenging because of the diversity
of games with their own unique dynamics, reward, visuals, and agent embodiments. Furthermore,
the sub-optimal data setting requires the learning algorithm to “stitch together” useful segments of
sub-optimal trajectories to perform well. To investigate generalization of learned representations, we
evaluate offline fine-tuning to never-before-seen games and fast online adaptation on new variants of
training games (Section 5.2). With our modifications,

       • Offline Q-learning learns policies that attain more than 100% human-level performance on
         most of these games, about 2x better than prior supervised learning (SL) approaches for
         learning from sub-optimal offline data (51% human-level performance).
       • Akin to scaling laws in SL (Kaplan et al., 2020), offline Q-learning performance scales
         favorably with model capacity (Figure 6).
       • Representations learned by offline Q-learning give rise to more than 80% better performance
         when fine-tuning on new games compared to representations from state-of-the-art return-
         conditioned supervised (Lee et al., 2022) and self-supervised methods (He et al., 2021; Oord
         et al., 2018).

By scaling Q-learning, we realize the promise of offline RL: learning policies that broadly generalize
and exceed the capabilities demonstrated in the training dataset. We hope that this work encourages
large-scale offline RL applications, especially in domains with large sub-optimal datasets.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Prior works have sought to train a single generalist policy to play multiple Atari games simultaneously
from environment interactions, either using off-policy RL with online data collection (Espeholt et al.,
2018; Hessel et al., 2019a; Song et al., 2019), or policy distillation (Teh et al., 2017; Rusu et al.,
2015) from single-task policies. While our work also focuses on learning such a generalist multi-task


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               DT (200M)   DT (40M)                               BC (80M)   Online MT DQN (5X)*                    Scaled QL (Ours, 80M)     Behavior Policy

                                                                                                                                  Performance Profile (Sub-optimal Data)
                                           Sub-optimal Data                                                                100%
    Human-Normalized Median                                              80%


                                                      Human-Normalized IQM


                                                                                                       Fraction of games
                                                                                                         with score > τ
                          60%                                                                                              75%
                                                                         60%
                                                                                                                           50%
                          40%
                                                                         40%
                                                                                                                           25%
                          20%
                                                                         20%
                                                                                                                            0%
                                                                                                                                    0.0        0.5      1.0   1.5        2.0
                              0%                                             0%                                                           Human Normalized Score (τ)
Figure 2: Offline multi-task performance on 40 games with sub-optimal data. Left. Scaled QL significantly
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method, DT, attaining about a 2.5x performance improvement in
normalized IQM score. To contextualize the absolute numbers, we include online multi-task Impala DQN (Es-
peholt et al., 2018) trained on 5x as much data. Right. Performance profiles (Agarwal et al., 2021) showing
the distribution of normalized scores across all 40 training games (higher is better). Scaled QL stochastically
dominates other offline RL algorithms and achieves superhuman performance in 40% of the games. “Behavior
policy” corresponds to the score of the dataset trajectories. Online MT DQN (5X), taken directly from Lee et al.
(2022), corresponds to running multi-task online RL for 5x more data with IMPALA (details in Appendix C.5).

policy, it investigates whether we can do so by scaling offline Q-learning on suboptimal offline data,
analogous to how supervised learning can be scaled to large, diverse datasets. Furthermore, prior
attempts to apply transfer learning using RL-learned policies in ALE (Rusu et al., 2015; Parisotto
et al., 2015; Mittel & Sowmya Munukutla, 2019) are restricted to a dozen games that tend to be
similar and generally require an “expert”, instead of learning how to play all games concurrently.
Closely related to our work, recent work train Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) on purely offline
data for learning such a generalist policy using supervised learning (SL) approaches, namely, behav-
ioral cloning (Reed et al., 2022) or return-conditioned behavioral cloning (Lee et al., 2022). While
these works focus on large datasets containing expert or near-human performance trajectories, our
work focuses on the regime when we only have access to highly diverse but sub-optimal datasets. We
find that these SL approaches perform poorly with such datasets, while offline Q-learning is able to
substantially extrapolate beyond dataset performance (Figure 2). Even with near-optimal data, we
observe that scaling up offline Q-learning outperforms SL approaches with 200 million parameters
using as few as half the number of network parameters (Figure 6).
There has been a recent surge of offline RL algorithms that focus on mitigating distribution shift
in single task settings (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019;
Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Siegel et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019;
Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Nachum et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021;
Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020b; 2021). Complementary to such work, our work investigates
scaling offline RL on the more diverse and challenging multi-task Atari setting with data from 40
different games (Agarwal et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022). To do so, we use CQL (Kumar et al., 2020),
due to its simplicity as well as its efficacy on offline RL datasets with high-dimensional observations.

3                             P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S ETUP
We consider sequential-decision making problems (Sutton & Barto, 1998) where on each timestep,
an agent observes a state s, produces an action a, and receives a reward r. The goal of a learning
algorithm is to maximize the sum of discounted rewards. Our approach is based on conservative
Q-learning (CQL) (Kumar et al., 2020), an offline Q-learning algorithm. CQL uses a sum of two
loss functions to combat value overestimation on unseen actions: (i) standard TD-error that enforces
Bellman consistency, and (ii) a regularizer that minimizes the Q-values for unseen actions at a given
state, while maximizing the Q-value at the dataset action to counteract excessive underestimation.
Denoting Qθ (s, a) as the learned Q-function, the training objective for CQL is given by:
                      "                           !#                     !
                             X
                                               ′
       min α Es∼D log             exp(Qθ (s, a )) −Es,a∼D [Qθ (s, a)] + TDError(θ; D),             (1)
                                   θ
                                                                             a′
where α is the regularizer weight, which we fix to α = 0.05 based on preliminary experiments unless
noted otherwise. Kumar et al. (2020) utilized a distributional TDError(θ; D) from C51 (Bellemare


                                                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: An overview of the network architecture. The key design decisions are: (1) the use of ResNet
models with learned spatial embeddings and group normalization, (2) use of a distributional representation
of return values and cross-entropy TD loss for training (i.e., C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017)), and (3) feature
normalization to stablize training.

et al., 2017), whereas (Kumar et al., 2021a) showed that similar results could be attained with the
standard mean-squared TD-error. Lee et al. (2022) use the distributional formulation of CQL and
found that it underperforms alternatives and performance does not improve with model capacity. In
general, there is no consensus on which formulation of TD-error must be utilized in Equation 1, and
we will study this choice in our scaling experiments.
Problem setup. Our goal is to learn a single policy that is effective at multiple Atari games and can
be fine-tuned to new games. For training, we utilize the set of 40 Atari games used by Lee et al.
(2022), and for each game, we utilize the experience collected in the DQN-Replay dataset (Agarwal
et al., 2020) as our offline dataset. We consider two different dataset compositions:

      1. Sub-optimal dataset consisting of the initial 20% of the trajectories (10M transitions)
         from DQN-Replay for each game, containing 400 million transitions overall with average
         human-normalized interquartile-mean (IQM) (Agarwal et al., 2021) score of 51%. Since
         this dataset does not contain optimal trajectories, we do not expect methods that simply copy
         behaviors in this dataset to perform well. On the other hand, we would expect methods that
         can combine useful segments of sub-optimal trajectories to perform well.
      2. Near-optimal dataset, used by Lee et al. (2022), consisting of all the experience (50M
         transitions) encountered during training of a DQN agent including human-level trajectories,
         containing 2 billion transitions with average human-normalized IQM score of 93.5%.

Evaluation. We evaluate our method in a variety of settings as we discuss in our experiments in
Section 5. Due to excessive computational requirements of running huge models, we are only able
to run our main experiments with one seed. Prior work (Lee et al., 2022) that also studied offline
multi-game Atari evaluated models with only one seed. That said, to ensure that our evaluations
are reliable, for reporting performance, we follow the recommendations by Agarwal et al. (2021).
Specifically, we report interquartile mean (IQM) normalized scores, which is the average scores
across middle 50% of the games, as well as performance profiles for qualitative summarization.

4    O UR A PPROACH FOR S CALING O FFLINE RL
In this section, we describe the critical modifications required to make CQL effective in learning
highly-expressive policies from large, heterogeneous datasets.
Parameterization of Q-values and TD error. In the single game setting, both mean-squared TD
error and distributional TD error perform comparably online (Agarwal et al., 2021) and offline (Kumar
et al., 2020; 2021a). In contrast, we observed, perhaps surprisingly, that mean-squared TD error does
not scale well, and performs much worse than using a categorical distributional representation of
return values (Bellemare et al., 2017) when we train on many Atari games. We hypothesize that this
is because even with reward clipping, Q-values for different games often span different ranges, and
training a single network with shared parameters to accurately predict all of them presents challenges
pertaining to gradient interference along different games (Hessel et al., 2019b; Yu et al., 2020a).
While prior works have proposed to use adaptive normalization schemes (Hessel et al., 2019b; Kurin
et al., 2022), preliminary experiments with these approaches were not effective to close the gap.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


% Improvement (Log scale)
                            1000%
                             100%                                                                                    1.00
                                                                                                                                          Sub-optimal data


                                                                                             Fraction of runs with
                             10%
                                                                                                                     0.75
                              1%


                                                                                                   score > τ
                              0%
                             −1%                                                                                     0.50

                            −10%
                                                                                                                     0.25
                            −100%


                                         YarsRevenge
                                         WizardOfWor
                                        KungFuMaster
                                               Freeway
                                              Frostbite
                                         FishingDerby


                                             TimePilot
                                              Breakout


                                          VideoPinball
                                             Kangaroo


                                             Robotank
                                                 Boxing


                                                Pooyan
                                            IceHockey


                                                Zaxxon
                                                Atlantis


                                               Carnival



                                        DemonAttack

                                                Enduro


                                                   Hero


                                              Riverraid
                                                Amidar
                                                Assault
                                                Asterix


                                                   Krull
                                            BankHeist
                                           BattleZone


                                          DoubleDunk
                                           BeamRider



                                            Centipede
                                    ChopperCommand
                                         CrazyClimber


                                                Gopher
                                               Gravitar


                                           Jamesbond



                                      NameThisGame
                                               Phoenix


                                             UpNDown
                                                  Qbert


                                             Seaquest
                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                            0%   200% 400% 600% 800% 1000%
                                                                                                                      Improvement of Scaled QL over DT (τ)


                             Figure 4: Comparing Scaled QL to DT on all training games on the sub-optimal dataset.
Q-function architecture. Since large neural networks has been crucial for scaling to large, diverse
datasets in NLP and vision (e.g., Tan & Le, 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020)), we explore
using bigger architectures for scaling offline Q-learning. We use standard feature extractor backbones
from vision, namely, the Impala-CNN architectures (Espeholt et al., 2018) that are fairly standard
in deep RL and ResNet 34, 50 and 101 models from the ResNet family (He et al., 2016). We make
modifications to these networks following recommendations from prior work (Kumar et al., 2022):
we utilize group normalization instead of batch normalization in ResNets, and utilize point-wise
multiplication with a learned spatial embedding when converting the output feature map of the vision
backbone into a flattened vector which is to be fed into the feed-forward part of the Q-function.
To handle the multi-task setting, we use a multi-headed architecture where the Q-network outputs
values for each game separately. The architecture uses a shared encoder and feedforward layers with
separate linear projection layers for each game (Figure 3). The training objective (Eq. 1) is computed
using the Q-values for the game that the transition originates from. In principle, explicitly injecting
the task-identifier may be unnecessary and its impact could be investigated in future work.
Feature Normalization via DR3 (Kumar et al., 2021a). While the previous modifications lead to
significant improvements over naïve CQL, our preliminary experiments on a subset of games did not
attain good performance. In the single-task setting, Kumar et al. (2021a) proposes a regularizer that
stabilizes training and allows the network to better use capacity, however, it introduces an additional
hyperparameter to tune. Motivated by this approach, we regularize the magnitude of the learned
features of the observation by introducing a “normalization” layer in the Q-network. This layer forces
the learned features to have an ℓ2 norm of 1 by construction, and we found that this this speeds
up learning, resulting in better performance. We present an ablation study analyzing this choice
in Table 2. We found this sufficient to achieve strong performance, however, we leave exploring
alternative feature normalization schemes to future work.

                            To summarize, the primary modifications that enable us to scale CQL are: (1) use of large
                            ResNets with learned spatial embeddings and group normalization, (2) use of a distributional
                            representation of return values and cross-entropy loss for training (i.e., C51 (Bellemare et al.,
                            2017)), and (3) feature normalization at intermediate layers to prevent feature co-adaptation,
                            motivated by Kumar et al. (2021a). For brevity, we call our approach Scaled Q-learning.

5                            E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In our experiments, we study how our approach, scaled Q-learning, can simultaneously learn from
sub-optimal and optimal data collected from 40 different Atari games. We compare the resulting
multi-task policies to behavior cloning (BC) with same architecture as scaled QL, and the prior
state-of-the-art method based on decision transformers (DT) (Chen et al., 2021), which utilize return-
conditioned supervised learning with large transformers (Lee et al., 2022), and have been previously
proposed for addressing this task. We also study the efficacy of the multi-task initialization produced
by scaled Q-learning in facilitating rapid transfer to new games via both offline and online fine-tuning,
in comparison to state-of-the-art self-supervised representation learning methods and other prior
approaches. Our goal is to answer the following questions: (1) How do our proposed design decisions
impact performance scaling with high-capacity models?, (2) Can scaled QL more effectively leverage
higher model capacity compared to naïve instantiations of Q-learning?, (3) Do the representations


                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learned by scaled QL transfer to new games? We will answer these questions in detail through
multiple experiments in the coming sections, but we will first summarize our main results below.
Main empirical findings. Our main results are summarized in Figures 2 and 5. These figures show
the performance of scaled QL, multi-game decision transformers (Lee et al., 2022) (marked as “DT”),
a prior method based on supervised learning via return conditioning, and standard behavioral cloning
baselines (marked as “BC”) in the two settings discussed previously, where we must learn from:
(i) near optimal data, and (ii) sub-optimal data obtained from the initial 20% segment of the replay
buffer (see Section 3 for problem setup). See Figure 4 for a direct comparison between DT and BC.
In the more challenging sub-optimal data setting,                                                                                      DT (200M)                             MT Impala-DQN*
scaled QL attains a performance of 77.8% IQM                                                                                           DT (40M)                              Scaled QL (Ours, 80M)
human-normalized score, although trajectories                                                                                          BC                                    Behavior Policy
in the sub-optimal training dataset only attain                                                                                 Sub-optimal Data                                Near-optimal Data
                                                                                                                      80%


                                                                                                   Human-Normalized IQM


                                                                                                                                                      Human-Normalized IQM
51% IQM human-normalized score. Scaled QL
also outperforms the prior DT approach by 2.5                                                                                                                            100%
                                                                                                                      60%
times on this dataset, even though the DT model                                                                                                                              80%
has more than twice as many parameters and                                                                            40%                                                    60%
uses data augmentation, compared to scaled QL.                                                                                                                               40%
                                                                                                                      20%
        nd                                                                     20%
In the 2 setting with near-optimal data, where
the training dataset already contains expert tra-      0%                       0%
jectories, scaled QL with 80M parameters still
outperforms the DT approach with 200M param- Figure 5: Offline scaled conservative Q-learning vs
eters, although the gap in performance is small other prior methods with near-optimal data and sub-
                                                  optimal data. Scaled QL outperforms the best DT model,
(3% in IQM performance, and 20% on median attaining an IQM human-normalized score of 114.1% on
performance). Overall, these results show that the near-optimal data and 77.8% on the sub-optimal data,
scaled QL is an effective approach for learning compared to 111.8% and 30.6% for DT, respectively.
from large multi-task datasets, for a variety of
data compositions including sub-optimal datasets, where we must stitch useful segments of subopti-
mal trajectories to perform well, and near-optimal datasets, where we should attempt to mimic the
best behavior in the offline dataset.
To the best of our knowledge, these results represent the largest performance improvement over the
average performance in the offline dataset on such a challenging problem. We will now present
experiments that show that offline Q-learning scales and generalizes.
                                                      Scaled QL + ResNet/MSE         Scaled QL + ResNet/C51                                      CQL + IMPALA
                                                                    Scaling curves with near-optimal data
                                                                                         Human-Normalized Median


                                                                                                                   100%
              Human-Normalized IQM


                                                                                DT
                                     100%
                                                                                                                          80%
                                                                                                                                                                                      DT
                                     80%
                                                                                                                          60%

                                     60%
                                                                                                                          40%

                                     40%
                                                                                                                          20%
                                            30   40     60       100           200                                               30   40    60        100                           200
                                                  Parameters (x1 Million)                                                              Parameters (x1 Million)

Figure 6: Scaling trends for offline Q-learning. Observe that while the performance of scaled QL instantiated
with IMPALA architectures (Espeholt et al., 2018) degrades as we increase model size, the performance of
scaled QL utilizing the ResNets described in Section 4 continues to increase as model capacity increases. This is
true for both an MSE-style TD error as well as for the categorical TD error used by C51 (which performs better
on an absolute scale). The CQL + IMPALA performance numbers are from (Lee et al., 2022).

5.1   D OES O FFLINE Q-L EARNING S CALE FAVORABLY ?
One of the primary goals of this paper was to understand if scaled Q-learning is able to leverage the
benefit of higher capacity architectures. Recently, Lee et al. (2022) found that the performance of
CQL with the IMPALA architecture does not improve with larger model sizes and may even degrade
with larger model sizes. To verify if scaled Q-learning can address this limitation, we compare our
value-based offline RL approach with a variety of model families: (a) IMPALA family (Espeholt
et al., 2018): three IMPALA models with varying widths (4, 8, 16) whose performance numbers are


                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  Scaled QL (ours)         Scaled QL (scratch)     BC (pre-trained)           CPC+DT
                                  Scaled QL (frozen)       MAE                     DT (pre-trained)

                             Alien              MsPacman                Pong            SpaceInvaders          StarGunner
                                                                                                        0.8
Normalized Score
                   1.5                                       1.00                1.00
                                         1.0                                                            0.6
                                                             0.75                0.75
                   1.0
                                                             0.50                                       0.4
                                                                                 0.50
                                         0.5
                   0.5                                       0.25                0.25                   0.2

                                                             0.00
                   0.0                   0.0                                     0.00                   0.0

Figure 7: Offline fine-tuning performance on unseen games trained with 1% of held-out game’s data, measured
in terms of DQN-normalized score, following (Lee et al., 2022). On average, pre-training with scaled QL
outperforms other methods by 82%. Furthermore, scaled QL improves over scaled QL (scratch) by 45%,
indicating that the representations learned by scaled QL during multi-game pre-training are useful for transfer.
Self-supervised representation learning (CPC, MAE) alone does not attain good fine-tuning performance.


taken directly from Lee et al. (2022) (and was consistent with our preliminary experiments), (b)
ResNet 34, 50, 101 and 152 from the ResNet family, modified to include group normalization and
learned spatial embeddings.These architectures include both small and large networks, spanning a
wide range from 1M to 100M parameters. As a point of reference, we use the scaling trends of the
multi-game decision transformer and BC transformer approaches from Lee et al. (2022).
Observe in Figure 6 that the performance of scaled Q-learning improves as the underlying Q-function
model size grows. Even though the standard mean-squared error formulation of TD error results in
worse absolute performance than C51 (blue vs orange), for both of these versions, the performance
of scaled Q-learning increases as the models become larger. This result indicates that value-based
offline RL methods can scale favorably, and give rise to better results, but this requires carefully
picking a model family. This also explains the findings from Lee et al. (2022): while this prior work
observed that CQL with IMPALA scaled poorly as model size increases, they also observed that the
performance of return-conditioned RL instantiated with IMPALA architectures also degraded with
higher model sizes. Combined with the results in Figure 6 above, this suggests that poor scaling
properties of offline RL can largely be attributed to the choice of IMPALA architectures, which may
not work well in general even for supervised learning methods (like return-conditioned BC).

5.2                      C AN O FFLINE RL L EARN U SEFUL I NITIALIZATIONS THAT E NABLE F INE -T UNING ?
Next, we study how multi-task training on multiple games via scaled QL can learn general-purpose
representations that can enable rapid fine-tuning to new games. We study this question in two
scenarios: fine-tuning to a new game via offline RL with a small amount of held-out data (1%
uniformly subsampled datasets from DQN-Replay (Agarwal et al., 2020)), and finetuning to a new
game mode via sample-efficient online RL initialized from our multi-game offline Q-function. For
finetuning, we transfer the weights from the visual encoder and reinitialize the downstream feed-
forward component (Figure 1). For both of these scenarios, we utilize a ResNet101 Q-function
trained via the methodology in Section 4, using C51 and feature normalization.
Scenario 1 (Offline fine-tuning): First, we present the results for fine-tuning in an offline setting:
following the protocol from Lee et al. (2022), we use the pre-trained representations to rapidly learn
a policy for a novel game using limited offline data (1% of the experience of an online DQN run). In
Figure 7, we present our results for offline fine-tuning on 5 games from Lee et al. (2022), A LIEN ,
M S PACMAN , S PACE I NVADERS , S TAR G UNNER and P ONG, alongside the prior approach based on
decision transformers (“DT (pre-trained)”), and fine-tuning using pre-trained representations learned
from state-of-the-art self-supervised representation learning methods such as contrastive predictive
coding (CPC) (Oord et al., 2018) and masked autoencoders (MAE) (He et al., 2021). For CPC
performance, we use the baseline reported in Lee et al. (2022). MAE is a more recent self-supervised
approach that we find generally outperformed CPC in this comparison. For MAE, we first pretrained
a vision transformer (ViT-Base) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) encoder with 80M parameters trained via a
reconstruction loss on observations from multi-game Atari dataset and freeze the encoder weights as
done in prior work (Xiao et al.). Then, with this frozen visual encoder, we used the same feed forward
architecture, Q-function parameterization, and training objective (CQL with C51) as scaled QL to


                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Scaled QL (Ours)        Scaled QL (Scratch)                    MAE (Pretrain)             Single-game DQN (50M)

                                                                   Freeway (m1d0)       Hero (m1d0)          Breakout (m12d0)
                                                              25
                                                                                                       150
                                                              20                6000


                                                 Game Score
                                                              15                                       100
                                                                                4000
                                                              10
                                                                                2000                    50
                                                              5

                                                              0                     0                    0


Figure 8: Online fine-tuning results on unseen game variants. Left. The top row shows default variants and
the bottom row shows unseen variants evaluated for transfer: Freeway’s mode 1 adds buses, more vehicles, and
increases velocity; Hero’s mode 1 starts the agent at level 5; Breakout’s mode 12 hides all bricks unless the ball
has recently collided with a brick. Right. We fine-tune all methods except single-game DQN for 3M online
frames (as we wish to test fast online adaptation). Error bars show minimum and maximum scores across 2
runs while the bar shows their average. Observe that scaled QL significantly outperforms learning from scratch
and single-game DQN with 50M online frames. Furthermore, scaled QL also outperforms RL fine-tuning on
representations learned using masked auto-encoders. See Figure B.1 for learning curves.

finetune the MAE network. We also compare to baseline methods that do not utilize any multi-game
pre-training (DT (scratch) and Scaled QL (scratch)).
Results. Observe in Figure 7 that multi-game pre-training via scaled QL leads to the best fine-tuning
performance and improves over prior methods, including decision transformers trained from scratch.
Importantly, we observe positive transfer to new games via scaled QL. Prior works (Badia et al., 2020)
running multi-game Atari (primarily in the online setting) have generally observed negative transfer
across Atari games. We show for the first time that pre-trained representations from Q-learning enable
positive transfer to novel games that significantly outperforms return-conditioned supervised learning
methods and dedicated representation learning approaches.
Scenario 2 (Online fine-tuning): Next, we study the efficacy of the learned representations in
enabling online fine-tuning. While deep RL agents on ALE are typically trained on default game
modes (referred to as m0d0), we utilize new variants of the ALE games designed to be challenging for
humans (Machado et al., 2018) for online-finetuning. We investigate whether multi-task training on
the 40 default game variants can enable fast online adaptation to these never-before-seen variants. In
contrast to offline fine-tuning (Scenario 1), this setting tests whether scaled QL can also provide a good
initialization for online data collection and learning, for closely related but different tasks. Following
Farebrother et al. (2018), we use the same variants investigated in this prior work: B REAKOUT,
H ERO, and F REEWAY, which we visualize in Figure 8 (left). To disentangle the performance gains
from multi-game pre-training and the choice of Q-function architecture, we compare to a baseline
approach (“scaled QL (scratch)”) that utilizes an identical Q-function architecture as pre-trained
scaled QL, but starts from a random initialization. As before, we also evaluate fine-tuning performance
using the representations obtained via masked auto-encoder pre-training (He et al., 2021; Xiao et al.).
We also compare to a single-game DQN performance attained after training for 50M steps, 16× more
transitions than what is allowed for scaled QL, as reported by Farebrother et al. (2018).
Results. Observe in Figure 8 that fine-tuning from the multi-task initialization learned by scaled
QL significantly outperforms training from scratch as well as the single-game DQN run trained with
16x more data. Fine-tuning with the frozen representations learned by MAE performs poorly, which
we hypothesize is due to differences in game dynamics and subtle changes in observations, which
must be accurately accounted for in order to learn optimal behavior (Dean et al., 2022). Our results
confirm that offline Q-learning can both effectively benefit from higher-capacity models and learn
multi-task initializations that enable sample-efficient transfer to new games.
5.3 A BLATION S TUDIES
Finally, in this section we perform controlled ablation studies to understand how crucial the design
decisions introduced in Section 4 are for the success of scaled Q-learning. In particular, we will
attempt to understand the benefits of using C51 and feature normalization.
MSE vs C51: We ran scaled Q-learning with identical network architectures (ResNet 50 and ResNet
101), with both the conventional squared error formulation of TD error, and compare it to C51, which
our main results utilize. Observe in Table 1 that C51 leads to much better performance for both


                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Performance of Scaled QL with the standard mean-squared TD-error and C51 in the offline
40-game setting aggregated by the median human-normalized score. Observe that for both ResNet 50 and
ResNet 101, utilizing C51 leads to a drastic improvement in performance.
                                    Scaled QL (ResNet 50)    Scaled QL (ResNet 101)
                       with MSE             41.1%                     59.5%
                       with C51        53.5% (+12.4%)            98.9% (+39.4%)


ResNet 50 and ResNet 101 models. The boost in performance is the largest for ResNet 101, where
C51 improves by over 39% as measured by median human-normalized score. This observation is
surprising since prior work (Agarwal et al., 2021) has shown that C51 performs on par with standard
DQN with an Adam optimizer, which all of our results use. One hypothesis is that this could be the
case as TD gradients would depend on the scale of the reward function, and hence some games would
likely exhibit a stronger contribution in the gradient. This is despite the fact that our implementation
of MSE TD-error already attempts to correct for this issue by applying the unitary scaling technique
from (Kurin et al., 2022) to standardize reward scales across games. That said, we still observe that
C51 performs significantly better.
Importance of feature normalization: We ran small-scale experiments with and without feature
normalization (Section 4). In these experiments, we consider a multi-game setting with only 6 games:
A STERIX, B REAKOUT, P ONG, S PACE I NVADERS, S EAQUEST, and we train with the initial 20% data
for each game. We report aggregated median human-normalized score across the 6 games in Table 2
for three different network architectures (ResNet 34, ResNet 50 and ResNet 101). Observe that the
addition of feature normalization significantly improves performance for all the models. Motivated by
this initial empirical finding, we used feature normalization in all of our main experiments. Overall,
the above ablation studies validate the efficacy of the two key design decisions in this paper.

Table 2: Performance of Scaled QL with and without feature normalization in the 6 game setting reported
in terms of the median human-normalized score. Observe that with models of all sizes, the addition of feature
normalization improves performance.
                                  Scaled QL (ResNet 34)   Scaled QL (ResNet 50)    Scaled QL (ResNet 101)
 without feature normalization           50.9%                    73.9%                     80.4%
 with feature normalization          78.0% (+28.9%)           83.5% (+9.6%)            98.0% (+17.6%)

Additional ablations: We also conducted ablation studies for the choice of the backbone architecture
(spatial learned embeddings) in Appendix B.3, and observed that utilizing spatial embeddings is
better. We also evaluated the performance of scaled QL without conservatism to test the importance
of utilizing pessimism in our setting with diverse data in Appendix B.4, and observe that pessimism
is crucial for attaining good performance on an average. We also provide some scaling studies for
another offline RL method (discrete BCQ) in Appendix B.2.

6    D ISCUSSION
This work shows, for the first time, that offline Q-learning can scale to high-capacity models trained
on large, diverse datasets. As we hoped, by scaling up capacity, we unlocked analogous trends to those
observed in vision and NLP. We found that scaled QL trains policies that exceed the average dataset
performance and prior methods, especially when the dataset does not contain expert trajectories.
Furthermore, by training a large-capacity model on diverse tasks, we show that Q-learning is sufficient
to recover general-purpose representations that enable rapid learning of novel tasks. Although we
detailed an approach that is sufficient to scale Q-learning, this is by no means optimal. The scale of
the experiments limited the number of alternatives we could explore, and we expect that future work
will greatly improve performance. For example, contrary to DT (Lee et al., 2022), we did not use
data augmentation in our experiments, which we believe can provide significant benefits. While we
did a preliminary attempt to perform online fine-tuning on an entirely new game (S PACE I NVADERS),
we found that this did not work well for any of the pretrained representations (see Figure B.1).
Addressing this is an important direction for future work. We speculate that this challenge is related
to designing methods for learning better exploration from offline data, which is not required for
offline fine-tuning. We refer the reader to the appendix for further discussion of future work. Overall,
we believe that scaled QL could serve as a starting point for RL-trained foundation models.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
AK conceived and led the project, developed scaled QL, decided and ran most of the experiments. RA
discussed the experiment design and project direction, helped set up and debug the training pipeline,
took the lead on setting up and running the MAE baseline and the online fine-tuning experiments.
XG helped with design choices for some experiments. GT advised the project and ran baseline
DT experiments. SL advised the project and provided valuable suggestions. AK, RA, GT, SL all
contributed to writing and editing the paper.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank several members of the Google Brain team for their help, support and feedback on this
paper. We thank Dale Schuurmans, Dibya Ghosh, Ross Goroshin, Marc Bellemare and Aleksandra
Faust for informative discussions. We thank Sherry Yang, Ofir Nachum, and Kuang-Huei Lee for
help with the multi-game decision transformer codebase; Anurag Arnab for help with the Scenic ViT
codebase. We thank Zoubin Ghahramani and Douglas Eck for leadership support.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. An optimistic perspective on offline
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 104–114. PMLR,
  2020.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Reincarnating reinforcement learning: Reusing prior computation to accelerate progress. NeurIPS,
  2022.
A Badia, B Piot, S Kapturowski, P Sprechmann, A Vitvitskyi, D Guo, and C Blundell. Agent57:
  Outperforming the human atari benchmark. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, Online, PMLR, volume 119, pp. 2020, 2020.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 449–458. PMLR, 2017.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G Belle-
  mare. Dopamine: A research framework for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.06110, 2018.
Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jake Varley, Alex
  Irpan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ryan Julian, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Actionable models:
  Unsupervised offline reinforcement learning of robotic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07749,
  2021.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
Victoria Dean, Daniel Kenji Toyama, and Doina Precup. Don’t freeze your embedding: Lessons
  from policy finetuning in environment transfer. In ICLR Workshop on Agent Learning in Open-
  Endedness, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mostafa Dehghani, Alexey Gritsenko, Anurag Arnab, Matthias Minderer, and Yi Tay. Scenic: A jax
 library for computer vision research and beyond. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 21393–21398, 2022.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.

Jesse Farebrother, Marlos C Machado, and Michael Bowling. Generalization and regularization in
  dqn. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00123, 2018.

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020.

Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06860, 2021.

Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02900, 2018.

Scott Fujimoto, Edoardo Conti, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Joelle Pineau. Benchmarking batch
  deep reinforcement learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01708, 2019.

Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Tom Le Paine, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Konrad
  Zolna, Rishabh Agarwal, Josh Merel, Daniel Mankowitz, Cosmin Paduraru, et al. Rl unplugged:
  Benchmarks for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13888, 2020.

K He, X Chen, S Xie, Y Li, P Doll’ar, and RB Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision
  learners. arXiv preprint arXiv.2111.06377, 2021.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.

Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado
 van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3796–3803, 2019a.

Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado
 van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, 2019b.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05951, 2020.

Ilya Kostrikov, Rob Fergus, Jonathan Tompson, and Ofir Nachum. Offline reinforcement learning
   with fisher divergence critic regularization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
   5774–5783. PMLR, 2021.

Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 11761–11771, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04779, 2020.
Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Tengyu Ma, Aaron Courville, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine.
  DR3: Value-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning Requires Explicit Regularization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.04716, 2021a.
Aviral Kumar, Joey Hong, Anikait Singh, and Sergey Levine. Should i run offline reinforcement
  learning or behavioral cloning? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Aviral Kumar, Anikait Singh, Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Pre-
  training for robots: Offline rl enables learning new tasks from a handful of trials. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.05178, 2022.
Vitaly Kurin, Alessandro De Palma, Ilya Kostrikov, Shimon Whiteson, and M Pawan Kumar. In
  defense of the unitary scalarization for deep multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04122,
  2022.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu, Sergio
  Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game decision transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15241, 2022.
Yao Liu, Adith Swaminathan, Alekh Agarwal, and Emma Brunskill. Off-policy policy gradient with
  state distribution correction. CoRR, abs/1904.08473, 2019.
Yao Liu, Adith Swaminathan, Alekh Agarwal, and Emma Brunskill. Provably good batch reinforce-
  ment learning without great exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08202, 2020.
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael
 Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for
 general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018.
Akshita Mittel and Purna Sowmya Munukutla. Visual transfer between atari games using competitive
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013.
Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, Ilya Kostrikov, Yinlam Chow, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Algaedice:
  Policy gradient from arbitrary experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02074, 2019.
Ashvin Nair, Murtaza Dalal, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Accelerating online reinforcement
  learning with offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Kei Ota, Devesh K Jha, and Asako Kanezaki. Training larger networks for deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07920, 2021.
Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and
 transfer reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06342, 2015.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al. A generalist
  agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirk-
  patrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06295, 2015.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Julian Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert, Amol Mandhane, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Ioannis
  Antonoglou, and David Silver. Online and offline reinforcement learning by planning with a
  learned model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27580–27591, 2021.
Noah Y Siegel, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Felix Berkenkamp, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Michael Neunert,
  Thomas Lampe, Roland Hafner, and Martin Riedmiller. Keep doing what worked: Behavioral
  modelling priors for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08396, 2020.
Samarth Sinha, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Aravind Srinivas, and Animesh Garg. D2rl: Deep dense
  architectures in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09163, 2020.
Douglas W Soares, Acordo Certo, Telma Lima, and Deep Learning Brazil. Pulserl: Enabling offline
  reinforcement learning for digital marketing systems via conservative q-learning. 2021.
H Francis Song, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Aidan Clark, Hubert Soyer, Jack W
  Rae, Seb Noury, Arun Ahuja, Siqi Liu, Dhruva Tirumala, et al. V-mpo: On-policy maximum a
  posteriori policy optimization for discrete and continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12238,
  2019.
R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, Cambridge,
  MA, 1998.
Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Batch learning from logged bandit feedback through
  counterfactual risk minimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res, 16:1731–1755, 2015.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
Yee Whye Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia
  Hadsell, Nicolas Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.04175, 2017.
Hado Van Hasselt, Yotam Doron, Florian Strub, Matteo Hessel, Nicolas Sonnerat, and Joseph
  Modayil. Deep reinforcement learning and the deadly triad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02648,
  2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11361, 2019.
Yuxin Wu and Kaiming He. Group normalization. In Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision (ECCV), pp. 3–19, 2018.
Tete Xiao, Ilija Radosavovic, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Masked visual pre-training for
  motor control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06173.
Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
  Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06782, 2020a.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. arXiv:2005.13239, 2020b.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. arXiv:2102.08363, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendices
A                 F UTURE W ORK
In addition to future work discussed in Section 6, here we list other promising directions for future
work. Given the strong performance of transformers, we suspect that offline Q-learning with a
transformer architecture is a promising future direction. Furthermore, there are several avenues for
future investigation related to the ablation studies in Section 5.3 for key design choices in scaled
Q-learning: 1) it is unclear if C51 works better because of the distributional formulation or the
categorical representation and experiments with other distributional formulations could answer this
question, 2) we did not extensively try alternate feature normalization schemes, which may improve
results. Another important avenue for future work is to scale offline Q-learning on other RL domains
such as robotic navigation, manipulation, locomotion, education, etc. This would require building
large-scale tasks, and we believe that scaled QL would provide for a good starting point for scaling in
these domains. Finally, in line with Agarwal et al. (2022), we plan to release our pre-trained models,
which we hope would enable subsequent methods to build upon.

B                 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
B.1                   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FROM THE PAPER

                                                                  Scaled QL (pretrain)                                   Scaled QL (scratch)                  MAE

                               Breakout                                               Freeway                                             H.E.R.O                        Space Invaders
                200
Average Score


                                                                        20                                               6000
                                                                                                                                                             600
                100                                                                                                      4000
                                                                        10                                                                                   400
                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                             200
                 0                                                      0                                                  0
                      1           2            3                             1           2            3                         1           2            3         1           2            3
                          Frames (in Millions)                                   Frames (in Millions)                               Frames (in Millions)               Frames (in Millions)


Figure B.1: Learning curves for online fine-tuning on unseen game variants. The dotted horizontal
line shows the performance of a single-game DQN agent trained for 50M frames (16x more data than
our methods). See Figure 8 for visualization of the variants.

                                                                    DT (200M)               BC (200M)                                       Scaled QL (80M)
                                                                    DT (40M)                Online MT DQN*                                  Behavior Policy
                                                                                         Near-optimal Data
                                        Human-Normalized Median


                                                                                                  Human-Normalized IQM


                                                              100%
                                                                                                                     100%
                                                                  80%
                                                                                                                         80%
                                                                  60%
                                                                                                                         60%
                                                                  40%
                                                                                                                         40%
                                                                  20%                                                    20%

                                                                  0%                                                      0%

Figure B.2: Offline scaled conservative Q-learning vs other prior methods with near-optimal data. Scaled
QL outperforms the best DT model, attaining an IQM human-normalized score of 114.1% and a median
human-normalized score of 98.9% compared to 111.8% and 78.2% for DT, respectively.

B.2                   R ESULTS FOR S CALING D ISCRETE -BCQ

To implement discrete BCQ, we followed the official implementation from Fujimoto et al. (2019).
We first trained a model of the behavior policy, π
                                                 bβ (a|s), using an architecture identical to that of the


                                                                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          Scaled QL (BCQ)            Scaled QL (CQL)

                                                   220%


                            Human-Normalized IQM
                                                   200%

                                                   180%

                                                   160%

                                                   140%

                                                   120%


                                                     ResNet 34                 ResNet 50
                                                               s)                        s)
                                                    (31M param                (60M param
                                                             Network Architecture


Figure B.3: Performance of scaling CQL and BCQ in terms of IQM human-normalized score. We perform
this comparison on the six-game setting for 100 epochs (note that these results are after 2x longer training than
other ablations in Table 2). Observe that for discrete-BCQ the performance improves from ResNet 34 to ResNet
50, indicating that it does scale favorably as network capacity increases.


Q-function, using negative log-likelihood. Then, following Fujimoto et al. (2019), we updated the
Bellman backup to only perform the maximization over actions that attain a high likelihood under the
probabilities learned by the behavior policy, as shown below:

                     y(s, a) := r(s, a) + γ ′                                   max                       Q̄(s′ , a′ ),
                                                                   πβ (a′ |s′ )≥τ ·maxa′′ π
                                                                a :b                      bβ (a′′ |s′ )


where τ is a hyperparameter. To tune the value of τ , we ran a preliminary initial sweep over
τ = {0.05, 0.1, 0.3}. When using C51 in our setup, we had to use a smaller CQL α of 0.05 (instead
of 0.1 for the MSE setting from Kumar et al. (2021a)), possibly because a discrete representation
of Q-values used by C51 is less prone to overestimation. Therefore, in the case of discrete-BCQ,
we chose to perform an initial sweep over τ values that were smaller than or equal to (i.e., less
conservative) the value of τ = 0.3 used in Fujimoto et al. (2019).
Since BCQ requires an additional policy network, it imposes a substantial memory overhead and as
such, we performed a sweep for initial 20 iterations to pick the best τ . We found that in these initial
experiments, τ = 0.05 performed significantly worse, but τ = 0.1 and τ = 0.3 performed similarly.
So, we utilized τ = 0.3 for reporting these results.
We ran these scaling experiments with ResNet 34 and ResNet 50 in the six-game setting and report
human-normalized IQM performance after 100 epochs = 6.25M gradient steps in Figure B.3. We also
present the results for CQL on the side for comparisons. Observe that we find favorable scaling trends
for BCQ: average performance over all games increases as the network size increases, indicating that
other offline RL algorithms such as BCQ can scale as we increase network capacity.

B.3    A BLATION FOR BACKBONE A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we present some results ablating the choice of the backbone architecture. For this
ablation, we ablate the choice of the spatial embedding while keeping group normalization fixed in
both cases. We perform this study for the 40-game setting. Observe that using the learned spatial
embedding results in better performance, and improves in 27 out of 40 games compared to not using
the learned embeddings.
Regarding the choice of group normalization vs batch normalization, note that we have been operating
in a setting where the size of the batch per device / core is only 4. Particularly, we use Cloud TPU v3
accelerators with 64 / 128 cores, and bigger batch sizes than 4 do not fit in memory, especially for
larger-capacity ResNets. This means that if we utilized batch normalization, we would be computing
batch statistics over only 4 elements, which is known to be unstable even for standard computer
vision tasks, for example, see Figure 1 in Wu & He (2018).


                                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table B.1: Ablations for the backbone architecture in the 40-game setting with ResNet 101. Observe that
learned spatial embeddings leads to around 80% improvement in performance.

                                               Scaled QL without backbone             Scaled QL w/ backbone
 Median human-normalized score                                54.9%                              98.9%
 IQM human-normalized score                                   68.9%                             114.1%
 Num. games with better performance                          13 / 40                             27 / 40


B.4    R ESULTS FOR S CALED QL W ITHOUT P ESSIMISM
In Table B.2, we present the results of running scaled Q-learning with no conservatism, i.e., by
setting the value of α in Equation 1 to 0.0 in the six game setting. We utilize the entire DQN-replay
dataset (Agarwal et al., 2020) for each of these six games that would be present in the full 40-game
dataset, to preserve the per-game dataset diversity.
Observe that while utilizing no conservatism does still learn, the performance of scaled QL without
conservatism is notably worse than standard scaled QL. Interestingly, on A STERIX, the performance
without pessimism is better than performance with pessimism, whereas, the use of pessimism in
S PACE I NVADERS and S EAQUEST leads to at least 2x improvement in performance.

Table B.2: Performance of scaled QL with and without conservatism in terms of IQM human-normalized
score in the six-game setting for 100 epochs (2x longer training compared to other ablations in Table 2) performed
with a ResNet 50. Observe that utilizing conservatism via CQL is beneficial. We also present per-game raw
scores in this table. Observe that while in one games no pessimism with such data can outperform CQL, we do
find that overall, conservatism performs better.

                                                Scaled QL without CQL            Scaled QL w/ CQL
           A STERIX                                         38000                        35200
           B REAKOUT                                          322                          410
           P ONG                                             12.6                         19.8
           Q BERT                                           13800                        15500
           S EAQUEST                                         1378                         3694
           S PACE I NVADERS                                  1675                         3819
          IQM human-normalized score                        188.3%                      223.4%

We also present some results without pessimism in the complete 40-game setting in Table B.3. Unlike
the smaller six game setting, we find a much larger difference between no pessimism (without CQL)
and utilizing pessimism via CQL. In particular, we find that in 6 games, not using pessimism leads
to slightly better performance, but this strategy hurts in all other games, giving rise to an agent that
performs worse than random in many of these 34 games. This indicates that pessimism is especially
deisrable as the diversity of tasks increases.

Table B.3: Scaled QL with and without conservatism in terms of IQM human-normalized score in the
40-game setting with ResNet 101. Observe that utilizing conservatism via CQL is still beneficial.

                                                     Scaled QL without CQL         Scaled QL w/ CQL
          Median human-normalized score                        11.1%                      98.9%
          IQM human-normalized score                           13.5%                     114.1%
          Num. games with better performance                    6 / 40                    34 / 40



C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND H YPER - PARAMETERS

In this section, we will describe some of the implementation details behind our method and will
provide implementation details for our approach, including the details of the network architectures,
the details of feature normalization and the details of our training and evaluation protocol.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.1   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

In our primary experiments, we consider variants of ResNet architectures for scaled Q-Learning.
The vision backbone in these architectures mimic the corresponding ResNet architectures from He
et al. (2016), however, we utilize group normalization (Wu & He, 2018) (with a group size of 4)
instead of batch normalization, and instead of applying global mean pooling to aggregate the outputs
of the ResNet, we utilize learned spatial embeddings (Kumar et al., 2022), that learn a matrix that
point-wise multiplies the output feature map of the ResNet. The output volume is then flattened to be
passed as input to the feed-forward part of the network.
The feed-forward layer part of the network begins with a layer of size 2048, and then applies layer
norm on the network. After this we apply 3 feed-forward layers with hidden dimension 1024 with
ReLU activations, to obtain the representation of the image observation.
Then, we apply feature normalization to the representation, by applying a normalization layer which
divides the representation of a given observation by its ℓ2 norm. Note that we do pass gradients
through this normalization term. Now, this representation is passed into different heads that are
supposed to predict the Q-values. The total number of heads is equal to the number of games we train
on. Each head consists of a linear layer that maps the 1024-dimensional normalized representation to
a vector of K elements, where K = |A| (i.e., the size of the action space) for the standard real-valued
parameterization of Q-values, and K = |A| × 51 for C51. The network does not apply any output
activation in either case, and the Q-values are treated as logits for C51.

C.2   D ETAILS OF C51

For the main results in the paper, we utilize C51. The main hyperparameter in C51 is the size of
the support set of Q-values. Unlike the paper from Bellemare et al. (2017) which utilizes a support
set of [−10, 10], we utilize a support set of [−20, 20] to allow for flexibility of CQL: Applying the
CQL regularizer can underestimate or overestimate Q-values, and this additional flexibility aids such
scenarios. Though, we still utilize only 51 atoms in our support set, and the average dataset Q-value
in our training runs is generally always smaller, around ∼ 8 − 9.

C.3   T RAINING AND E VALUATION P ROTOCOLS AND H YPERPARAMETERS

We utilize the initial 20% (sub-optimal) and 100% (near-optimal) datasets from Agarwal et al. (2020)
for our experiments. These datasets are generated from runs of standard online DQN on stochastic
dynamics Atari environments that utilize sticky actions, i.e., there is a 25% chance at every time
step that the environment will execute the agents previous action again, instead of the new action
commanded. The majority of the training details are identical to a typical run of offline RL on
single-game Atari. We discuss the key differences below.
We trained our ResNet 101 network for 10M gradient steps with a batch size of 512. The agent
hasn’t converged yet, and the performance is still improving gradually. When training on multiple
games, we utilize a stratified batch sampling scheme with a total batch size of 512. To obtain the
batch at any given training iteration, we first sample 128 game indices from the set all games (40
games in our experiments) with replacement, and then sample 4 transitions from each game. This
scheme does not necessarily produce an equal number of transitions from each game in a training
batch, but it does make sure that all games are seen in expectation throughout training.
Since we utilize a larger batch size, that is 16 times larger than the standard batch size of 32 on Atari,
we scale up the learning rate from 5e − 05 to 0.0002, but keep the target network update period fixed
to the same value of 1 target update per 2000 gradient steps as with single-task Atari. We also utilize
n-step returns with n = 3 by default, with both our MSE and C51 runs.
Evaluation Protocol. Even though we train on Atari datasets with sticky actions, we evaluate on
Atari environments that do not enable sticky actions following the protocol from Lee et al. (2022).
This allows us to be comparable to this prior work in all of our comparisons, without needing to
re-train their model, which would have been too computationally expensive. Following standard
protocols on Atari, we evaluate a noised version of the policy with an epsilon-greedy scheme, with
εeval = 0.001. Following the protocol in Castro et al. (2018), we compute average return over 125K
training steps.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table C.1: Hyperparameters used by multi-game training. Here we report the key hyperparameters
used by the multi-game training. The differences from the standard single-game training setup are
highlighted in red.
                 Hyperparameter                             Setting (for both variations)
                 Eval Sticky actions                                                  No
                 Grey-scaling                                                       True
                 Observation down-sampling                                      (84, 84)
                 Frames stacked                                                         4
                 Frame skip (Action repetitions)                                        4
                 Reward clipping                                                  [-1, 1]
                 Terminal condition                                         Game Over
                 Max frames per episode                                            108K
                 Discount factor                                                    0.99
                 Mini-batch size                                                     512
                 Target network update period                        every 2000 updates
                 Training environment steps per iteration                          62.5k
                 Update period every                                1 environment steps
                 Evaluation ϵ                                                      0.001
                 Evaluation steps per iteration                                    125K
                 Learning rate                                                   0.0002
                 n-step returns (n)                                                     3
                 CQL regularizer weight α                    0.1 for MSE, 0.05 for C51


C.4   F INE -T UNING P ROTOCOL

For offline fine-tuning we fine-tuned the parameters of the pre-trained policy on the new domain
using a batch size of 32, and identical hyperparameters as those used during pre-training. We utilized
α = 0.05 for fine-tuning, but with the default learning rate of 5e − 05 (since the batch size was the
default 32). We attempted to use other CQL α values {0.07, 0.02, 0.1} for fine-tuning but found that
retaining the value of α = 0.05 for pre-training worked the best. For reporting results, we reported
the performance of the algorithm at the end of 300k gradient steps.
For online fine-tuning, we use the C51 algorithm (Bellemare et al., 2017), with n-step= 3 and
all other hyperparameters from the C51 implementation in the Dopamine library (Castro et al.,
2018). We swept over two learning rates, {1e − 05, 5e − 05} for all the methods and picked the
best learning rate per-game for all the methods. For the MAE implementation, we used the Scenic
library (Dehghani et al., 2022) with the typical configuration used for ImageNet pretraining, except
using 84 × 84 × 4 sized Atari observations, instead of images of size 224 × 224 × 3. We train the
MAE for 2 epochs on the entire multi-task offline Atari dataset and we observe that the reconstruction
loss plateaus to a low value.

C.5   D ETAILS OF M ULTI -TASK I MPALA DQN

The “MT Impala DQN” comparison in Figures 2 & 5 is a multi-task implementation of online DQN,
evaluated at 5x many gradient steps as the size of the sub-optimal dataset. This comparison is taken
directly from Lee et al. (2022). To explain this baseline briefly, this baseline runs C51 in conjunction
with n-step returns with n = 4, with an IMPALA architecture that uses three blocks with 64, 128,
and 128 channels. This baseline was trained with a batch size of 128 and update period of 256.

D     R AW T RAINING S CORES FOR DIFFERENT M ODELS


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table D.1: Raw scores on 40 training Atari games in the sub-optimal multi-task Atari dataset (51%
human-normalized IQM). Scaled QL uses the ResNet-101 architecture.
 Game              DT (200M)    DT (40M)   Scaled QL (80M)   BC (80M)   MT Impala-DQN*    Human
 Amidar                  72.9       82.2              33.1       14.5             629.8    1719.5
 Assault                392.9      124.7            1380.8     1060.0            1338.7     742.0
 Asterix               1518.8     2256.2            9967.3      745.3            2949.1    8503.3
 Atlantis             10525.0    13125.0          485200.0     2494.1          976030.4   29028.1
 BankHeist               13.1       15.6              18.6       87.6            1069.6     753.1
 BattleZone            3750.0     7687.5            8500.0     1550.0           26235.2   37187.5
 BeamRider             1535.8     1397.5            5856.5      327.2            1524.8   16926.5
 Boxing                  71.4       74.2              95.2       95.4              68.3      12.1
 Breakout                38.8       38.2             351.1      274.7              32.6      30.5
 Carnival               993.8      791.2             199.3      792.7            2021.2    3800.0
 Centipede             2645.4     3026.9            2711.4     2260.8            4848.0   12017.0
 ChopperCommand        1006.2     1093.8             752.2      336.7             951.4    7387.8
 CrazyClimber         85487.5    86050.0          122933.3   121394.4          146362.5   35829.4
 DemonAttack           2269.7     1049.4           14229.8      765.8             446.8    1971.0
 DoubleDunk             -14.5      -20.2             -12.4      -13.6            -156.2     -16.4
 Enduro                 336.5      266.2            2297.6      638.7             896.3     860.5
 FishingDerby            15.9       16.8              13.7      -88.1            -152.3     -38.7
 Freeway                 16.2       20.5              24.4        0.1              30.6      29.6
 Frostbite             1014.4      776.2            2324.5      234.8            2748.4    4334.7
 Gopher                1137.5     1251.2            1041.0      231.5            3205.6    2412.5
 Gravitar               237.5      193.8             260.3      248.8             492.5    3351.4
 Hero                  6741.2     6295.3            4011.9     7485.8           26568.8   30826.4
 IceHockey               -8.8      -11.1              -3.7      -10.8             -10.4       0.9
 Jamesbond              378.1      312.5              58.7        7.1             264.6     302.8
 Kangaroo              1975.0     2687.5            5796.6      307.1            7997.1    3035.0
 Krull                 6913.8     4377.5            9333.7     9585.3            8221.4    2665.5
 KungFuMaster         17575.0    14743.8           24320.0    15778.6           29383.1   22736.3
 NameThisGame          4396.9     4502.5            6759.6     2756.8            6548.8    8049.0
 Phoenix               3560.0     2813.8           12770.0      762.9            3932.5    7242.6
 Pooyan                1053.8     1394.7            1264.5      718.7            4000.0    4000.0
 Qbert                 8371.9     5917.2           14877.9     5759.6            4226.5   13455.0
 Riverraid             6191.9     4265.6            9602.7     6657.2            7306.6   17118.0
 Robotank                14.9       12.8              17.4        5.7               9.2      11.9
 Seaquest               781.9      512.5            1021.8      113.9            1415.2   42054.7
 TimePilot             2512.5     2700.0             767.3     3841.1            -883.1    5229.2
 UpNDown               5288.8     5456.2           35541.3     8395.2            8167.6   11693.2
 VideoPinball          1277.4     1953.1              40.0     2650.3           85351.0   17667.9
 WizardOfWor            237.5      881.2             107.0      495.3             975.9    4756.5
 YarsRevenge          11867.4    10436.8           11482.4    17755.5           18889.5   54576.9
 Zaxxon                 287.5      337.5               1.4        0.0              -0.1    9173.3


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table D.2: Raw scores on 40 training Atari games in the near-optimal multi-task Atari dataset. Scaled
QL uses the ResNet 101 architecture.
 Game             DT (200 M)   DT (40M)    BC (200M)   MT Impala-DQN*     Scaled QL (80M)   Human
 Amidar             101.5         1703.8       101.0              629.8              21.0    1719.5
 Assault           2385.9         1772.2      1872.1             1338.7            3809.6     742.0
 Asterix          14706.3         4575.0      5162.5             2949.1           34278.9    8503.3
 Atlantis       3105342.3       304931.2      4237.5           976030.4          881980.0   29028.1
 BankHeist            5.0           40.0        63.1             1069.6              33.9     753.1
 BattleZone       17687.5        17250.0      9250.0            26235.2            8812.5   37187.5
 BeamRider         8560.5         3225.5      4948.4             1524.8           10301.0   16926.5
 Boxing              95.1           92.1        90.9               68.3              99.5      12.1
 Breakout           290.6          160.0       185.6               32.6             415.0      30.5
 Carnival          2213.8         3786.9      2986.9             2021.2             926.1    3800.0
 Centipede         2463.0         2867.5      2262.8             4848.0            3168.2   12017.0
 ChopperCommand    4268.8         3337.5      1800.0              951.4             832.2    7387.8
 CrazyClimber    126018.8       113425.0    123350.0           146362.5          140500.0   35829.4
 DemonAttack      23768.4         3629.4      7870.6              446.8           56318.3    1971.0
 DoubleDunk         -10.6          -12.5        -1.5             -156.2             -13.1     -16.4
 Enduro            1092.6          770.8       793.2              896.3            2345.8     860.5
 FishingDerby        11.8           19.2         5.6             -152.3              23.8     -38.7
 Freeway             30.4           32.8        29.8               30.6              31.9      29.6
 Frostbite         2435.6          934.4       782.5             2748.4            3566.4    4334.7
 Gopher            9935.0         3827.5      3496.2             3205.6            3776.9    2412.5
 Gravitar            59.4           75.0        12.5              492.5             262.3    3351.4
 Hero             20408.8        19667.2     13850.0            26568.8           20470.6   30826.4
 IceHockey          -10.1           -5.2        -8.3              -10.4              -1.5       0.9
 Jamesbond          700.0          712.5       431.2              264.6             483.6     302.8
 Kangaroo         12700.0        11581.2     12143.8             7997.1            2738.6    3035.0
 Krull             8685.6         8295.6      8058.8             8221.4           10176.9    2665.5
 KungFuMaster     15562.5        16387.5      4362.5            29383.1           25808.3   22736.3
 NameThisGame      9056.9         7777.5      7241.9             6548.8           11647.0    8049.0
 Phoenix           5295.6         4744.4      4326.9             3932.5            5264.0    7242.6
 Pooyan            2859.1         1191.9      1677.2             4000.0            2020.1    4000.0
 Qbert            13734.4        12534.4     11276.6             4226.5           15946.0   13455.0
 Riverraid        14755.6        11330.6      9816.2             7306.6           18494.8   17118.0
 Robotank            63.2           50.9        44.6                9.2              53.2      11.9
 Seaquest          5173.8         3112.5      1175.6             1415.2             414.1   42054.7
 TimePilot         2743.8         3487.5      1312.5             -883.1            4220.5    5229.2
 UpNDown          16291.3         9306.9     10454.4             8167.6           55512.9   11693.2
 VideoPinball      1007.7         9671.4      1140.8            85351.0             285.7   17667.9
 WizardOfWor        187.5          687.5       443.8              975.9             301.6    4756.5
 YarsRevenge      28897.9        25306.3     20738.9            18889.5           24393.9   54576.9
 Zaxxon             275.0         4637.5        50.0               -0.1               2.1    9173.3


                                                 20
