Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U SING B OTH D EMONSTRATIONS AND L ANGUAGE I N -
STRUCTIONS TO E FFICIENTLY L EARN ROBOTIC TASKS

 Albert Yu                                             Raymond J. Mooney
 UT Austin                                             UT Austin
 albertyu@utexas.edu                                   mooney@utexas.edu


                                            A BSTRACT

         Demonstrations and natural language instructions are two common ways to spec-
         ify and teach robots novel tasks. However, for many complex tasks, a demon-
         stration or language instruction alone contains ambiguities, preventing tasks from
         being specified clearly. In such cases, a combination of both a demonstration
         and an instruction more concisely and effectively conveys the task to the robot
         than either modality alone. To instantiate this problem setting, we train a single
         multi-task policy on a few hundred challenging robotic pick-and-place tasks and
         propose DeL-TaCo (Joint Demo-Language Task Conditioning), a method for con-
         ditioning a robotic policy on task embeddings comprised of two components: a
         visual demonstration and a language instruction. By allowing these two modalities
         to mutually disambiguate and clarify each other during novel task specification,
         DeL-TaCo (1) substantially decreases the teacher effort needed to specify a new
         task and (2) achieves better generalization performance on novel objects and in-
         structions over previous task-conditioning methods. To our knowledge, this is the
         first work to show that simultaneously conditioning a multi-task robotic manipu-
         lation policy on both demonstration and language embeddings improves sample
         efficiency and generalization over conditioning on either modality alone. See ad-
         ditional materials at https://deltaco-robot.github.io.


1   I NTRODUCTION

A significant barrier to deploying household robots is the inability of novice users to teach new
tasks with minimal time and effort. Recent work in multi-task learning suggests that training on
a wide range of tasks, instead of the single target task, helps the robot learn shared perceptual
representations across the different tasks, improving generalization (Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2019; Jang et al., 2021; Shridhar et al., 2021). We study the problem of how to more efficiently
specify new tasks for multi-task robotic policies while also improving performance.
Humans often learn complex tasks through multiple concurrent modalities, such as simultaneous
visual and linguistic (speech/captioning) streams of a video tutorial. One might reasonably expect
robotic policies to also benefit from multi-modal task specification. However, previous work in mul-
titask policies condition only on a single modality during evaluation: one-hot embeddings, language
embeddings, or demonstration/goal-image embeddings. Each has limitations.
One-hot encodings for each task (Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Ebert et al., 2021) suffice for learning a
repertoire of training tasks but perform very poorly on novel tasks where the one-hot embedding is
out of the training distribution, since one-hot embedding spaces do not leverage semantic similarity
between tasks to more rapidly learn additional tasks. Conditioning policies on goal-images (Nair
et al., 2017; 2018; Nasiriany et al., 2019) or training on video demonstrations (Smith et al., 2020;
Young et al., 2020) often suffer from ambiguity, especially when there are large differences between
the environment of the demonstration and the environment the robot is in, hindering the understand-
ing of a demonstration’s true intention. In language-conditioned policies (Blukis et al., 2018; 2019;
Mees et al., 2021; 2022), issues of ambiguity are often even more pronounced, since humans specify
similar tasks in very linguistically dissimilar ways and often speak at different levels of granular-
ity, skipping over common-sense steps and details while bringing up other impertinent information.
Grounding novel nouns and verbs not seen during training compounds these challenges.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Training                                                                                      Testing
           Train a single multi-task policy on hundreds of tasks.                                 One-shot generalization to ~100 new tasks (new objects, colors, shapes).
              Training Buffer                                                                                      Validation Buffer
      Task 𝑼𝟏                      Task 𝑼𝟐                       Task 𝑼𝒏                                   Task 𝑽𝟏                   Task 𝑽𝟐                         Task 𝑽𝒎
      Instruction: “Put circular   Instruction: “Put yellow      Instruction: “Put vase-                   Instruction: “Put metal   Instruction: “Put black-        Instruction: “Put trape-
      table in red bin.”           object in left bin.”          shaped obj. in back bin.”                 plate in front bin.”      white object in left bin.”      zoidal obj. in green bin.”
      Demos:                       Demos:                                                                  Single Demo:              Single Demo:                  … Single Demo:
                                                               … Demos:


                           Randomly selected task 𝑈𝑖                                                                                       Test task 𝑉𝑗
                          Demo               Instruction                                                                      Demo                         Instruction
                                       “Put vase-shaped object                                                                                        “Put trapezoidal object
                                            in back bin.”                                                                                                in green bin.”


                                                                               Learn                …To leverage
                           Demo                               Language         demo + language    both modalities              Demo                               Language
                          encoder                              encoder                                                        encoder                              encoder
                                                                               contextual          to resolve task
                                                                               associations           ambiguities
                                          Contrastive
                         𝒛𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒐             Learning
                                                               𝒛𝒍𝒂𝒏𝒈           during training…     during testing.           𝒛𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒐                               𝒛𝒍𝒂𝒏𝒈



                                   Multitask Policy                               Action                                             Multitask Policy                                  Action

      RGB State                                                                                            RGB State

                                   Learning Algorithm


Figure 1: DeL-TaCo Overview. Unlike current multitask methods that condition on a single task
specification modality, DeL-TaCo simultaneously conditions on both language and demonstrations
during training and testing to resolve any ambiguities in either task specification modality, enabling
better generalization to novel tasks and significantly reducing teacher effort for specifying new tasks.


We posit that in a broad category of tasks, current unimodal task representations are often too ineffi-
cient and ambiguous for novel task specification. In these tasks, current task-conditioning methods
would need either a large number of diverse demonstrations to disambiguate the intended task, or a
long, very detailed, fine-grained language instruction. Both are difficult for novice users to provide.
We argue that conditioning the policy on both a demonstration and language not only ameliorates
the ambiguity issues with language-only and demonstration-only specifications, but is much easier
and more cost-effective for the end-user to provide.
We propose DeL-TaCo (Figure 1), a new task embedding scheme comprised of two component
modalities that contextually complement each other: demonstrations of the target task and corre-
sponding language descriptions. To our knowledge, this is the first work to demonstrate that speci-
fying new tasks to robotic multi-task policies simultaneously with both demonstrations and language
reduces teacher effort in task specification and improves generalization performance, two important
characteristics of deployable household robots. With bimodal task embeddings, ambiguity is bidi-
rectionally resolved: instructions disambiguate intent in demonstrations, and demonstrations help
ground novel noun and verb tokens by conveying what to act on, and how. To learn several hundred
tasks, we train a single imitation learning (IL) policy, conditioned on joint demonstration-language
embeddings, to predict low-level continuous-space actions for a robot given image observations.
Task encoders are trained jointly with the policy, making our model fully differentiable end-to-end.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows: (1) We present a broad distribution of highly-
randomized simulated robotic pick-and-place tasks where instructions or demonstrations alone are
too ambiguous and inefficient at specifying novel tasks. (2) We propose a simple architecture, DeL-
TaCo, for training and integrating demonstrations and language into joint task embeddings for few-
shot novel task specification. This framework is flexible and learning algorithm-agnostic. (3) We
show that DeL-TaCo significantly lowers teacher effort in novel task-specification and improves
generalization performance over previous unimodal task-conditioning methods.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1    M ULTI - TASK L EARNING

The most straightforward way to condition multi-task policies is through one-hot vectors (Ebert
et al., 2021; Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Walke et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2021). We instead use embed-


                                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ding spaces that are shaped with pretrained language models so that semantically similar tasks are
encoded in similar regions of the embedding space, which helps improve generalization. Multi-task
robotic policies have also been studied in other settings and contexts that do not fall under the class of
approaches we take in this paper, such as hierarchical goal-conditioned policies (Gupta et al., 2022),
probabilistic modeling techniques (Wilson et al., 2007), distillation and transfer learning (Parisotto
et al., 2015; Teh et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2020; Rusu et al., 2015), data sharing (Espeholt et al., 2018;
Hessel et al., 2019), gradient-based techniques (Yu et al., 2020), policy modularization (Andreas
et al., 2017; Devin et al., 2017) and task modularization (Yang et al., 2020).

2.2   L EARNING WITH L ANGUAGE AND D EMONSTRATIONS

Conditioning Multitask Policies on Language or Demonstrations. Our work largely tackles the
same problem as BC-Z (Jang et al., 2021) of generalizing to novel tasks with multi-task learning.
BC-Z trains a video demonstration encoder to predict the pretrained embeddings of corresponding
language instructions, while jointly training a multi-task imitation learning policy conditioned on
either the instruction or demonstration embeddings. Lynch & Sermanet (2021); Mees et al. (2021)
learn a similar policy conditioned on either language or goal images. All of these approaches learn
to map a demonstration or goal image to a similar embedding space as its corresponding language
instruction. During training, Mees et al. (2022) use both demonstrations and language to learn
associations between demonstration embeddings and language-conditioned latent plans, but during
evaluation, only use the language embedding to produce a latent plan. With a slightly different ar-
chitecture, Shao et al. (2020) learn a policy that maps natural language verbs and initial observations
to full trajectories by training a video classifier on a large dataset of annotated human videos.
While all of these prior approaches use both demonstrations and language during training, their
policies are conditioned on either a language instruction or visual image/demonstration embedding
during testing. By contrast, ours is conditioned on both demonstration and language embeddings
during training and testing, which we show improves generalization performance and reduces human
teacher effort on a broad category of tasks.
Pretrained Multi-modal Models for Multitask Policies. Another recent line of work leverages
pretrained vision-language models to learn richer vision features for downstream policies. CLI-
Port (Shridhar et al., 2021) uses pre-trained CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to learn robust Transporter-
based (Zeng et al., 2020) robot policies. Our method resembles CLIPort, its 3-dimensional successor
PerAct (Shridhar et al., 2022), and the previously mentioned multi-task policy methods in that we
train on expert trajectories associated with language task descriptions, but in CLIPort and PerAct,
the policy is only conditioned on language during training and testing; demonstrations are used only
as buffer data for imitation learning. Our method, however, learns tasks during training or testing by
using both language and a demonstration to condition the policy.
ZeST (Cui et al., 2022) and Socratic Models (Zeng et al., 2022) demonstrate that pretrained vision-
language models encode valuable information for robotic goal selection and task specification.
R3M (Nair et al., 2022) pretrains a ResNet (He et al., 2015) policy backbone on language-annotated
videos from Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2021) to boost downstream task performance. While our mo-
tivation is similar to ZeST in using a pretrained language model to leverage the structure of the
pretrained embedding space, we assume access to both language and demonstrations for learning
novel tasks and condition on task embeddings from both, which is unlike the ZeST and R3M prob-
lem settings where the policies are not directly task-conditioned.

2.3   OTHER A PPLICATIONS OF L ANGUAGE FOR ROBOTICS

Language-shaped state representations. On the MetaWorld multitask benchmark (Yu et al., 2019),
a number of prior works have investigated using language instructions to learn better state repre-
sentations. Sodhani et al. (2021) use language instruction embeddings to compute an attention-
weighted context representation over a mixture of state encoders. Silva et al. (2021) learn a goal
encoder that transforms language instruction embeddings to shape the state encoder representations.
Hierarchical Learning with Language. Our approach can be loosely framed as hierarchical learn-
ing, where we have two high-level task encoders that output language and demonstration embed-
dings, both of which the low-level policy is conditioned on to output actions. Prior work has used


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


language instructions in hierarchical learning for shaping high-level plan vectors (Mees et al., 2022)
or skill representations (Garg et al., 2022), which are then fed to a low-level policy to output the ac-
tion. Karamcheti et al. (2021) use an autoencoder-based architecture to predict higher-dimensional
robot actions from lower-dimensional controller actions and language instructions, where the lan-
guage is fed into both the encoder and decoder. All of these prior approaches condition on a single
high-level policy, whereas ours incorporates guidance from two high-level encoders for both demon-
strations and language to learn novel tasks, giving the low-level policy access to certain information
expressible only through their combination.
Language for Rewards and Planning. Language has also been used for reward shaping in RL
(Nair et al., 2021; Goyal et al., 2019; 2020). Pretrained language models have also been leveraged
for their ability to propose plans in long-horizon tasks (Huang et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022). While we work with IL instead of RL and mainly deal with highly variable pick-
and-place tasks, we do not use language for training reward functions or for planning, though our
multi-modal task specification framework is compatible with these additional uses of language.


3     P ROBLEM S ETTING

3.1   M ULTI - TASK I MITATION L EARNING

We define a set of n tasks {Ti }ni=1 and split them into training tasks U and test tasks V , where (U, V )
is a bipartition of {Ti }ni=1 . For each task Ti , we assume access to a set of m expert trajectories
{τij }m
      j=1 and a single language description li . Given continuous state space S, continuous action
space A, and task embedding space Z, the goal is to train a Markovian policy π : S × Z → Π(A)
that maps the current state and task embeddings to a probability distribution over the continuous
action space.
During training, we assume access to a buffer Dtrain of trajectories for only the tasks in U and their
associated natural language
                          h  descriptions.
                                            We define   each
                                                           i trajectory as a fixed-length sequence of
                              (i)   (i)     (i)   (i)
state-action pairs τij =    s0,j , a0,j , s1,j , a1,j , ... , where j is the trajectory index for task
Ti ∈ U with task embedding zi . We use behavioral cloning (BC) (Hussein       et al., 2017;
                                                                                           Pomerleau,
                                                                               (i) (i)
1988) to update the parameters of π to maximize the log probability of π at,j st,j , zi , though our
framework is agnostic to the learning algorithm and would work for RL approaches as well.
During evaluation, we assume access to a buffer Dval of trajectories for only the tasks in V and their
associated natural language descriptions. Unlike Dtrain where we have m demonstrations for each
task, in Dval we have just a single demonstration for each task. For all test tasks Ti ∈ V , we rollout
the policy for a fixed number of timesteps by taking action at ∼ π(a|st , zi ). The zi for all test tasks
is computed beforehand and held constant throughout each test trajectory.

3.2   TASK E NCODER N ETWORKS

To obtain the task embedding zi , we have two encoders (which are either trained jointly with policy
π or frozen from a pretrained model): a demonstration encoder, fdemo : τij 7→ zdemo,i mapping
trajectories of task Ti to demonstration embeddings, and a language encoder, flang : li 7→ zlang,i
mapping task instruction strings li to language embeddings. Previous work has explored using
zi as a one-hot task vector, language embedding zlang,i , or goal image/demonstration embedding
zdemo,i , but our approach DeL-TaCo uses task embedding zi = [zdemo,i , zlang,i ] based on both the
instruction and demonstration embedding during training and testing to learn novel tasks.


4     M ETHOD

4.1   A RCHITECTURE

Demonstration and Language Encoders. The encoder fdemo is a CNN network trained from
scratch. Following Jang et al. (2021), we input the demonstration as an array of m × n frames (in
raster-scan order) from the trajectory for faster processing. (We use (m, n) = (1, 2) or (2, 2) in our


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Policy 𝝅
                                                                                               Current Robot State
                                                   Spatial Softmax
                                                                                                [6 joint angles]
                                                                                                [x, y, z, gripper]

                                      ResNet-18
                                                                                                                        FC layers
                                                                Image obs
                                                               embeddings
                  Current Image Obs
                    (48 × 48 × 3)
                                                   FiLM
      Demo Encoder 𝒇𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒐
                                                                                                       +                                      Action
                                                                                                 Concatenate                              𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟
                                        CNN

           Task Demonstration
                                                                     𝑧𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜
                                                                                 Contrastive
      Language Encoder 𝒇𝒍𝒂𝒏𝒈                                                      learning
                                                                                                                     1024   512     256

      “Put yellow-colored object in   DistilBERT
                left bin.”             (frozen)
             Task Instruction
                                                                     𝑧𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑔



Figure 2: Method Architecture. DeL-TaCo uses three main networks: the policy π, a demonstra-
tion encoder fdemo , and a language encoder flang . During both training and testing, the policy is
conditioned on the demonstration and language embeddings for the task.


experiments.) We freeze a pretrained DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019) as the encoder flang , where
zlang,i is simply the average of all DistilBERT-embedded tokens in li (we found this works better
than taking the [CLS] token embedding).
Policy Network. We use a ResNet-18 (He et al., 2015) as the visual backbone for the policy π,
followed by a spatial softmax layer (Finn et al., 2016) and fully connected layers.
Task Conditioning Architecture. BC-Z (Jang et al., 2021) inputs the task embedding into the
ResNet backbone via FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) layers, which apply a learned affine transformation
to the intermediate image representations after each residual block. BC-Z’s task embeddings are
either from demonstrations or language. Since our policy conditions on both, the main architectural
decision was finding the best way to feed task embeddings from multiple modalities into the policy.
Empirically, a simple approach performed best. The demonstration embeddings zdemo are fed into
the policy’s ResNet backbone via FiLM, while the language task embeddings zlang and robot pro-
prioceptive state (6 joint angles, end-effector xyz coordinates, and gripper open/close state) are
concatenated to the output of the spatial softmax layer. Our full network architecture is shown in
Figure 2, hyperparameters are in Appendix B, and architectural ablations are in Table 8.

4.2    T RAINING AND L OSSES

The training procedure for DeL-TaCo is summarized in Algorithm 1. During each training iteration,
we sample a size k subset of training tasks M = {Tm1 , ..., Tmk } ⊂ U . Given a trajectory τij for task
Tmi and corresponding natural language instruction li , we compute the demonstration embeddings
zemb,mi = fdemo (τij ) and language embeddings zlang,mi = flang (li ). We collect the embeddings
of tasks in M in matrices Zdemo = [zdemo,m1 , ..., zdemo,mk ] and Zlang = [zlang,m1 , ..., zlang,mk ].
To train the demonstration encoder, Jang et al. (2021) use a cosine distance loss to directly regress
demonstration embeddings to their associated language embeddings. However, this causes demon-
stration embeddings to be essentially equivalent to the associated language embeddings for each
task, undercutting the value of passing both to our policy. To preserve information unique to each
modality while enabling the language and demonstration embedding spaces to shape each other, we
train with a CLIP-style (Radford et al., 2021) contrastive loss for our demonstration encoder:

                                                                 1 ⊤
                  Ldemo (Zdemo , Zlang ) = CrossEntropy           Z      Zlang , I                (1)
                                                                 β demo
where I is the identity matrix and β is a tuned temperature scalar. We use the standard BC log-
likelihood loss as the policy loss term for some trajectory composed of state-action pairs xt,i,j =


                                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (i) (i)
    st,j , at,j extracted from an expert demonstration τij for task Tmi :

                                                        (i) (i)
                                          X
                      Lpolicy (τij ) = −       log π at,j st,j , zdemo,mi , zlang,mi                                                                                  (2)
                                       xt,i,j ∈τij

Both fdemo and π networks are trained jointly with the following loss, for a tuned α > 0:
                      L(π, fdemo , flang ) = Lpolicy (τij ) + αLdemo (Zdemo , Zlang )                                                                                 (3)
Where Lpolicy (τij ) is summed over all trajectories in the batch of training tasks M (we omit this
double summation in Equation 2 for brevity). Note that the language encoder does not have a loss
term because we use a frozen, pretrained language model and rely on the pretrained embedding
space to shape the demonstration encoding space.

4.3     E VALUATION

During evaluation, we want the robot to perform some novel task Tv ∈ V . Recall that Tv ∈     / U,
our set of training tasks. From our problem setup description in Section 3.1, we have access to a
validation task buffer Dval with a single demonstration τv and a natural language instruction lv of
task Tv . We encode the demonstration with fdemo and the language with flang and pass both task
embeddings to the policy. Details are summarized in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 1 DeL-TaCo: Training                         Algorithm 2 DeL-TaCo: Evaluation
Input: Dtrain                                        Input: Dval
 1: while not done do                                 1: for validation task Tv in V do
 2:   M ← k random train tasks from U                 2:    Get 1 demo τv and language lv from Dval
 3:   Sample Xi = {τij }b−1
                         j=0 ∼ Dtrain                 3:    zdemo ← fdemo (τv ) // Encode demo
 4:   X ← {Xi |Ti ∈ M }                               4:    zlang ← flang (lv ) // Encode language
 5:   L ← {li |Ti ∈ M } // Lang. instructions         5:    for time t = 0, ..., H − 1 do
 6:   Zdemo ← fdemo (X) // Demo encoder               6:       Take action at ∼ π(a|st , zdemo , zlang )
 7:   Zlang ← flang (L) // Language encoder           7:    end for
 8:   Update π, fdemo on L(π, fdemo , flang ) // per 8: end for
      Eqn. 3
 9: end while


5      E XPERIMENTS
We empirically investigate the following questions: (1) Does there exist a distribution of tasks that
are more clearly specified with both language and demonstrations rather than either alone? (2) Does
conditioning on both language instructions and video demonstrations with DeL-TaCo improve gen-
eralization performance on novel tasks? (3) If so, how much teacher effort is reduced by specifying
a new task with both language and demonstrations than with either modality alone?

5.1     S ETUP

Environment. We develop a Pybullet (Coumans                       Object
                                                                 Example Training Tasks
                                                              Identifier Type           Example Test Tasks
& Bai, 2007-2022) simulation environment with a
WidowX 250 robot arm, 32 possible objects of di-         Name                      “Put circular table in red bin.”                 “Put metal plate in front bin.”

verse colors and shapes for manipulation, and 2
different containers. The action space is continu-       Color                  “Put yellow colored object in left bin.”   “Put black and white colored object in left bin.”


ous, representing an (x, y, z) change in the robot’s
                                                         Shape
end effector position, plus the binary gripper state                            “Put vase-shaped object in back bin.”       “Put trapezoidal-shaped object in green bin.”


(closed/opened). We subdivide the workspace into Figure 3: Sample train and test tasks,
four quadrants. Two quadrants are randomly chosen grouped by the object identifier types (un-
to contain the two different containers, and three of derlined in each language instruction). All 6
the 32 possible objects are dropped at random loca- container identifiers are seen in both training
tions in the remaining two quadrants. RGB image and testing.
observations are size 48 × 48 × 3 and fed into the
policy. The input format of each demo for fdemo is
an m × n array of images extracted from the trajectory. Details are in Appendix H.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Task Objective. To explore the first question, we design the following set of pick-and-place tasks
where the objective is to grasp the target object and place it in the target container. Both the target
object and container can be inferred from the demonstration and language instruction. In every
task, the scene contains three visually distinct objects (of which exactly one of them is the target
object) and two visually distinct containers (of which exactly one of them is the target container).
To make the task more challenging, the distractor objects on the scene are chosen adversarially,
whenever possible, to match either the color or shape of the target object. Thus, a robotic policy
that disregards both the task demonstration and instruction and picks any random object and places
it into any random container would solve the task with 1-in-6 odds.
Language Instructions for Each Task. Figure 3 shows a selection of our training and testing tasks.
Each task is specified through language with a single template-based instruction of the format “put
[target object identifier] in [target container identifier].”
We make this environment more challenging by having task instructions refer to containers by either
their color or quadrant position and objects by either their name, color, or shape. We use six different
container identifiers in the task instructions to convey which container to drop the object in: red,
green, front, back, left, and right. Thus, if the robot is provided a demonstration of grasping a cup
and placing it in the red container in the front left quadrant, and it encounters an initialization with
the containers in different locations, it does not know whether to place the cup in the red, front, or left
container. This ambiguity can only be resolved with the language instruction. Conversely, aspects
of the task, such as which object to grasp, are most clearly expressed through the demonstration
rather than the instruction, since for novel tasks, the language instruction contains object identifiers
unfamiliar to the policy. The task instructions also refer to the objects through different types of
identifiers: their unique names (32 strings such as “fountain vase”), color (8 strings such as “black-
and-white colored object”), or shape (10 strings such as “trapezoidal prism shaped object”).
The multiple identifiers help simulate ambiguity that arises from informal human instructions, where
different humans may refer to the same object or container through different attributes, enabling
demonstrations and instructions to complement each other when the robot learns a new task. In
total, there are 50 target object identifiers (32 + 8 + 10) and 6 target container identifiers, giving us
300 pick-and-place tasks. We train and evaluate on a bipartition of these 300 tasks. See Appendix A
for a list of all our train and test tasks.
Success Metric. In calculating the success rate, a successful trajectory is defined as one that (1)
picks up the correct object and (2) places it in the correct container. Appendix D details the number
of seeds and trials used to calculate success rates and standard deviations.
Data. Using a scripted policy (details in Appendix C), we collect roughly 130 successful demon-
strations for each training task, and a single successful demonstration for each test task. All demon-
strations are 30 timesteps long. Depending on our experimental scenario (see Section 5.2), we train
on 65% to 80% of the 300 tasks, so our training buffer contains roughly 26,000-31,000 trajectories.
5.2 G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE ON N OVEL TASKS

To test generalization, we run experiments under two scenarios: (A) generalization to novel objects,
colors and shapes, and (B) generalization to only novel colors and shapes.

5.2.1   S CENARIO A: N OVEL O BJECTS , C OLORS , AND S HAPES
Table 1 (plots in Figure 8) shows our results in experimental scenario A, where we train on 24/32
objects, 4/8 colors, and 5/10 shapes (a total of 198 training tasks) and evaluate on the remaining 102
tasks. The overall success rates show much room for improvement on this challenging benchmark
for a number of reasons. The robot must not only know how to pick-and-place the 8/32 objects it
has never seen during training, but must also understand novel instructions that refer to these ob-
jects by either their name, color, or shape. Additionally, training a multitask policy to perform well
on hundreds of tasks remains an open question with current multitask robot learning algorithms—a
problem compounded in difficulty by the adversarial selection of distractor objects in our environ-
ment as mentioned earlier in Section 5.1.
We lower-bound the performance of our task conditioning methods by first running a one-hot con-
ditioned policy, with the expectation that it performs worse than conditioning on language and/or
demonstrations for the reasons mentioned in Section 1. As an upper-bound, we directly train a


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



             Table 1: Evaluation on Novel Objects, Colors, and Shapes. (p) = pretrained.
        Demo Encoder    Language Encoder                           Task Conditioning                       Success Rate ± SD (%)
             –                 –                                 One-hot (lower bound)                          6.6 ± 1.3
             –                 –                              One-hot Oracle (upper bound)                      47.9 ± 4.8
                                                                    Language-only                               13.7 ± 1.9
                   CLIP (p)                                           Demo-only                                 8.0 ± 1.9
                                                                   DeL-TaCo (ours)                             15.3 ± 1.8
            –             DistilBERT (p)                            Language-only                               10.4 ± 1.6
           CNN                   –                                    Demo-only                                 14.6 ± 2.2
           CNN            DistilBERT (p)                           DeL-TaCo (ours)                             19.9 ± 1.8
           CNN                   –                         BC-Z (Jang et al., 2021); Demo-only                  8.8 ± 2.0
           CNN            DistilBERT (p)        MCIL (Lynch & Sermanet, 2021); Demo-only + Language-only        9.4 ± 1.8
                   Table 2: Evaluation on Novel Colors and Shapes. (p) = pretrained.
                       Demo Encoder        Language Encoder         Task Conditioning         Success Rate ± SD (%)
                            –                      –              One-hot (lower bound)            10.3 ± 1.8
                            –                      –           One-hot Oracle (upper bound)        50.9 ± 4.9
                            –               DistilBERT (p)           Language-only                 15.8 ± 2.8
                          CNN                      –                   Demo-only                   17.0 ± 2.7
                          CNN               DistilBERT (p)          DeL-TaCo (ours)               26.3 ± 4.1


one-hot oracle on only the 102 evaluation tasks and evaluate on those same tasks. No other method
in the table is trained on any evaluation tasks. (For consistency, the one-hot oracle is trained on the
same total number of trajectories as the other methods.)
Next, we examine the performance of policies conditioned with only language, with only one
demonstration, and with both (DeL-TaCo). The language-only policies do not involve training
fdemo , and only the language instruction embeddings are fed into the policy via FiLM during
training and testing. The demo-only policies train fdemo as shown in Algorithm 1, but during
training and testing, only the demonstration embedding zdemo is passed into the policy via FiLM.
DeL-TaCo (ours) conditions on both demonstration and language during training and testing as
shown in Algorithms 1 and 2.
When using pretrained DistilBERT as flang and a lightweight CNN for fdemo , DeL-TaCo achieves
the highest performance, increasing the success rate of the second-best conditioning method, demo-
only, from 14.6% to 19.9%. Both methods using demonstration embeddings outperform the
language-conditioned policy perhaps because a visual demonstration is important in conveying the
nature of the chosen object and how the robot should manipulate it. Note that both the demo-only
and DeL-TaCo policies train the fdemo CNN from scratch without any pretraining, so they must
learn to ground object and container identifiers from training demonstrations alone.
We also compare to prior methods. BC-Z (Jang et al., 2021) performs worse than our approaches
because its demo encoder is trained to directly regress zdemo to zlang , hindering it from performing
better than solely using zlang during testing. MCIL (Lynch & Sermanet, 2021), which trains sepa-
rate encoders for each task embedding modality and averages the imitation learning losses over the
different encoders, also performs worse than DeL-TaCo because without any task encoder loss term,
it is harder to learn a well-shaped task embedding space, hurting generalization performance.
Finally, to evaluate the effect of pretraining, we use pretrained CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as the
task encoder (with its language transformer as flang and vision transformer as fdemo ) and freeze
it during training. The language-only policy performs significantly better than the video-only pol-
icy most likely because CLIP’s visual transformer was trained mostly on real-world images and
without further finetuning, does not know how to sufficiently differentiate between the simulation
demonstrations of different tasks in our problem setting. Despite this, DeL-TaCo modestly outper-
forms conditioning on language-only or demo-only, demonstrating the value of our method even
with frozen pretrained models.

5.2.2   S CENARIO B: N OVEL C OLORS AND S HAPES
In Table 2 (plots in Figure 9), we train on 32/32 objects, 4/8 colors, and 5/10 shapes, and evaluate
on the rest—an easier setting as all objects were seen during training. Since evaluation tasks in this
scenario only refer to objects by their color or shape, we up-sample the color and shape training
tasks to be 50% of each training batch (such up-sampling was not done in scenario A).
We take the highest-performing fdemo and flang models in Table 1 and again compare conditioning
on language, demonstrations, and both. All methods perform better in scenario B than A. The novel
color and shape task demonstrations contain more ambiguity than the novel object demonstrations
because the task with language instruction “put the blue object in the left bin” might have a demon-


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



          Table 3: Value of Language. Evaluation on Novel Objects, Colors, and Shapes.
                          Task Conditioning                       Demo-only          DeL-TaCo (ours)
                    # demos per test-task finetuned on    0    10    25     50 100         0
                           Success Rate (%)              14.6 14.9 17.4 20.0 24.2        19.9
                               ± SD (%)                  ±2.2 ±1.6 ±2.7 ±2.4 ±2.5        ±1.8


stration where the robot manipulates the blue cup, but the test-time environment might contain a
blue table instead. This added ambiguity likely explains the increased importance of language and
the wider 9.7% performance gap between DeL-TaCo and demo-only task conditioning.
Analysis. Overall, we see that on this wide range of tasks, language and demonstrations together do
help disambiguate each other during task specification—answering our first question; this leads to
better generalization performance on novel tasks—answering our second question.

5.3   H OW MANY DEMONSTRATIONS IS LANGUAGE WORTH ?

To answer our third question, we re-examine experimental scenario A (testing on novel objects, col-
ors, and shapes) but now further finetune the demo-only policy on a variable number of test-task
expert demonstrations. Results are shown in Table 3 (plots in Figure 9). The demo-only policy
only starts to match and surpass DeL-TaCo (underlined) when it is finetuned on 50 demonstrations
(underlined) per evaluation task (a total of around 5,000 demonstrations for all test tasks combined).
This suggests that surprisingly, specifying a new task to DeL-TaCo with a single demonstration and
language instruction performs as well as specifying a new task to a demo-only policy with a single
demonstration and finetuning it on 50 additional demonstrations of that task. This showcases the im-
mense value of language in supplementing demonstrations for novel task specification, significantly
reducing the effort involved in teaching robots novel tasks over demonstration-only methods.

5.4   A BLATIONS AND M ULTIMODALITY FOR A MBIGUITY R ESOLUTION

We provide extensive ablations of our model and algorithm in Appendix F and further explore the
utility of using multi-modal task specification to resolve ambiguity in Appendix G.
6     C ONCLUSION
When specifying tasks through language or demonstrations, ambiguities can arise that hinder robot
learning, especially when the demonstrations or instructions were provided in an environment that
does not perfectly align with the environment the robot is in. In this paper, we showed a problem
setting of learning 300 highly diverse pick and place tasks and propose a simple framework, DeL-
TaCo, to resolve ambiguity during task specification by using both language and demonstrations
during both training and testing. Two main obstacles to deploying household robotic systems are
the inability to generalize to new environments and tasks, and prohibitively high end-user effort
needed to teach robots these new tasks. Our results show progress on both fronts: over previous
task-conditioning methods, DeL-TaCo improves generalization performance to new tasks by 5 − 9%
and reduces human effort on our set of tasks by roughly 50 expert demonstrations per task.
Limitations and Future Work. Our work leaves a number of areas for improvement. First, we
experiment only with pick-and-place tasks. Future work may need more interpretable modular en-
coders to handle a wider diversity of manipulation skills and temporally-extended tasks. Second,
we used a rigid set of template-based language instructions for each task, but our framework would
likely benefit from a more diverse instruction set of human paraphrases for each task. Third, we did
not find pretrained vision-language models, such as CLIP, to increase performance in our simulation-
based environment, most likely because of the domain mismatch between our simulation objects and
the more real-world-centric images CLIP was trained on. Investigating ways to better leverage pre-
trained vision-language models for multimodal task specification, in tandem with real-world robotic
tasks and real-world human demonstrations, would be a promising line of future research.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Please see our appendix for details needed to replicate our results. In particular, Appendix A pro-
vides the full list of our 300 tasks, instructions, and objects, as well as train and test task splits.
Appendix B contains architectural hyperparameters and details for network layers, initialization,
and optimizer settings. The remaining appendices detail aspects of our training/evaluation processes
and provide additional ablations that were not fully described in the main text of our paper.
We link to our open-sourced codebase on our project website, https://deltaco-robot.
github.io.

8   E THICS S TATEMENT
This work leverages language model embeddings for task conditioning, which leaves our approach
vulnerable to distributional biases of the language models. Future work should explore adding ad-
ditional safeguards to DeL-TaCo to reason about the safety of language instructions before utilizing
these embeddings for execution by the robot policy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Prasoon Goyal and Vanya Cohen for their numerous suggestions and discus-
sions during the course of this work. This research was supported by NSF NRI Grant IIS-1925082.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey,
 Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as I can and not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Modular multitask reinforcement learning with
  policy sketches. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Valts Blukis, Dipendra Misra, Ross A. Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. Mapping navigation instructions to
  continuous control actions with position-visitation prediction. In Conference on Robot Learning
  (CoRL), 2018.
Valts Blukis, Yannick Terme, Eyvind Niklasson, Ross A. Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. Learning to map
  natural language instructions to physical quadcopter control using simulated flight. In Conference
  on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
Boyuan Chen, Fei Xia, Brian Ichter, Kanishka Rao, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Michael S. Ryoo,
  Austin Stone, and Daniel Kappler. Open-vocabulary queryable scene representations for real
  world planning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.09874, 2022.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Bullet and pybullet, physics simulation for games, visual effects,
  robotics and reinforcement learning. https://pybullet.org, May 2007-2022.
Yuchen Cui, Scott Niekum, Abhinav Gupta, Vikash Kumar, and Aravind Rajeswaran. Can founda-
  tion models perform zero-shot task specification for robot manipulation? Learning for Dynamics
  and Control Conference, 2022.
Coline Devin, Abhishek Gupta, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Learning modular
  neural network policies for multi-task and multi-robot transfer. In International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Karl Schmeckpeper, Bernadette Bucher, Georgios Georgakis, Kostas
  Daniilidis, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridge data: Boosting generalization of robotic
  skills with cross-domain datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13396, 2021.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
  portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
Chelsea Finn, Xin Yu Tan, Yan Duan, Trevor Darrell, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep spatial
  autoencoders for visuomotor learning. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), 2016.
Divyansh Garg, Skanda Vaidyanath, Kuno Kim, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Lisa: Learn-
  ing interpretable skill abstractions from language, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2203.00054.
Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond Mooney. Using natural language for reward shaping
  in reinforcement learning. 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.02020.
Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond Mooney. Pixl2r: Guiding reinforcement learning
  using natural language by mapping pixels to rewards. 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2007.15543.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, et al.
  Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07058,
  2021.
Abhishek Gupta, Corey Lynch, Brandon Kinman, Garrett Peake, Sergey Levine, and Karol Haus-
  man. Demonstration-bootstrapped autonomous practicing via multi-task reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15755, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385, 2015.
Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado van
 Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
 ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3796–3803, 2019.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. In ACM Computing Surveys, 2017.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. BC-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In 5th
  Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=8kbp23tSGYv.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar, Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski,
 Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic re-
 inforcement learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08212, 2021.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Megha Srivastava, Percy Liang, and Dorsa Sadigh. Lila: Language-informed
  latent actions. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/pdf/2111.03205.
Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured data.
  Robotics: Science and Systems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.07648.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark
  for language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.03227.
Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, and Wolfram Burgard. What matters in language conditioned imitation
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06252, 2022.
Ashvin Nair, Dian Chen, Pulkit Agrawal, Phillip Isola, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Sergey
  Levine. Combining self-supervised learning and imitation for vision-based rope manipulation. In
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1703.02018.
Ashvin Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems (NeurIPS), 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04742.
Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, Brian Ichter, Silvio Savarese, and Chelsea Finn. Learning
  language-conditioned robot behavior from offline data and crowd-sourced annotation. In 5th An-
  nual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.01115.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Soroush Nasiriany, Vitchyr Pong, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Planning with goal-conditioned
  policies. 2019.
Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and
  transfer reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06342, 2015.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In AAAI, 2018.
Dean Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 1988.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Andrei Rusu, Sergio Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Krikpatrick, Raz-
  van Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1511.06295v2, 2015.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version
  of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. In Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilroberta, 2020. URL
  https://huggingface.co/distilroberta-base.
Lin Shao, Toki Migimatsu, Qiang Zhang, Karen Yang, and Jeannette Bohg. Concept2robot: Learn-
  ing manipulation concepts from instructions and human demonstrations. In Proceedings of
  Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2020.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for
 robotic manipulation. Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Andrew Silva, Nina Moorman, William Silva, Zulfiqar Zaidi, Nakul Gopalan, and Matthew Gom-
  bolay. Lancon-learn: Learning with language to enable generalization in multi-task manipulation.
  In IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Laura Smith, Nikita Dhawan, Marvin Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Avid: Learning
  multi-stage tasks via pixel-level translation of human videos. In Robotics Science and Systems
  (RSS), 2020.
Shagun Sodhani, Amy Zhang, and Joelle Pineau. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-
  based representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06177, 2021.
Yee Whye Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia
  Hadsell, Nicolas Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.04175, 2017.
Homer Walke, Jonathan Yang, Albert Yu, Aviral Kumar, Jedrzej Orbik, Avi Singh, and Sergey
  Levine. Don’t start from scratch: Leveraging prior data to automate robotic reinforcement learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Robot Learning (CORL), 2022.
Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. Minilm: Deep self-
 attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers, 2020.
Aaron Wilson, Alan Fern, Soumya Ray, and Prasad Tadepalli. Multi-task reinforcement learning: a
  hierarchical bayesian approach. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine
  learning, pp. 1015–1022, 2007.
Zhiyuan Xu, Kun Wu, Zhengping Che, Jian Tang, and Jieping Ye. Knowledge transfer in multi-task
  deep reinforcement learning for continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07494, 2020.
Ruihan Yang, Huazhe Xu, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Multi-task reinforcement learning with soft
  modularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13661, 2020.
Sarah Young, Dhiraj Gandhi, Shubham Tulsiani, Abhinav Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto.
  Visual imitation made easy, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
  10897.
Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
  Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06782, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Conservative data sharing for multi-task offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Transporter networks: Rear-
  ranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Robot
  Learning (CoRL), 2020.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker,
  Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Van-
  houcke, and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with
  language. arXiv, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendices
A     A LL TASKS , I NSTRUCTIONS , AND T RAIN -T EST S PLIT

A.1    L IST OF TASKS

All 300 tasks are shown below, by object identifier (rows) and container identifier (columns). The
colors denote groups of tasks which guide our train and test task splits, and the cell numbers denote
the task indices.

       • Scenario A (novel objects, colors, and shapes) trains on all gray tasks and tests on
          yellow , blue , and green tasks.

       • Scenario B (novel colors and shapes) trains on all gray and yellow tasks and tests on
          blue and green tasks.

                                                                                            Container Identifier
                  Object Identifier Type       Object Identifier
                                                                              green   red     front     back       left   right
                                                      conic cup                 0     50       100      150        200     250
                                                   fountain vase                1     51       101      151        201     251
                                                   circular table               2     52       102      152        202     252
                                                  hex deep bowl                 3     53       103      153        203     253
                                               smushed dumbbell                 4     54       104      154        204     254
                                                 square prism bin               5     55       105      155        205     255
                                                     narrow tray                6     56       106      156        206     256
                                                   colunnade top                7     57       107      157        207     257
                                                 stalagcite chunk               8     58       108      158        208     258
                                                bongo drum bowl                 9     59       109      159        209     259
                                                    pacifier vase              10     60       110      160        210     260
                                                  beehive funnel               11     61       111      161        211     261
                                             crooked lid trash can             12     62       112      162        212     262
                                                     toilet bowl               13     63       113      163        213     263
                                                     pepsi bottle              14     64       114      164        214     264
                                                    tongue chair               15     65       115      165        215     265
                          name
                                                   modern canoe                16     66       116      166        216     266
                                                 pear ringed vase              17     67       117      167        217     267
                                                 short handle cup              18     68       118      168        218     268
                                                     bullet vase               19     69       119      169        219     269
                                                 glass half gallon             20     70       120      170        220     270
                                             flat bottom sack vase             21     71       121      171        221     271
                                                  trapezoidal bin              22     72       122      172        222     272
                                                   vintage canoe               23     73       123      173        223     273
                                                       bathtub                 24     74       124      174        224     274
                                               flowery half donut              25     75       125      175        225     275
                                                         t cup                 26     76       126      176        226     276
                                           cookie circular lidless tin         27     77       127      177        227     277
                                                       box sofa                28     78       128      178        228     278
                                            two layered lampshade              29     79       129      179        229     279
                                                      conic bin                30     80       130      180        230     280
                                                           jar                 31     81       131      181        231     281
                                                 black and white               32     82       132      182        232     282
                                                        brown                  33     83       133      183        233     283
                                                          blue                 34     84       134      184        234     284
                                                          gray                 35     85       135      185        235     285
                          color
                                                         white                 36     86       136      186        236     286
                                                           red                 37     87       137      187        237     287
                                                        orange                 38     88       138      188        238     288
                                                        yellow                 39     89       139      189        239     289
                                                          vase                 40     90       140      190        240     290
                                                        chalice                41     91       141      191        241     291
                                                      freeform                 42     92       142      192        242     292
                                                         bottle                43     93       143      193        243     293
                                                         canoe                 44     94       144      194        244     294
                          shape
                                                          cup                  45     95       145      195        245     295
                                                         bowl                  46     96       146      196        246     296
                                                trapezoidal prism              47     97       147      197        247     297
                                                       cylinder                48     98       148      198        248     298
                                                     round hole                49     99       149      199        249     299



A.2    TASK I NSTRUCTION F ORMAT

As mentioned in Section 5.1, we use the following template as the language instruction for each task:
“Put [target object identifier string] in [target container identifier string].” For each object identifier,
we build a string referring to the target obj in a specific format shown in Table 4.


                                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Table 4: Object Identifier String Format for each Object Identifier Type.
        Object Identifier Type Target Object Identifier String
                Name           “[object color] colored, [object shape] shaped [object name]”
                Color          “[object color] colored object”
                Shape          “[object shape] shaped object”


Example task instructions (with target object identifier and target container strings underlined):

        • Task 4: “Put black and white colored, chalice shaped smushed dumbbell in green bin.”
        • Task 292: “Put cup shaped object in right bin.”

A.3     T RAIN AND T EST S PLIT V ISUALIZATIONS

We visually show our train-test splits on objects (Figure 4), colors (Figure 5), and shapes (Figure
6).
 Objects Objects
    Test Train


Figure 4: Train-Test Object Split. Objects are shown in raster-scan task-index order, so the object
in the second row from top, second column from left, is the “bongo drum bowl”, which is associated
with task index 9.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Train Colors                                       Test Colors
                                      Black and
               White                                                     Blue
                                        White


                Red
                                                                 Brown
              Orange


              Yellow                                             Gray


                                Figure 5: Train-Test Color Split.



         Train Shapes                                        Test Shapes
                      Vase                                          Bowl


                             Canoe                               Cup


         Freeform            Bottle                     Trapezoidal Prism


              Chalice                                 Cylinder      Round Hole


                                Figure 6: Train-Test Shape Split.


B     D ETAILED A RCHITECTURE AND H YPERPARAMETERS

B.1   P OLICY π AND D EMONSTRATION E NCODER fdemo ARCHITECTURE

See Figure 7 for a detailed diagram of the policy and demonstration encoder (for a higher-level
overview, see Figure 2). For the policy backbone, we use a ResNet-18 architecture but made changes
to the strides and number of channels to adapt the network to our small image size. Hyperparameters
are shown in Tables 5 and 6.

B.2   T RAINING H YPERPARAMETERS

Table 7 shows our IL training hyperparameters.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘(𝑐𝑖𝑛 , 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑡 )
                           𝑥: 𝑐𝑖𝑛 , ℎ, 𝑤          𝑧𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜
                                                                𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑜𝑏𝑠: 3,48,48                       𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑜: 3,48,96

                   conv3x3 (stride 1)                                                                 conv3x3 (stride 1)
                                                                                                  MaxPool2x2 (stride 2), ReLU

                           𝑥: 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑡 , ℎ, 𝑤
                                                                                                          𝑥: 16,24,48

                   BatchNorm, ReLU                                                                    conv3x3 (stride 1)
                                                                                                  MaxPool2x2 (stride 2), ReLU

                   conv3x3 (stride 1)                      conv7x7 (stride 1)
                                                                                                          𝑥: 16,12,24
                                                           BatchNorm, ReLU
                         BatchNorm                                                                       conv3x3 (stride 1)
                                                                    𝑥: 16,48,48                            ReLU, Flatten

                        𝐹𝑖𝐿𝑀𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘(𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑡 )
                                                               MaxPool3x3 (stride 2)                        𝑥: 4608,

                                 +                                  𝑥: 16,24,24                  FC Layers [1024, 512, 256]

                                                            𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 16,16                              𝑧𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜 : 768,
                              ReLU
                                                            𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 16,16                       Demo Encoder 𝒇𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒐
                          𝑜𝑢𝑡: 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑡 , ℎ, 𝑤
                                                                                                                          Policy 𝝅
                                                            𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 16,32

                                                            𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 32,32

                                                            𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 32,64
                    𝐹𝑖𝐿𝑀𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘(𝑐)
                                                            𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 64,64
           𝑥: 𝑐, ℎ, 𝑤
                                                           𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 64,128
                                         𝛾
               ∗                      learned              𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 128,128
                                     projection
                                                                   𝑥: 128,24,24
                                                  𝑧𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜
                                         𝛽                     Spatial Softmax
               +                      learned
                                     projection                𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠: 256,        𝑧𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑔 : 768,      𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑜𝑡 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒: 10,

          𝑜𝑢𝑡: 𝑐, ℎ, 𝑤                                               Concat
                                                           FC Layers [1024, 512, 256]

                                                               𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛: 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟


          Figure 7: Detailed Architecture of the Policy and Demonstration Encoder.


Table 7: Imitation learning hyperparameters. In each training iteration, we sample 16 random
tasks from our training buffer and get 64 samples for each task, for a total batch size of 1024.

                          Attribute                                                          Value
                          Number of Tasks per Batch                                             16
                          Batch Size per Task                                                   64
                          Learning Rate                                                   3 × 10−4
                          Task Encoder weight (α in L)                                         10.0
                          Contrastive Learning Temperature (β in Ldemo )                        0.1


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Table 5: Policy π hyperparameters.
             Attribute                                                            Value
             Input Height                                                              48
             Input Width                                                               48
             Input Channels                                                             3
             Number of Kernels                                        [16, 32, 64, 128]
             Kernel Sizes                                                 [7, 3, 3, 3, 3]
             Conv Strides                                                 [1, 1, 1, 1, 1]
             Maxpool Stride                                                             2
             Fully Connected Layers                                   [1024, 512, 256]
             Hidden Activations                                                   ReLU
             FiLM input size                                                         768
             FiLM hidden layers                                                         0
             Spatial Softmax Temperature                                              1.0
             Learning Rate                                                    3 × 10−4
             Policy Action Distribution       Multivariate Isotropic Gaussian N (µ, σ)
             Policy Outputs                                                       (µ, σ)
             Image Augmentation                                         Random Crops
             Image Augmentation Padding                                                 4


                              Table 6: fdemo CNN hyperparameters.
                 Attribute                                                 Value
                 Demonstration frames                   First and last timesteps
                 Demonstration image array size (m, n)                     (1, 2)
                 Input Height (m· Image height)                                48
                 Input Width (n· Image width)                                  96
                 Input Channels                                                  3
                 Output Size                                                  768
                 Kernel Sizes                                            [3, 3, 3]
                 Number of Kernels                                  [16, 16, 16]
                 Strides                                                 [1, 1, 1]
                 Fully Connected Layers                        [1024, 512, 256]
                 Hidden Activations                                        ReLU
                 Paddings                                                [1, 1, 1]
                 Pool Type                                               Max 2D
                 Pool Sizes                                              [2, 2, 1]
                 Pool Strides                                            [2, 2, 1]
                 Pool Paddings                                           [0, 0, 0]
                 Image Augmentation                              Random Crops
                 Image Augmentation Padding                                      4


C    S CRIPTED P OLICY D ETAILS


We collect 26, 000 − 31, 000 training demonstrations using a scripted policy with Gaussian noise
added to the action of each timestep. Details are shown in Algorithm 3. “eePos” stands for end-
effector position. All variables ending in “Pos” are xyz positions. Our training buffer contains only
successful demonstrations.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Scripted Pick and Place
 1: pickPos ← target object position
 2: dropPos ← target container position
 3: distThresh ← 0.02
 4: numTimesteps ← 30
 5: placeAttempted ← False
 6: for t in [0, numTimesteps) do
 7:    eePos ← end effector position
 8:    dropPosDist ← ∥eePos − dropPos∥2
 9:    pickPosDist ← ∥eePos − pickPos∥2
10:    if placeAttempted then
11:        action ← 0
12:    else if object not grasped AND pickPosDist > distThresh then
13:         // Move toward target object
14:        action ← pickPos − eePos
15:    else if object not grasped then
16:         // gripper is very close to object
17:        action ← pickPos − eePos
18:        close gripper // Object is in gripper
19:    else if object not lifted then
20:         // Move gripper upward to avoid hitting other objects/containers
21:        action ← [0, 0, 1]
22:    else if dropPosDist > distThresh then
23:         // Move toward target container
24:        action ← dropPos − eePos
25:    else
26:        open gripper // Object falls into container
27:        placeAttempted ← True
28:    end if
29:    noise ∼ N (0, 0.1)
30:    action ← action + noise
31:    s′ ← env.step(action)
32: end for


D     S UCCESS R ATE C ALCULATION D ETAILS
To avoid reporting cherry-picked results, we detail our success rate calculation methodology here.
We run each setting with three random seeds for 800k-900k training steps. An evaluation
set, which we define as rolling out the policy for 2 trials per task for all of the test tasks,
is run every 10k training steps. Thus, there are a total of 80-90 evaluation sets that occur
throughout training. Let seed i attain the success rate r(i, j) on evaluation set j. Let J =
top 10 evaluation set indices for the quantity meani r(i, j). Our reported success rate and standard
deviation in the tables are calculated as the following equations:
                            Reported Success Rate = meanj∈J (meani r(i, j))
                       Reported Standard Deviation = meanj∈J (stddevi r(i, j))


Scenario A: Since there are 102 test tasks, each success rate in Tables 1 and 3 is computed from:
          2 trials   102 test tasks   10 evaluation sets
                   ×                ×                    × 3 seeds = 6120 evaluation trials
         test task evaluation set           seed

Scenario B: Applying the same calculation for the 54 tasks in Scenario B, each success rate in
Table 2 is computed from 3240 evaluation trials.
For Table 3, the best final checkpoint of the three demo-only policy seeds from Table 1 was taken
for finetuning.



                                                      19
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 E                        L EARNING C URVES FOR E XPERIMENTS

                                                                 Novel Objects, Colors, and Shapes                                                                                    Novel Objects, Colors, and Shapes (CLIP-Pretrained Task Encoder)
                                    0.5                                                                                                                                             0.5

                                    0.4                                                                                                                                             0.4
                     Success Rate


                                                                                                                                                                     Success Rate
                                    0.3                                                                                                                                             0.3

                                    0.2                                                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0.1                                                                                                                                             0.1

                                    0.0                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                          0K         100K        200K        300K        400K        500K          600K          700K          800K                                       0K    100K         200K        300K         400K        500K     600K        700K     800K
                                                                                    Timesteps                                                                                                                                   Timesteps
                                               DeL-TaCo (ours)          demo-only                    BC-Z (Jang, et al)           onehot oracle                                                        CLIP: DeL-TaCo (ours)           CLIP: demo-only          onehot oracle
                                               language-only            MCIL (Lynch, et al)          onehot                                                                                            CLIP: language-only             onehot



 Figure 8: Table 1 learning curves, where all methods are evaluated on novel objects, colors, and
 shapes. Left: fdemo is a trained-from-scratch CNN and flang is pretrained DistilBERT. Right:
 fdemo and flang are from pretrained CLIP. The same upper and lower one-hot bounds (dotted) are
 shown in both the left and right plots.

                                                                 Novel Colors and Shapes                                                                                                   Demo-Only Policy Finetuning (by # demos per test task)
                                                                                                                                                                     0.26
               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                     0.24
               0.4                                                                                                                                                   0.22
Success Rate


                                                                                                                                                      Success Rate


                                                                                                                                                                     0.20
               0.3
                                                                                                                                                                     0.18
               0.2                                                                                                                                                   0.16
                                                                                                                                                                     0.14
               0.1
                                                                                                                                                                     0.12
               0.0                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                     0K                   100K          200K       300K          400K         500K          600K          700K          800K                                   0K               50K              100K             150K             200K           250K          300K
                                                                           Timesteps                                                                                                                                           Timesteps
                                                         DeL-TaCo (ours)            demo-only             onehot oracle                                                                                             DeL-TaCo (ours)          10           50
                                                         language-only              onehot                                                                                                                          0                        25           100


 Figure 9: Table 2 and 3 learning curves. Left: Evaluation only on novel colors and shapes. Right:
 Evaluation on novel objects, colors, and shapes, using a trained-from-scratch CNN as fdemo and
 pretrained DistilBERT as flang . The performance of the demo-only policy and DeL-TaCo pol-
 icy from Table 1 (also depicted in the left plot of Figure 8) are shown as lower and upper dotted
 lines, respectively. The solid lines indicate performance during 300k finetuning steps when given x
 demonstrations per test-task, where x is indicated in the legend.


                                                                                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Table 8: Ablations. Evaluation on Novel Objects, Colors and Shapes. (p) = pretrained.
    Demo Encoder        Language Encoder       Task Encoder Loss        Task Conditioning Arch.    Task Conditioning   Success Rate ± SD (%)
                                                      Best non-oracle result from Table 1
       CNN               DistilBERT (p)           Contrastive         FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         19.9 ± 1.8
                                                         Language Encoder Ablations
         –            DistilBERT (finetuned)           –                          FiLM              Language-only          12.6 ± 5.0
       CNN            DistilBERT (finetuned)      Contrastive         FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         12.1 ± 5.6
         –             DistilRoBERTa (p)               –                          FiLM              Language-only          12.4 ± 2.1
       CNN             DistilRoBERTa (p)          Contrastive         FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         16.6 ± 1.5
         –                  miniLM (p)                 –                          FiLM              Language-only          13.7 ± 2.3
       CNN                  miniLM (p)            Contrastive         FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         20.9 ± 2.3
      CLIP (p)        CLIP (p) + MLP head         Contrastive         FiLM (lang), Concat (demo)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         15.8 ± 2.3
                                                           Demo Encoder Ablations
 R3M (p) + MLP head      DistilBERT (p)           Contrastive         FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         13.2 ± 1.8
                                                         Task Encoder Loss Ablations
       CNN               DistilBERT (p)         Cosine distance       FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         12.2 ± 2.5
       CNN               DistilBERT (p)              None             FiLM (demo), Concat (lang)   DeL-TaCo (ours)         12.5 ± 2.6
                                                   Task Conditioning Architecture Ablations
       CNN               DistilBERT (p)           Contrastive             Concat (demo + lang)     DeL-TaCo (ours)         10.6 ± 4.2
       CNN               DistilBERT (p)           Contrastive             FiLM (demo + lang)       DeL-TaCo (ours)         17.3 ± 2.7


F    A BLATION A NALYSIS

In Table 8, we compare the performance of different language encoders, demonstration encoders,
task encoder loss types, and task conditioning architectures in Experimental Scenario A to our best
model from Table 1 (top row).
Language Encoder Ablations. Finetuning the language model did not improve performance, most
likely because the model becomes significantly harder to train jointly with a relatively deep language
encoder. Perhaps training the policy and finetuning the language model in separate stages may yield
better results. We also compare with other language models such as DistilRoBERTa (Sanh et al.,
2020) and miniLM (Wang et al., 2020). These were chosen because they have (1) a relatively small
number of parameters for computational efficiency, and (2) were shown to achieve high performance
on language-conditioned robotic policies when compared to other common language models (Mees
et al., 2022). When using CLIP as the demo and language encoder, we did not notice much of a
performance difference from adding a finetuneable MLP head on top of the frozen CLIP language
encoder.
Demonstration Encoder Ablations. Using pretrained demonstration encoders, such as R3M, did
not perform better than training a small CNN from scratch—a similar takeaway from our experi-
ments with pretrained CLIP.
Loss Ablations. Our approach outperforms using a BC-Z-styled cosine-distance loss term
Ldemo (zdemo , zlang ) = 1 − zdemo · zlang (where ∥zdemo ∥ = ∥zlang ∥ = 1). Our contrastive task
encoder loss term is crucial; without it (setting α = 0 in Eqn. 3), performance drops substantially.
Task Conditioning Architecture Ablations. Concatenating zdemo and zlang before feeding into
FiLM layers causes a slight drop in performance compared to our architecture in Figure 2, and sim-
ply concatenating zdemo and zlang to the image observation embeddings without FiLM dramatically
decreases performance.


G     A DDITIONAL A MBIGUITY E XPERIMENTS

In Tables 1 and 2, we examined the effects of conditioning the multitask policy on a demonstration
that is ambiguous about the target container, plus an unambiguous language instruction that clearly
specifies both the target object and container for each pick-and-place task. We label this as ambiguity
scheme (i).
To further examine the utility of multi-modal task conditioning, we experimented with a different
ambiguity scheme (ii) in which the language instruction is ambiguous about the target object but
unambiguous about the target container, and the demonstration is unambiguous about the target
object but ambiguous about the target container. This scheme allows us to test how well two task-
conditioning modalities complement each other if each modality unambiguously conveys only a
single aspect of the task.


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Table 9: Ambiguity Experiments
             Ambiguity Scheme      Demo Ambiguity   Language Ambiguity   Task Conditioning   Success Rate ± SD (%)
                                          –               None            Language-only           10.4 ± 1.6
              (i) (From Table 1)      container             –               Demo-only             14.6 ± 2.2
                                      container           None           DeL-TaCo (ours)         19.9 ± 1.8
                                          –               object          Language-only           15.8 ± 2.3
                     (ii)             container             –               Demo-only             22.7 ± 2.4
                                      container           object         DeL-TaCo (ours)         26.7 ± 5.2


To introduce ambiguity on the target objects, in scheme (ii), we place two identical objects on the
scene in different parts of the tray, plus a third visually distinct distractor object. Exactly one of
these two identical objects is the target object. The language instruction is ambiguous because it
does not convey the positional identifier that describes which side of the tray the target object is at.
However, the demonstration unambiguously conveys the target object by showing the robot picking
up the target object from the correct part of the tray.
The results are shown in Table 9. By displaying two identical objects as we do in scheme (ii), we
visually reveal that the target object is one of the two identical objects (and not the third, distinct
object on the scene), causing scheme (ii) to have higher overall success rates than scheme (i). We
see that the gap between DeL-TaCo and the demo-only policy slightly decreases from more than 5%
in scheme (i) to 4% in scheme (ii) because the language instruction unambiguously specifies the task
in scheme (i), complementing the demonstration which is ambiguous on both the target object and
container, whereas in scheme (ii), both the language instruction and demonstration are ambiguous in
one aspect (either in specifying the container or the object), narrowing the performance gap between
DeL-TaCo and the demo-only policies.

H    D EMONSTRATION FORMATTING FOR fdemo
We represent each demonstration as an m × n image array consisting of observations from the first
timestep, the last timestep, and mn − 2 other randomly selected timesteps from the trajectory, ar-
ranged in raster-scan order. For our CLIP and R3M experiments, we use (m, n) = (2, 2) because
CLIP and R3M perform a center square crop on each input image, so we made the demonstration ar-
ray square. When using our trained-from-scratch fdemo , we used (m, n) = (1, 2) for computational
efficiency. This sufficed for our tasks because pick-and-place was not a particularly long horizon
task, so including more frames did not improve performance.


                                                             22
