Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


AGENT P RIORITIZATION WITH I NTERPRETABLE R E -
LATION FOR T RAJECTORY P REDICTION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         In this paper, we present a novel multi-agent trajectory prediction model, which
         discovers interpretable relations among agents and prioritize agent’s motion. Dif-
         ferent from existing approaches, our interpretable design is inspired by the fun-
         damental navigation and motion functions of agent movements, which represent
         ’where’ and ’how’ the agents move in the scenes. Specifically, it generates the
         relation matrix, where each element indicates the motion impact from one to an-
         other. In addition, in highly interactive scenarios, one agent may implicitly gain
         higher priority to move, while the motion of other agents may be impacted by
         the prioritized agents with higher priority (e.g., a vehicle stopping or reducing its
         speed due to crossing pedestrians). Based on this intuition, we design a novel
         motion prioritization module to learn the agent motion priorities based on the in-
         ferred relation matrix. Then, a decoder is proposed to sequentially predict and
         iteratively update the future trajectories of each agent based on their priority or-
         ders and the learned relation structures. We first demonstrate the effectiveness of
         our prediction model on simulated Charged Particles (Kipf et al., 2018) dataset.
         Next, extensive evaluations are performed on commonly-used datasets for robot
         navigation, human-robot interactions, and autonomous agents: real-world NBA
         basketball (Yue et al., 2014) and INTERACTION (Zhan et al., 2019). Finally, we
         show that the proposed model outperforms other state-of-the-art relation based
         methods, and is capable to infer interpretable, meaningful relations among agents.


1   I NTRODUCTION

                                                                              Impact score
                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                  2
   Past       Interaction        Future             Past    Interpretable    12           In-order
Trajectory     Encoding        Trajectory        Trajectory    Relation   Prioritization Prediction
    (a) existing paradigm of relation-based                        (b) Our proposed approach
    trajectory prediction methods

Figure 1: Different from the common paradigm on inferring relation for trajectory prediction, our
approach aims to learn interpretable relations, prioritize agent motions, and make in-order prediction
based on their priorities.

Multi-agent trajectory prediction is an essential component in a wide range of applications from
robot navigation to autonomous intelligent systems. While navigating in crowded scenes, au-
tonomous agents (i.e., robots and vehicles) not only themselves interact, but also should have
ability to observe others’ interactions and anticipate where other agents will move in near future.
This ability is crucial for autonomous agents to avoid collisions and plan meaningful machine-
human/machine-machine interactions.
Designing a robust and accurate trajectory prediction model has attracted much of recent research
efforts. In fact, meaningful reasoning about interactions among agents provides valuable cues to im-
prove the trajectory prediction accuracy, especially in highly interactive scenarios. However, how to


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learn/discover meaningful relations among agents from historical motion data to improve prediction
accuracy remains a challenging task in recent research. There is a large body of recent research fo-
cused on modeling interaction among agents for future trajectory prediction. Some notable research
in this field learn interaction features using advanced deep learning techniques such as graph neural
networks (Scarselli et al., 2008), social pooling mechanism (Alahi et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2018),
or attention networks (Kamra et al., 2020). These works follow a common paradigm, as shown in
Figure 1a, to infer the relations among agents using their historical motions. The main limitation
of these approaches is that they lack a mechanism to learn the motion importance of each agent in
the scene. In realistically interactive scenarios, it is often that the agent movements implicitly imply
that an agent gains higher priority to decide where and when to move, their movements will impact
the others in the scene. For example, in driving scenarios, vehicles yield to crossing pedestrians
(higher prioritized agents). In the basket ball game, the other players’ movements are likely to be
conditioned (i.e., impacted ) by the ball-controlling offensive player.
To handle the aforementioned limitations, we propose a new approach, shown in Figure 1b, to prior-
itize each agent motion based on their interpretable relations. Our model first learns the interaction
among agents at each time-step. Inspired by the relation learning method (Fujii et al., 2021) for an-
imal movements, we design a inter-agent encoder that consists of two sub-encoders, each of which
represents innate movement and navigation capacities of agents. While the navigation encoder cap-
tures the agent relations based on the moving directions (i.e, where to move), the motion encoder
infers the relation based on the motion capacity (i.e., how to move). Next, the prioritization module
quantifies the importance score (i.e., priority) of each agent by measuring their motion impacts on
other agents. Based on the orders of priorities, sequential predictions are made to allow the predicted
future trajectories of agents with higher priorities to impact on the lower prioritized ones within their
relation structures. In summary, our contributions are:
• We propose a novel prediction pipeline with motion prioritization module to prioritize the impor-
tance of each agent based on its motion impacts on other agents within their interpretable relation
structures.
• We design an interpretable interaction encoder to capture the agent relations from both navigational
and motion perspectives. The relationships among agents are learned interpretably at each observed
time step to produce meaningful relation structures for prioritization task.
• We evaluate our prediction model on several highly interactive datasets: Charged Particles, NBA,
and INTERACTION. We show that the proposed model is able to learn meaningful interaction
features and outperforms state-of-the-art models on these datasets.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction Multi-agent trajectory prediction is an actively researched
problem due to its broad applications in robot planning (Schmerling et al., 2018), traffic predic-
tion (Liao et al., 2018), sport video analysis (Felsen et al., 2017). Recent research have focused on
modeling the relations among agents seeking to improve trajectory prediction. In general, existing
approaches employ common structures such as graph neural network, social-GAN (Mohamed et al.,
2020), attention network, transformer, etc. to learn agent interactions from their motions. Notably,
Kosaraju et al. (Kosaraju et al., 2019) on graph attention network (Veličković et al., 2017) to decide
how much information to share between agents. Kamra et al. (Kamra et al., 2020) developed a ded-
icated attention mechanism for trajectory prediction from the inductive bias of motion and intents.
Kipf et al. (Kipf et al., 2018) proposed neural relational inference (NRI) proposed by taking the
form of a variational auto-encoder;. Jiachen et al. (Li et al., 2020) improved NRI by using graphs
that evolve over time. Although these approaches can capture some interactions among agent, they
lack mechanism to reason the agent priorities, important feature cues to improve trajectory results.

Relation Discovery Another closely related research theme focuses on discovering the Granger-
causal (GC) relationship among agents. SENN (Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018) is the first self-
explanatory network, a class of intrinsically interpretable models, which explains the contributions
concepts (i.e., raw inputs) to predictions. SENN was applied to infer GC relationship via gener-
alized vector autoregression model (GVAR) (Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2021), which captures the GC
relationship via coefficient matrices. These models have shown promising performances to learn


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                ℎ!                        Motion Decoder
                            Motion
                            Encoder                                         $#!      "$,!
                                                     "",!                    2       > 1           >3
                        Inter-agent
                                                                        Motion Prioritization
                           Encoder
 Past trajectory                                                             1             2           3
                                                                                                               Future trajectory
                                                            Φ%           2       3     1       3   1       2

                                                                         Relation Inference


Figure 2: (The overview of our prediction model. Our model consists of three main modules: Motion
Encoder (Section 3.1), Inter-agent Encoder (Section 3.3), and Decoder (Section 3.2) with Motion
Prioritization and Relation Inference (Section 3.4).
agent interaction in simulated environments, where the GC relationships are known and static. Re-
cently, ABM model (Fujii et al., 2021) was proposed to further extend GVAR model to capture
animal interactions such as approaching or repulsing. ABM relies on scientific knowledge and as-
sumes that if an agent goes straight then there is no interactions. For relation discovery in trajectory
prediction, (Makansi et al., 2021) analyzed feature attributes to provide insights on the impacts
of relation feature and discussed its links to causality inference. Recently, M2I (Sun et al., 2022)
learn to predict, but limits to pairs of relations, and only applicable for traffic scenes. Different from
these works, we build a new pipeline and extend relation modeling schemes to discover agent rela-
tions in real-world interacting scenarios. Based on the learned relation structures, agent motions are
prioritized for the purpose of future trajectory prediction.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
In this work, we tackle the problem of multi-agent trajectory prediction. Given the past trajectories
X = [X1 , X2 ..., XN 2 RTo ⇥d ] 2 RN ⇥To ⇥d of N agents with d-dimensional spatial locations in the
past To time steps, we aim to predict their trajectories Y = [Y1 , Y2 , ..., YN 2 RTp ⇥d ] 2 RN ⇥Tp ⇥d
in the next Tp future time steps. The overview of our prediction model is shown in Figure 2. Our
model consists of three main modules: (1) Motion Encoder: encodes historical motion of each
agents. (2) Inter-agent Encoder: encodes interactions among agents; (3) Decoder: infer relations,
prioritize motion, sequentially predict future trajectories of agents. Next, we present the details of
each module.

3.1   M OTION E NCODER

The motion encoder p(h|X) captures the individual movement of agents by learning the hidden
motion feature h 2 RN ⇥dh conditioned on X. We encode the hidden state of each agent i as:
                                      ei = ReLU(Conv1D(Xi )) 2 RTo ⇥C ,                                                      (1)
                                         [oti , hti ] = GRU(ei ), hti 2 Rdh ,                                                (2)
where hti is the hidden motion state of target agent i at current time step t, oti is the output feature of
GRU, C is the size of embedded feature ei .

3.2   M OTION D ECODER

The motion decoder q(Ŷ |h) decodes the future trajectories of each agent i from the learned hidden
motion feature hti . We formulate this decoding process as:
                                            [ot+1
                                              i   , ht+1
                                                     i   ] = GRU(hti ),                                                      (3)
                        [    µt+1
                              i   ,     t+1 t+1
                                        i  , pi ] = fc(ot+1
                                                        i   ); µt+1
                                                                  i   = µti +                  µt+1
                                                                                                i   ,                        (4)
                                      Yit+1 ⇠ N (µt+1
                                                   i  , it+1 , pt+1
                                                                i   ) 2 Rd h ,                                               (5)
where fc is a fully connected layer. To cope with multi-modal nature of future trajectories, we predict
a bivariate Gaussian distribution N (µti , it+1 , pti ) in each future time step t 2 {t0 + 1, ..., t0 + Tp },


                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where µt+1
         i    = (µx , µy )t+1
                          i    , it+1 = ( x , y )t+1
                                                  i  , pti are the mean, standard deviation, and corre-
lation coefficient. We then randomly select K samples from the distribution for the final multiple
trajectories prediction. Due to complex interactions among agents, relying on historical motions is
not adequate for accurate predictions. Thus, in the next stages, we extend the decoder to incorporate
relation features from inter-agent encoder and from the motion prioritization module. The decoder
is formulated as q(Ŷ |h, za , zm ), where za and zm are relation features from inter-agent encoder and
motion prioritization, which will be presented next.

3.3   I NTER - AGENT E NCODER

The encoder pa (za , |X), depicted in Figure 3, learns interpretable relation features za given
the past locations of all agents. It also produces relation matrices (i.e., coefficient matrices)
  , consisting of relation matrix t 2 RN ⇥N at each observed time step t 2 {t0              To +
              i,j is an asymmetric square matrix, which elements indicate the motion impact of
              t
1, ..., t0 }.
an agent on another. Thus, the value of ti,j is high if there is strong motion impact from
agent i to j. In other words, agent i contains rich information that improves future predic-
tion of agent j. Conversely, ti,j = 0 indicates no relation i ! j. The relation matri-
ces are learned during the training process via inducing sparsity loss, introduced in Section 3.4.

                                                    To learn interpretable and meaningful relation
        ℎ$     ⨂     +        +         ⨂     '+,$  matrix, we design an disentangled inter-agent
                                                    encoder, which consists of an interaction-
                                                    based navigation encoder Fn ( n |X) and
            Φ&!'("#$)*               Φ&!     Φ      an interaction-based movement encoder
                                                    Fm ( m |X). Our design is inspired by that
   $
                          "%$                       autonomous agents innately possess common
  "%     ℱ!                    ℱ"                   navigation and movement functions, which
                ⨀                                   enable them an ability to plan the future
                                     ⨀
                                                    movements. While the navigation encoder
   $
  "#     ℱ!               $
                         "#    ℱ"                   captures the relation based on the future
                                                    directions of agents, the movement encoder
                                                    infers the relation based on the strength of
                                                    their movements. Specifically, we imple-
Figure 3: The architecture of Inter-agent encoder. ment our inter-agent encoder following the
                                                    concepts of self-explanatory neural networks
SENN(Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018), and its extensions to to discover causal relationships
(GVAR (Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2021), ABM (Fujii et al., 2021)). These networks consists of a link
function g(·), basis concepts (x), and explainable function ✓(x) to each concept to the predictions.
The general form is:
                              f (x) = g(✓(x)1 (x)1 , ..., ✓(x)u (x)u ).                            (6)

In our work, we consider the concepts (x) being motion feature hi , the relation matrix        t is the
result of explainable function ✓(x), and g(·) is the sum. Equation 6 can be written as:
                                            t0
                                            X
                                t                    t t
                               za,i =                 hi + ✏t , zi 2 Rda .                         (7)
                                        t=t0 To +1

 t
     can be decomposed to tm and tn ; that is t = tm                 n , where
                                                                     t
                                                                                  is element-wise mul-
tiplication, ✏t represent independent noise. Each matrix represents the agent relationships from
motion and navigational perspectives. Formally, tm and tm are learned from motion and naviga-
tion functions as: tm = Fm     t
                                 (X t ) 2 RN di ⇥(N 1)di and tn = Fnt (utn ) 2 RN di ⇥(N 1)di , where
utn = [X t , rt ] 2 Rdu is the input feature, concatenating the observed location X t of all agents and
its relative locations to others rt = [ Xi,j(j6=i) ]. Fm and Fn are neural networks. Equation 7 makes
our relation modeling to capture agent relations in each observed time step, which is different from
NRI (Kipf et al., 2018) and dNRI (Graber & Schwing, 2020). We note that ABM (Fujii et al., 2021))
also shares a similar structure, but with limitations that hinder the ability to extend SENN to work
in human interactive scenarios. The key differences are highlighted below:


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(1) ABM model designs a specific navigation function Fn to capture the relationship of few animal
species, where there relationship occurs within a close distance (i.e., local scope). Thus, this model
does not generalize well to other real-world applications, where the relation could be occurred in
further distance. In this work, we extend the navigation functions to captures relations in both local
and global scopes as: Fn (un ) = &↵ Fnl (uln )+(1 &↵ )Fng (ugn ), where Fnl and Fng are local and global
navigation functions, which capture the relations within local areas and entire scene, respectively.
The contribution of each function is weighted by &↵ , a sigmoid function with learnable parameter
↵; &↵ 2 [0, 1]. We present the implementation and impacts of these functions in the supplementary
material.
(2) While previous models (Fujii et al., 2021; Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2021) infer the causal rela-
tionships without focusing on long-term trajectory prediction task. In contrast, our work focus on
learning interpretable relation, which is meaningful for motion prioritization in the later stage and
the entire pipeline is trained to improve the multi-step future prediction.


3.4   M OTION P RIORITIZATION

The motion prioritization module pm (zm , r| , Ŷ ) learns to prioritize the impact of the agents based
on the learned relation matrix from Inter-agent Encoder. It also produces the future-trajectories
conditioned relational features zm for each agent. We present the details of each module below:


Future-Conditioned Relation Inference Given the learned relational matrix t at each observed
time step t 2 {t0 To + 1, ..., t0 }, we quantify the relation matrix among agents S 2 RN ⇥N as:

                                                        t0
                                                        X
                                                 1                                    2
                                        Si,j =                   (t, t0 )(||   i,j ||2 ),                   (8)
                                                 To
                                                      t0 To +1

                                                                    XN
                              r        Si,j
                             wi,j = PP             ; wi,j 2 [0, 1];      wi,j = 1,                           (9)
                                     j=0,j6=i Si,j                  j6=i


where    =[    t0 To +1
                          , ...,   t0
                                        ], consisting the relation matrix at each observed time step, and   t
                                                                                                                =
        m . Due to the dynamic movements of agents, the recent relation matrix is more relevant to
 t      t
 n
predict future time steps compared to those in further past. To achieve this, we design a temporal
kernel (t, t0 ) = &ar (1/|t0 t| dth ) with &ar is a sigmoid function with gain ar . The kernel
emphasizes the relation feature as it closer to the current time step, and weaken those that is away.
Next, we construct the future-conditioned relation feature zm,i of target agent i as:

                                          ĥj = GRU(Conv1D(Ŷj )) 2 Rdh ,                                   (10)
                                                      r
                                              zm,i = wi,j ⇥ ĥj 2 Rdz .                                     (11)


Motion Prioritization The intuition is that an agent gains higher priority when its motion is less
affected by other’s motion and more impacts on others. In fact, the impact score can be measured
                                                                                   Pj=N
from the relation matrix. We associate each agent with a priority score mi = j=0,j6=i Si,j . Based
on the priority score, we propose to predict future trajectories in order of their priorities. This is to
allow the predicted trajectories of higher prioritized agents have impacts on the ones with lower pri-
orities. Considering motion prioritization, we can extend the motion decoder as q(Ŷ |h, za , zm ). In
fact, the predicted trajectories of each agent can be updated (i.e., refined) multiple times to encourage
the self-corrected among agent’s future trajectories and to fully utilize the future-conditioned rela-
tion features. To implement this idea, we iteratively decodes the future trajectories multiple times
defined by Ns 2 R. Intuitively, if Ns = 0, then there is no updates on predictions. In other words,
the motion prioritization does not have effects. Otherwise, there will be Ns loop over the prioritized
list O = {i, j, ..., N }, where mi      mj . The details of decoding procedure and the impacts of Ns
on prediction accuracy are presented in our supplementary material.


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Loss Function We jointly train the proposed models by using the following losses:
                                   Tp                         To
                                   X                          X
                          L(✓) =        Lpred (Ŷt , Yt ) +        Lsparsity ( ),                  (12)

                                   Lpred = mink (||Yi Yik ||2 ),                                   (13)
                                         1
                             Lsparsity =    (↵|| ||1 + (1 ↵)|| ||2F ),                             (14)
                                         To
where Lpred is the min-over-k mean-square-error (MSE) prediction loss, which encourages diver-
sities among K predictions sampled from the predicted Gaussian distribution. Lsparsity ( t ) is
sparsity-inducing penalty term used to learn the relation matrix. In our implementation, we use the
elastic-net-style penalty term (Nicholson et al., 2017) (Equation 14) with ↵ = 0.5, and || · ||F is the
Frobenius norm.

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We evaluate our model on simulated Charged Particles (Kipf et al., 2018) dataset and two complex
interaction datasets, which commonly favors the applications of robot navigation and autonomous
system: NBA (Yue et al., 2014) and INTERACTION (Zhan et al., 2019).

Charged Particles Charged particles (Kipf et al., 2018) is a simulated deterministic system, which
is controlled by simple physics rules. In each scene, there are 5 charged particles. Each particle has
either a positive or negative charge with equal probability. Particles with the same charge repel each
other, and vise versa. We set T = 100 and To = 80 for each scene. We generate 50K scenes for
training, and 10K each for validation and test respectively.

NBA Dataset This dataset contains tracking data from the 2012-2013 NBA season, and is pro-
vided in (Li et al., 2021). The dataset consist of trajectories of a ball and 10 players from both teams
(i.e., 5 players each team). We preprocess the data such that each scene has 50 frames and spans
approximately 8 seconds of play, and the first 40 frames are historic, i.e. T = 50 and To = 40.

INTERACTION It consists of different realistic and interactive driving scenarios in roundabout,
un-signalized intersection, signalized intersection, merging and lane changing. In total, the dataset is
collected from 11 locations using drones or fixed cameras. We follow the same train/validation/test
splits as proposed by (Zhan et al., 2019). We set To = 30 frames (3 seconds), Tp = 10 frames (1
second).
The evaluations are made in comparison with state-of-the-art models: Social-GAN (Gupta et al.,
2018), Fuzzy Query Attention (FQA) (Kamra et al., 2020), Dynamic Neural Relational Inference
(dNRI) (Graber & Schwing, 2020), and GRIN (Li et al., 2021). We evaluate our model using the
commonly-used metrics: Average Displacement Error (ADE) and Final Displacement Error (FDE),
which are the L2 distance between the ground truth and predicted trajectories, and the L2 distance
between the ground truth final destination and predicted final destination. Following GRIN (Li et al.,
2021), we report the best-of-100 displacement error of each trajectory/destination. We present the
details of comparison models and implementations in the supplementary material.

4.1   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We provide quantitative comparisons with related methods on Charged Particles and NBA datasets
in Table 1. We follow the same experiment setups used on GRIN (Li et al., 2021). Our approach
outperforms relation modeling methods (NRI (Kipf et al., 2018), dNRI (Graber & Schwing, 2020))
in ADE/FDE, which demonstrates the efficacy of discovering agent relations in each observed time
step. Additionally, our model also outperforms state-of-the-art model (Kamra et al., 2020) and
interpretable model (Li et al., 2021) on both datasets by large margins. It concludes that the proposed
prioritization module plays a pivot role in improving prediction accuracy. We perform the ablation
study (see Table 2) to investigate the impact of each model component. The brief description of
each module is as follows: E using only motion encoder/decoder, Fm is the motion encoder; Fn


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Model                Charged Particles    NBA                  Components          Charged Particles    NBA
                                     ADE/FDE          ADE/FDE         E   Fm Fn Re       P ri      ADE/FDE          ADE/FDE
      NRI (Kipf et al., 2018)        0.63/1.30        2.10/4.56       X                            0.51/0.96        1.83/3.46
  dNRI (Graber & Schwing, 2020)      0.94/1.93        2.02/4.52       X        X                   0.50/0.94        1.89/3.52
     FQA (Kamra et al., 2020)        0.82/1.76        2.42/4.81       X   X                        0.46/0.88        1.87/3.50
    S-GAN (Gupta et al., 2018)       0.66/1.25        1.88/3.64       X   X    X                   0.45/0.87        1.87/3.50
      GRIN (Li et al., 2021)         0.52/1.09        1.72/3.59       X   X    X    X              0.48/0.77        1.84/2.99
              Ours                   0.42/0.72        1.66/2.89       X   X    X    X       X      0.42/0.72        1.66/2.89


 Table 1: Comparisons with Other Relation based Table 2: Ablation Study on Charged Particles
 Trajectory Prediction Models.                  and NBA Dataset.


      (a) Ground truth                 (b) Prediction                 (c) Relation matrix            (d) Ground truth

Figure 4: Qualitative results on Charged Particles dataset. Darker colours corresponds to weak
relation between agents in relation matrix.


is the navigation encoder, Re is future-conditioned relation inference, Pri is motion prioritization
module. We can see that the relation-based navigation encoder(i.e., E + Fn ) and relation-based
motion encoder (i.e., E + Fm ) show their positive impacts when reducing the prediction errors
on Charge Particles compared to the variant only individual motion encoder E. However, it is
interesting to observe that these variants worsen the results on NBA sport dataset. It is reasonable
because the NBA consist of mostly realistic and complex interactions among players. The players
make strategy movements based on the future movements of other higher prioritized players. This
explains why adding relational inference (i.e., module Re) to condition one player’s movements on
other’s future trajectories helps reduce the prediction errors. Interestingly, our full model with Pri
(last row) shows best results overall. This indicates that each player has different motion impact that
affects other players’ movements in NBA sport games.

4.2    Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We show the qualitative results consisting of the predicted trajectory and learned relation matrix.
In Figure 4 the charged particles preserve very interesting swirling interactions, such as among two
particles 2 and 4 in the first row, and two groups of swirling particles (1,4), and (0,3) in second
row. The learned relation matrices show that these interactions can be captured in the corresponding
squares (1,3), (3,1), (4, 2), (2,4) for the first scenario, and (3,0), (0,3) (1,4), (4,1) for the second
scenario. We note that the stronger relation among agents, the more yellowish (i.e., Sij ! 1) in the
corresponding square in the relation matrix, while blue (Sij ! 0) indicates there is no relation.
In NBA dataset, we observe several interesting interaction scenarios, shown in Figure 5. In the first
row, there are several notable interaction pairs (2,7), (0, 5), (4,9) captured in our relation matrix. It
can be observed that in this scenario player 7 is following along with player 2, moving from one
side to another side of the court. At the same time, players 5, 9 play defense against players 0 and
4, respectively. In second row, our model learns there are group of motion among players (0, 6, 8,
1, 7, 3), where player 0 has dominant motion impact on other players. In the last row, there are two


                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    ADE               FDE
                             Models               1/20/100         FDE 1/20/100
                     GRIN (Li et al., 2021)     1.80/1.27/0.67     3.31/2.33/1.26
                            Ours                1.46/1.16/0.61     2.69/2.11/1.22

Table 3: Quantitative results on INTERACTION datasets with different number of prediction sam-
ples 1/20/100.


main groups (1,7) and (2,9, 4 ,5 6,), especially player 9 plays large attention to player 2 as player 9
is defending against player 2, who is trying to score.


        (a) Ground truth       (b) Prediction         (c) Priority map       (d) Relation matrix

Figure 5: Qualitative results on NBA dataset. Offensive team (i.e., controlling the ball) is colored in
red, defensive team is colored in blue. The ball is colored in black. Solid line represents observed
trajectory. Dotted line represents predicted trajectory. In priority map, the larger circles represent
higher priority scores of agents.



4.3   R ESULTS ON INTERACTION DATASET

In this section, we present our evaluation on INTERACTION dataset in comparisons with GRIN (Li
et al., 2021) on different number of prediction samples: 1, 20, 100, as reported in Table 3. Both mod-
els are trained with 100 epochs. Overall, our model outperforms GRIN model in both ADE/FDE in
different number of predicted trajectories. Finally, we provide visualization on different driving sce-
narios such as intersection, roundabout and merging in INTERACTION dataset, shown in Figure 6.
Generally, interaction types such as following, or yielding are very common in driving scenarios.
The results show that our model is able to capture these types of interactions in several scenarios.
As we can see that in first row (intersection scenarios), agent 2 is waiting for agent 0 and 1 to pass
before it can turn left. Meanwhile, agent 1 makes a slight interaction (i.e., yield) to agent 3. In the
roundabout scenarios (second row), the most notable interaction is between 2 and 4. In this scenario,
agent 2 is waiting for agent 4 to cross, before it can go into the roundabout section. In the last row,
there is interesting merging scenarios from 4 to 3. and agent 3 following 2 when there merge from


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a) Trajectory prediction                (a) Priority map                (a) Relation matrix

Figure 6: Visualizations from scenarios: intersection (first row), roundabout (second row), and
merging (third row) in INTERACTION dataset.


3 to 2 lanes. In addition, the priority map for each scenario indicates the agent’s importance, which
provides meaning cues for improving trajectory prediction.

5   L IMITATIONS
Although we have demonstrated that the proposed model has successfully captured several inter-
action behavior in the given datasets, discovering causalities in realistic scenarios such as in au-
tonomous driving is still challenging. As a possible solution, exploring scientific knowledge about
traffics and the priorities of different agent types could be incorporated to improve the model accu-
racy. Secondly, our model discovers relations and prioritization from bird-eye views, which provides
a global-view relation agents. However, robots or ego-vehicles also observe the relations with sur-
rounding agent from the front camera views. Thus, the future work of considering fusing relations
from different views can be explored to strengthen the relation features. Lastly, discovering relation
and trajectory prediction (if the identity of subject is known, which is not the case in our work) can
raise issues regarding privacy sensitivity.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a novel multi-agent trajectory prediction. Our model discovers inter-
pretable interaction feature from historical trajectories of all agents. We also developed motion
prioritization module, which prioritize those agents which have higher impacts on other future mo-
tions. Based on the prioritized scores, the decoder makes sequential prediction of each agents with
iterative predictions. In broader impacts, our prediction could be used to infer relations in other
scenarios such as human motions, or inferring robot-human interactions and predictions.

R EFERENCES
Alexandre Alahi, Kratarth Goel, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alexandre Robicquet, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio
  Savarese. Social lstm: Human trajectory prediction in crowded spaces. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 961–971, 2016.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David Alvarez Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. Towards robust interpretability with self-explaining
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Panna Felsen, Pulkit Agrawal, and Jitendra Malik. What will happen next? forecasting player
  moves in sports videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
  pp. 3342–3351, 2017.
Keisuke Fujii, Naoya Takeishi, Kazushi Tsutsui, Emyo Fujioka, Nozomi Nishiumi, Ryoya Tanaka,
  Mika Fukushiro, Kaoru Ide, Hiroyoshi Kohno, Ken Yoda, et al. Learning interaction rules from
  multi-animal trajectories via augmented behavioral models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Colin Graber and Alexander Schwing. Dynamic neural relational inference for forecasting trajecto-
  ries. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  Workshops, pp. 1018–1019, 2020.
Agrim Gupta, Justin Johnson, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, and Alexandre Alahi. Social gan: So-
  cially acceptable trajectories with generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2255–2264, 2018.
Nitin Kamra, Hao Zhu, Dweep Kumarbhai Trivedi, Ming Zhang, and Yan Liu. Multi-agent trajectory
  prediction with fuzzy query attention. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  22530–22541, 2020.
Thomas Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. Neural relational
  inference for interacting systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2688–
  2697. PMLR, 2018.
Vineet Kosaraju, Amir Sadeghian, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Ian Reid, Hamid Rezatofighi, and Silvio
  Savarese. Social-bigat: Multimodal trajectory forecasting using bicycle-gan and graph attention
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jiachen Li, Fan Yang, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Chiho Choi. Evolvegraph: Heterogeneous multi-
   agent multi-modal trajectory prediction with evolving interaction graphs. 2020.
Longyuan Li, Jian Yao, Li Wenliang, Tong He, Tianjun Xiao, Junchi Yan, David Wipf, and Zheng
  Zhang. Grin: Generative relation and intention network for multi-agent trajectory prediction.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Binbing Liao, Jingqing Zhang, Chao Wu, Douglas McIlwraith, Tong Chen, Shengwen Yang, Yike
  Guo, and Fei Wu. Deep sequence learning with auxiliary information for traffic prediction. In
  Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
  Data Mining, pp. 537–546, 2018.
Osama Makansi, Julius Von Kügelgen, Francesco Locatello, Peter Gehler, Dominik Janzing,
  Thomas Brox, and Bernhard Schölkopf. You mostly walk alone: Analyzing feature attribution in
  trajectory prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05304, 2021.
Ričards Marcinkevičs and Julia E Vogt. Interpretable models for granger causality using self-
  explaining neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07600, 2021.
Abduallah Mohamed, Kun Qian, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Christian Claudel. Social-stgcnn: A so-
  cial spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for human trajectory prediction. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14424–
  14432, 2020.
William B Nicholson, David S Matteson, and Jacob Bien. Varx-l: Structured regularization for large
 vector autoregressions with exogenous variables. International Journal of Forecasting, 33(3):
 627–651, 2017.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
  The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Edward Schmerling, Karen Leung, Wolf Vollprecht, and Marco Pavone. Multimodal probabilistic
  model-based planning for human-robot interaction. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3399–3406. IEEE, 2018.
Qiao Sun, Xin Huang, Junru Gu, Brian C Williams, and Hang Zhao. M2i: From factored marginal
  trajectory prediction to interactive prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6543–6552, 2022.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
Yisong Yue, Patrick Lucey, Peter Carr, Alina Bialkowski, and Iain Matthews. Learning fine-grained
  spatial models for dynamic sports play prediction. In 2014 IEEE international conference on data
  mining, pp. 670–679. IEEE, 2014.
Wei Zhan, Liting Sun, Di Wang, Haojie Shi, Aubrey Clausse, Maximilian Naumann, Julius Kum-
 merle, Hendrik Konigshof, Christoph Stiller, Arnaud de La Fortelle, et al. Interaction dataset:
 An international, adversarial and cooperative motion dataset in interactive driving scenarios with
 semantic maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03088, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIALS :
AGENT P RIORITIZATION WITH I NTERPRETABLE R E -
LATION FOR T RAJECTORY P REDICTION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



In this supplementary material, we first provide the details of Inter-Agent encoder (Section 1).
We then discuss algorithm of future trajectory decoding process with motion prioritization (Sec-
tion 2). We further provide the implementation and training details of our model(Section 3) and
additional qualitative results (Section 4) on Charged Particles Graber & Schwing (2020), NBA Yue
et al. (2014), and INTERACTION Zhan et al. (2019) datasets.

1    D ETAILS OF I NTER -AGENT E NCODER
We introduced in our main paper that the Inter-Agent encoder consists of movement function Fm
and navigation function Fn , which capture agent relations from motion and navigation perspectives,
inspired by animal movements Nathan et al. (2008); Fujii et al. (2021). Specifically, each function
produces a relation matrix ( m and n ), where each element of m (produced by Fm ) represents
the amplitude of interaction, and each element of n (produced by n ) represents the sign of in-
teractions (e.g., positive : two agents approach, negative: two agents repulse). To further extend
the model to generalize well to real-world robot applications, where the relation could be occurred
in further distance. We implement our navigation function to capture interaction from local and
global scopes, which capture the relations within local areas and entire scene, respective. Thus, Fn
can be decomposed into local function Fnl and global function Fng . The local function Fnl capture
interaction with emphasies given a pre-defined thershold dignore as follows:
                                                1                                  1
                        FNL (un ) = &ad (                dignore )(&av (v i,j        ) ⇥ 2,               (1)
                                            ||ri,j ||2                             2

while the global function capture the interaction in entire scene (without threshold).
                                                       1                      1
                            FNG (un ) = &ad (                  )(&av (v i,j     ) ⇥ 2,                    (2)
                                                 ||ri,j || ⇤ 2                2
where &ad and &av are sigmoid functions with gain ad and av , respectively; dignore is a threshold for
defining the local area. Thus, if the distance of two agents are greater than dignore , then there is no
interaction. ri,j = rj ri is the relative distance of agent j to agent i with ri = (xi , yi )T . v i,j is the
velocity of agent i (i.e., v i ) in the direction of rij , thus &av (v i,j 12 ) ⇥ 2 sign represents of effects
of j on i. Then, the navigation function is formulated as:
                                FN (hi ) = &↵ FNL (hi ) + (1          &↵ )FNG (hi ),                      (3)
where &↵ is a sigmoid function with learnable parameter &↵ 2 [0, 1].
In addition to our ablation studies presented in (Section 4, Table 2 in main paper), we validate
the impact of the proposed navigation functions on trajectory prediction. In this experiment, we
train/test the different variants of Inter-Agent encoder on Charged Particles dataset. As shown in
Table 1, we can observe that local navigation function Fnl and Fng both improves the prediction
accuracy. This indicates the important roles of these functions in our model.

2    D ETAILS OF D ECODING A LGORITHM
We present the details of trajectory decoding process with motion prioritization in Algorithm 1. We
note that the predicted trajectories of each agent can be updated (i.e., refined) multiple times to


                                                         1
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Table 1: Comparisons with other relation based trajectory prediction models.

                                     Model             Charged Particles
                                                            ADE              FDE
                             GRIN Li et al. (2021)           0.52            1.09
                                      E                      0.54            1.01
                                   E + Fm                    0.52            0.95
                                 E + Fm + Fnl                0.50            0.94
                              E + Fm + Fnl + Fng             0.48            0.93


        Figure 1: Analysis of number of iterations (Ns on Charge Particles (left) and NBA (right).

    encourage the correction among agent’s future trajectories and to fully utilize the future-conditioned
    relation features. To implement this idea, we iteratively decodes the future trajectories multiple
    times defined by Ns . For example, if the prioritized list of agent is O = {3, 2, 1, 4, 5}, with 3 is
    the agent with highest priority, 5 is the lowest one. One iteration (i.e., Ns = 1) corresponds to a
    sequential prediction in order of 3 ! 2 ! 1 ! 4 ! 5. This allows the predicted trajectories of
    agent with higher priority influences on trajectories of agent with lower priority. We study the impact
    of different number of iterations to update the future trajectories, shown in Figure 1. It is interesting
    to observe that only one step of refinement is enough to achieve the best prediction on Charged
    Particles. On NBA dataset, although we achieve best results at 5 iterations, the results also seem to
    be saturated in the first iteration. This concludes that relational features has been fully shared from
    the higher-prioritized agent to the lower one in list of prioritized agent in the first iteration.

    Algorithm 1: Algorithm for trajectory prediction with motion prioritization
  Input: List of relational matrices = [ t0 To +1 , . . . , t0 ] in To historical time-steps
  Output: Predicted trajectories Y = [Y1 , Y2 , ..., YN 2 RTp ⇥d ] of all N agents in the next Tp
             future time steps.
1 Calculate relational weights using Equation 9.
                                                                        Pj=N
2 Estimate the priority score (i.e., impactness) for each agent. mi =
                                                                           j=0,j6=i Si,j
3 Rank agents with priority scores in descending order: O = {i, j, ..., N }: ordered list of agents,
   where mi mj .
4 for step in Ns do
5     for i in O do
6         Calculate relational feature fir for target agent i using Equation 10 and 11.
7         Update predicted trajectory
8         Yi0 = fc(GRU([ĥi , zm,i ])
9   .


    3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

    We implement our model using PyTorch Pytorch (2018), which has BSD-style license. We train the
    model with the Adam Zhang (2018) optimizer with the learning rate of 0.0001 and 100 epochs. The


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     t=10


     t=60


     t=120


    t=240


                 (a) Ground truth       (b) Prediction     (c) Relation Matrix   (d) Ground-truth

                 Figure 2: Additional qualitative results on Charge Particles dataset
batch size is 128. For all datasets, we implement the movement encoders with 2 MLP layers, each
has hidden size of 50. The hidden size of GRU in both encoders and decoders is 48. In the training
loss, we set ↵ = 0.5, and = 1.

4   A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
In this section, we present additional qualitative results on three datasets: Charged Particles, NBA,
INTERACTION.

Results on Charged Particles Figure 2 shows the trajectory prediction and the learned relation
matrix at different time steps. We observe that at different time steps, particles involves in different
interactions. For example, at t=10 and t=60, there are mainly swirling interactions between particles
(2, 4) and (1, 3). At t=120, particle 3 reaches toward particle 0, and then goes further away at t=240.
The learned relation matrix show that these subtle movements and interactions can be captured.

Results on NBA Next, we show predictions and priority scores of players in basketball games
(Figure 3). NBA dataset consists of highly complex interactions among players. In the first scenario,
player 0 and 4 in offensive team (red) have higher priority score (i.e., higher impact) as the player 0
is passing the ball to player 4; thus, their movements highly influence others’ motions. In the second
scenario, player 0 holding the ball but does not have large impact; this is because the motions of
the ball and player 0 is not changing much. Other players may suspect that the player 0 could pass
the ball to other offensive players. Thus, the movements of other players in the red team are more
important to observe. Interestingly, player 2 has the most critical move and thus it generates the
largest impact on other players.

Results on INTERACTION We further visualize the trajectory prediction, priority map, and re-
lation matrix for two interactive scenarios: merging and roundabout in Figure 4. We can see that our
model can capture intriguing relation matrix and learns the motion importance of agent effectively.
In the merging scenarios (top row), agent 2 gains highest importance as it is going to merge and have
high relations with others agents in front (agent 1), and behind (agent 3). In the roundabout scenario
(bottom row), we observe two groups: (1,3) and (0,2,4) on different sides of the roundabout. In-
terestingly, we can see that the relation between agent 0 (pedestrian) and agent 2 (vehicle) can be


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Ground truth          Prediction              Priority map       Ground truth            Prediction              Priority Map

Figure 3: Qualitative results on NBA dataset. Offensive team (i.e., controlling the ball) is colored in
red, defensive team is colored in blue. The ball is colored in black. Solid line represents observed
trajectory. Dotted line represents predicted trajectory. In priority map, the larger circles represent
higher priority scores of agents.


                         merging


                 pedestrian



                   (a) Trajectory prediction                           (b) Priority map                (c) Relation matrix


                Figure 4: Additional qualitative results on INTERACTION dataset.


captured even though they still far-way. The agent 2 gains most motion priority within the group
(0,2,4) because it has relationship with both agent 4 and 0.

R EFERENCES
Keisuke Fujii, Naoya Takeishi, Kazushi Tsutsui, Emyo Fujioka, Nozomi Nishiumi, Ryoya Tanaka,
  Mika Fukushiro, Kaoru Ide, Hiroyoshi Kohno, Ken Yoda, et al. Learning interaction rules from
  multi-animal trajectories via augmented behavioral models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Colin Graber and Alexander Schwing. Dynamic neural relational inference for forecasting trajecto-
  ries. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  Workshops, pp. 1018–1019, 2020.
Longyuan Li, Jian Yao, Li Wenliang, Tong He, Tianjun Xiao, Junchi Yan, David Wipf, and Zheng
  Zhang. Grin: Generative relation and intention network for multi-agent trajectory prediction.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Ran Nathan, Wayne M Getz, Eloy Revilla, Marcel Holyoak, Ronen Kadmon, David Saltz, and
  Peter E Smouse. A movement ecology paradigm for unifying organismal movement research.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(49):19052–19059, 2008.
Automatic Differentiation In Pytorch. Pytorch, 2018.
Yisong Yue, Patrick Lucey, Peter Carr, Alina Bialkowski, and Iain Matthews. Learning fine-grained
  spatial models for dynamic sports play prediction. In 2014 IEEE international conference on data
  mining, pp. 670–679. IEEE, 2014.
Wei Zhan, Liting Sun, Di Wang, Haojie Shi, Aubrey Clausse, Maximilian Naumann, Julius Kum-
 merle, Hendrik Konigshof, Christoph Stiller, Arnaud de La Fortelle, et al. Interaction dataset:
 An international, adversarial and cooperative motion dataset in interactive driving scenarios with
 semantic maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03088, 2019.
Zijun Zhang. Improved adam optimizer for deep neural networks. In 2018 IEEE/ACM 26th Inter-
  national Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), pp. 1–2. Ieee, 2018.


                                                              4
