Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DATASET P RUNING : R EDUCING T RAINING DATA BY
E XAMINING G ENERALIZATION I NFLUENCE
 Shuo Yang1 Zeke Xie2 Hanyu Peng2 Min Xu1 Mingming Sun2 Ping Li2
 1
   School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney
 2
   Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research



                                             A BSTRACT
         The great success of deep learning heavily relies on increasingly larger training
         data, which comes at a price of huge computational and infrastructural costs. This
         poses crucial questions that, do all training data contribute to model’s performance?
         How much does each individual training sample or a sub-training-set affect the
         model’s generalization, and how to construct the smallest subset from the entire
         training data as a proxy training set without significantly sacrificing the model’s
         performance? To answer these, we propose dataset pruning, an optimization-based
         sample selection method that can (1) examine the influence of removing a particular
         set of training samples on model’s generalization ability with theoretical guarantee,
         and (2) construct the smallest subset of training data that yields strictly constrained
         generalization gap. The empirically observed generalization gap of dataset pruning
         is substantially consistent with our theoretical expectations. Furthermore, the
         proposed method prunes 40% training examples on the CIFAR-10 dataset, halves
         the convergence time with only 1.3% test accuracy decrease, which is superior to
         previous score-based sample selection methods.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The great advances in deep learning over the past decades have been powered by ever-bigger models
crunching ever-bigger amounts of data. However, this success comes at a price of huge computational
and infrastructural costs for network training, network inference, hyper-parameter tuning, and model
architecture search. While lots of research efforts seek to reduce the network inference cost by
pruning redundant parameters Blalock et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2018); Molchanov et al. (2019), scant
attention has been paid to the data redundant problem, which is crucial for network training and
parameter tuning efficiency.
Investigating the data redundant problem not only helps to improve the training efficiency, but also
helps us understand the representation ability of small data and how many training samples is required
and sufficient for a learning system. Previous literatures on subset selection try to sort and select
a fraction of training data according to a scalar score computed based on some criterions, such as
the distance to class center Welling (2009); Rebuffi et al. (2017); Castro et al. (2018); Belouadah &
Popescu (2020), the distance to other selected examples Wolf (2011); Sener & Savarese (2018b),
the forgetting score Toneva et al. (2019a), and the gradient norm Paul et al. (2021). However, these
methods are (a) heuristic and lack of theoretically guaranteed generalization for the selected data,
also (b) discard the joint effect, i.e., the norm of averaged gradient vector of two high-gradient-norm
samples could be zero if the direction of these two samples’ gradient is opposite.
To go beyond these limitations, a natural ask is, how much does a combination of particular training
examples contribute to the model’s generalization ability? However, simply evaluating the test
performance drop caused by removing each possible subset is not acceptable. Because it requires to
re-train the model for 2n times given a dataset with size n. Therefore, the key challenges of dataset
pruning are: (1) how to efficiently estimate the generalization influence of all possible subsets without
iteratively re-training the model, and (2) how to identify the smallest subset of the original training
data with strictly constrained generalization gap.
In this work, we present an optimization-based dataset pruning method that can identify the largest
redundant subset from the entire training dataset with (a) theoretically guaranteed generalization gap


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and (b) consideration of the joint influence of all collected data. Specifically, we define the parameter
influence of a training example as the model’s parameter change caused by omitting the example
from training. The parameter influence can be linearly approximated without re-training the model by
Influence Function Koh & Liang (2017a). Then, we formulate the subset selection as a constrained
discrete optimization problem with an objective of maximizing the number of collected samples, and
a constraint of penalizing the network parameter change caused by removing the collected subset
within a given threshold ϵ. We then conduct extensive theoretical and empirical analysis to show
that the generalization gap of the proposed dataset pruning can be upper bounded by the pre-defined
threshold ϵ. Superior to previous score-based sample selection methods, our proposed method prunes
40% training examples in CIFAR-10 Krizhevsky (2009), halves the convergence time, and achieves
only 1.3% test accuracy drop. Before delving into details, we summarize our contributions as below:

    • This paper proposes a dataset pruning problem, which extends the sample selection problem
      from cardinality constraint to generalization constraint. Specifically, previous sample selection
      methods find a data subset with fixed size budget and try to improve their performance, while
      dataset pruning tries to identify the smallest subset that satisfies the expected generalization
      ability.
    • This paper proposes to leverage the influence function to approximate the network parameter
      change caused by omitting each individual training example. Then an optimization-based method
      is proposed to identify the largest subset that satisfies the expected parameter change.
    • We prove that the generalization gap caused by removing the identified subset can be up-bounded
      by the network parameter change that was strictly constrained during the dataset pruning proce-
      dure. The observed empirical result is substantially consistent with our theoretical expectation.
    • The experimental results on dataset pruning and neural architecture search (NAS) demonstrate
      that the proposed dataset pruning method is extremely effective on improving the network training
      and architecture search efficiency.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section. 2, we briefly review existing sample
selection and dataset condensation research, where we will discuss the major differences between our
proposed dataset pruning and previous methods. In Section. 3, we present the formal definition of
the dataset pruning problem. In Section. 4 and Section. 5, our optimization-based dataset pruning
method and its generalization bound are introduced. In Section. 6, we conduct extensive experiments
to verify the validity of the theoretical result and the effectiveness of dataset pruning. Finally, in
Section. 7, we conclude our paper.

2      R ELATED W ORKS

Dataset pruning is orthogonal to few-shot learning Finn et al. (2017); Vinyals et al. (2016); Snell et al.
(2017); Chen et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2020); Yang et al. (2021a;b). Few-shot learning aims at
improving the performance given limited training data, while dataset pruning aims at reducing the
training data without hurting the performance much.
Dataset pruning is closely related to the data selection methods, which try to identify the most
representative training samples. Classical data selection methods Agarwal et al. (2004); Har-Peled
& Mazumdar (2004); Feldman et al. (2013) focus on clustering problems. Recently, more and
more data selection methods have been proposed in continual learning Rebuffi et al. (2017); Toneva
et al. (2019b); Castro et al. (2018); Aljundi et al. (2019) and active learning Sener & Savarese
(2018a) to identify which example needs to be stored or labeled. The data selection methods
typically rely on a pre-defined criterion to compute a scalar score for each training example, e.g. the
compactness Rebuffi et al. (2017); Castro et al. (2018), diversity Sener & Savarese (2018b); Aljundi
et al. (2019), forgetfulness Toneva et al. (2019b), or the gradient norm Paul et al. (2021), then rank
and select the training data according to the computed score. However, these methods are heuristic
and lack of generalization guarantee, they also discard the influence interaction between the collected
samples. Our proposed dataset pruning method overcomes these shortcomings.
Another line of works on reducing the training data is dataset distillation Wang et al. (2018); Such et al.
(2020); Sucholutsky & Schonlau (2019); Bohdal et al. (2020); Nguyen et al. (2021a;b); Cazenavette
et al. (2022) or dataset condensation Zhao et al. (2021); Zhao & Bilen (2021a;b); Wang et al. (2022);


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jin et al. (2021; 2022). This series of works focus on synthesizing a small but informative dataset as
an alternative to the original large dataset. For example, Dataset Distillation Wang et al. (2018) try
to learn the synthetic dataset by directly minimizing the classification loss on the real training data
of the neural networks trained on the synthetic data. Cazenavette et al. (2022) proposed to learn the
synthetic images by matching the training trajectories. Zhao et al. (2021); Zhao & Bilen (2021a;b)
proposed to learn the synthetic images by matching the gradients and features. However, due to the
computational power limitation, these methods usually only synthesize an extremely small number
of examples (e.g. 50 images per class) and the performance is far from satisfactory. Therefore, the
performances of dataset distillation and dataset pruning are not directly comparable.
Our method is inspired by Influence Function Koh & Liang (2017a) in statistical machine learning.
Removing a training example from the training dataset and not damage the generalization indicates
that the example has a small influence on the expected test loss. Earlier works focused on studying
the influence of removing training points from linear models, and later works extended this to more
general models Hampel et al. (2011); Cook (1986); Thomas & Cook (1990); Chatterjee & Hadi
(1986); Wei et al. (1998). Liu et al. (2014) used influence functions to study model robustness and to
fo fast cross-validation in kernel methods. Kabra et al. (2015) defined a different notion of influence
that is specialized to finite hypothesis classes. Koh & Liang (2017a) studied the influence of weighting
an example on model’s parameters. Borsos et al. (2020) proposes to construct a coreset by learning
a per-sample weight score, the proposed selection rule eventually converge to the formulation of
influence function Koh & Liang (2017b). But different with our work, Borsos et al. (2020) did not
directly leverage the influence function to select examples and cannot guarantee the generalization of
the selected examples.


3    P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Given a large-scale dataset D = {z1 , . . . , zn } containing n training points where zi = (xi , yi ) ∈
X × Y, X is the input space and Y is the label space. The goal of dataset pruning is to identify a set
of redundant training samples from D as many as possible and remove them to reduce the training
cost. The identified redundant subset, D̂ = {ẑ1 , . . . , ẑm } and D̂ ⊂ D, should have a minimal impact
on the learned model, i.e. the test performances of the models learned on the training sets before and
after pruning should be very close, as described below:

                                 Ez∼P (D) L(z, θ̂) ≃ Ez∼P (D) L(z, θ̂−D̂ )                                (1)


where P (D) is the data distribution, L is the loss function, and θ̂ and θ̂−D̂ are the empiri-
cal risk minimizers on the training set D before and after pruning D̂, respectively, i.e., θ̂ =
arg minθ∈Θ n1 zi ∈D L(zi , θ) and θ̂−D̂ = arg minθ∈Θ n−m      1
                 P                                               P
                                                                   zi ∈D\D̂ L(zi , θ). Considering the
neural network is a locally smooth function Rifai et al. (2012); Goodfellow et al. (2014); Zhao
et al. (2021), similar weights (θ ≈ θ̂) imply similar mappings in a local neighborhood and thus
generalization performance. Therefore, we can achieve Eq. 1 by obtaining a θ̂−D̂ that is very close
to θ̂ (the distance between θ̂−D̂ and θ̂ is smaller than a given very small value ϵ). To this end, we
first define the dataset pruning problem on the perspective of model parameter change, we will later
provide the theoretical evidence that the generalization gap in Eq. 1 can be upper bounded by the
parameter change in Section. 5.
Definition 1 (ϵ-redundant subset.). Given a dataset D = {z1 , . . . , zn } containing n training
points where zi = (xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y, considering D̂ is a subset of D where D̂ = {ẑ1 , . . . , ẑm },
D̂ ⊂ D.    We say D̂ is an ϵ-redundant subset of D if θ̂−D̂ − θ̂       ≤ ϵ, where θ̂−D̂ =
                                                                   2
            1                                         1
               P                                        P
arg minθ∈Θ n−m zi ∈D\D̂ L(zi , θ) and θ̂ = arg minθ∈Θ n zi ∈D L(zi , θ), then write D̂ as D̂ϵ .

Dataset Pruning: Given a dataset D, dataset pruning aims at finding its largest ϵ-redundant subset
D̂ϵmax , i.e., ∀D̂ϵ ⊂ D, |D̂ϵmax | ≥ |D̂ϵ |, so that the pruned dataset can be constructed as D̃ = D\ D̂ϵmax .


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     M ETHOD

To achieve the goal of dataset pruning, we need to evaluate the model’s parameter change θ̂−D̂ − θ̂
                                                                                                      2
caused by removing each possible subset of D. However, it is impossible to re-train the model for
2n times to obtain D̂ϵmax for a given dataset D with size n. In this section, we propose to efficiently
approximate the D̂ϵmax without the need to re-train the model.

4.1   PARAMETER I NFLUENCE E STIMATION

We start from studying the model parameter change of removing each single training sample
                  P set D. The change can be formally written as θ̂−z − θ̂, where θ̂−z =
z from the training
               1
arg minθ∈Θ n−1       zi ∈D,zi ̸=z L(zi , θ). Estimating the parameter change for each training exam-
ple by re-training the model for n times is also unacceptable time-consuming, because n is usually
on the order of tens or even hundreds of thousands.
Alternatively, the researches of Influence Function Cook (1977); Cook & Weisberg (1980); Cook
(1986); Cook & Weisberg (1982); Koh & Liang (2017a) provide us an accurate and fast estimation
of the parameter change caused by weighting an example z for training. Considering a training
example z was weighted by a small δ during training, the empirical risk minimizer can be written as
θ̂δ,z = arg minθ∈Θ n1 zi ∈D L (zi , θ) + δL (z, θ). Assigning − n1 to δ is equivalent to removing the
                       P
training example z. Then, the influence of weighting z on the parameters is given by

                                           dθ̂δ,z
                            Iparam (z) =           = −Hθ̂−1 ∇θ L(z, θ̂)                             (2)
                                            dδ δ=0

where Hθ̂ = n1 zi ∈D ∇2θ L(zi , θ̂) is the Hessian and positive definite by assumption, Iparam (z) ∈
                P

RN , N is the number of network parameters. The proof of Eq.equation 2 can be found in Koh &
Liang (2017a). Then, we can linearly approximate the parameter change due to removing z without
retraining the model by computing θ̂−z − θ̂ ≈ − n1 Iparam (z) = n1 Hθ̂−1 ∇θ L(z, θ̂). Similarly, we can
approximate the parameter change caused by removing a subset D̂ by accumulating the parameter
change of removing each example, θ̂−D̂ − θ̂ ≈ zi ∈D̂ − n1 Iparam (zi ) = zi ∈D̂ n1 Hθ̂−1 ∇θ L(zi , θ̂).
                                             P                          P

The accumulated individual influence can accurately reflect the influence of removing a group of
data, as proved in Koh et al. (2019).

4.2   DATASET P RUNING AS D ISCRETE O PTIMIZATION

Combining definition 1 and the parameter influence function (Eq. equation 2), it is easy to derive
                                                                    1
                                                         P
that if the parameter influence of a subset D̂ satisfies   zi ∈D̂ − n Iparam (zi ) ≤ ϵ, then it is an
                                                                                    2
ϵ-redundant subset of D. Denote S = {− n1 Iparam (z1 ), · · · , − n1 Iparam (zn )}, to find the largest
                                                                                 1
ϵ-redundant subset D̂ϵmax that satisfies the conditions of (1)
                                                                P
                                                                    zi ∈D̂ max − n I(zi )
                                                                         ϵ
                                                                                           ≤ ϵ and (2)
                                                                                        2
∀D̂ϵ ⊂ D, |D̂ϵmax | ≥ |D̂ϵ | simultaneously, we formulate the generalization-guaranteed dataset
pruning as a discrete optimization problem as below (a):
(a) generalization-guaranteed pruning:                (b) cardinality-guaranteed pruning:
                         n
                         X                                       minimize      WTS 2
           maximize            Wi                                   W
               W                                                              n
                         i=1                                                  X
                                                (3)              subject to         Wi = m          (4)
           subject to     WTS 2 ≤ ϵ                                           i=1
                        W ∈ {0, 1}n                                           W ∈ {0, 1}n
where W is a discrete variable that is needed to be optimized. For each dimension i, Wi = 1
indicates the training sample zi is selected into D̂ϵmax , while Wi = 0 indicates the training sample
zi is not pruned. After solving W in Eq .3, the largest ϵ-redundant subset can be constructed as
D̂ϵmax = {zi |∀zi ∈ D, Wi = 1}. For some scenarios when we need to specify the removed subset


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Generalization guaranteed dataset pruning.
Require: Dataset D = {z1 , . . . , zn }
Require: Random initialized network θ;
Require: Expected generalization drop ϵ;
 1: θ̂ = arg minθ∈Θ n1
                            P
                               zi ∈D L(zi , θ);                                                //compute ERM on D
 2: Initialize S = ϕ;
 3: for i = 1, 2, . . . , n do
 4:    Si = − n1 Iparam (zi ) = n1 Hθ̂−1 ∇θ L(zi , θ̂);         //store the parameter influence of each example
 5: end for
 6: Initialize W ∈ {0, 1}n ;
 7: Solve the following problem to get W :
                                                         n
                                                         X
                                       maximize                 Wi                      //maximize the subset size
                                              W
                                                          i=1
                                       subject to          WTS 2 ≤ ϵ            //guarantee the generalization drop
                                                                        n
                                                         W ∈ {0, 1}

 8: Construct the largest ϵ-redundant subset D̂ϵmax = {zi |∀zi ∈ D, Wi = 1};
 9: return Pruned dataset: D̃ = D \ D̂ϵmax ;



size m and want to minimize their influence on parameter change, we provide cardinality-guaranteed
dataset pruning in Eq. 4.

5    G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS

In this section, we theoretically formulate the generalization guarantee of the minimizer given by the
pruned dataset. Our theoretical analysis suggests that the proposed dataset pruning method have a
relatively tight upper bound on the expected test loss, given a small enough ϵ.
For simplicity, we first assume that we prune only one training sample z (namely, δ is one-
dimensional). Following the classical results, we may write the influence function of the test
loss as

                      dL ztest , θ̂z,δ                           dθ̂δ,z
  Iloss (ztest , z) =                        = ∇θ L(ztest , θ̂)⊤            = ∇θ L(ztest , θ̂)⊤ Iparam (z)
                           dδ            δ=0                      dδ    δ=0
                                                                                                         (5)

which indicates the first-order derivative of the test loss L ztest , θ̂z,δ with respect to δ.

We may easily generalize the theoretical analysis to the case that prunes m training samples, if we let
δ be a m-dimensional vector (− n1 , . . . , − n1 ) and ẑ ∈ D̂. Then we may write the multi-dimensional
form of the influence function of the test loss as
                                             dθ̂δ,ẑ
    Iloss (ztest , D̂) = ∇θ L(ztest , θ̂)⊤                   = (Iloss (ztest , ẑ1 ), . . . , Iloss (ztest , ẑm )),   (6)
                                              dδ δ=(0,...,0)

which is an N × m matrix and N indicates the number of parameters.
We define the expected test loss over the data distribution P (D) as L(θ) = Eztest ∼P (D) L (ztest , θ)
and define the generalization gap due to dataset pruning as |L(θ̂−D̂ ) − L(θ̂)|. By using the influence
function of the test loss Singh et al. (2021), we obtain Theorem 1 which formulates the upper bound
of the generalization gap.
Theorem 1 (Generalization Gap of Dataset Pruning). Suppose that the original dataset is D and
the pruned dataset is D̂ = {ẑi }m
                                          P
                                 i=1 . If  ẑi ∈D̂ Iparam (ẑi ) ≤ ϵ, we have the upper bound of the
                                                                            2


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


generalization gap as
                                                                 ϵ   m
                                 sup |L(θ̂−D̂ ) − L(θ̂)| = O(      +   ).                               (7)
                                                                 n n2


Proof. We express the test loss at θ̂−D̂ using the first-order Taylor approximation as

              L ztest , f (θ̂−D̂ ) = L ztest , f (θ̂) + Iloss (ztest , D̂)δ + O(∥δ∥2 ),                 (8)

where the last term O(∥δ∥2 ) is usually ignorable in practice, because ∥δ∥2 = nm2 is very small for
popular benchmark datasets. The same approximation is also used in related papers which used
influence function for generalization analysis Singh et al. (2021). According to Equation equation 8,
we have

          L(θ̂−D̂ ) − L(θ̂) ≈Eztest ∼P (D) [Iloss (ztest , D̂)]δ                                        (9)
                               X 1
                            =         − Eztest ∼P (D) [Iloss (ztest , ẑi )]                           (10)
                                       n
                              ẑi ∈D̂
                                                                                                  
                                   1                                         X
                            = − Eztest ∼P (D) [−∇θ L(ztest , θ̂)⊤ ]           Hθ̂−1 ∇θ L(ẑi , θ̂)   (11)
                                   n
                                                                          ẑi ∈D̂

                             1            X
                            ≤ ∥∇θ L(θ̂)∥2   Iparam (ẑi )                                              (12)
                             n
                                                ẑi ∈D̂             2
                             ϵ
                            ≤ ∥∇θ L(θ̂)∥2 ,                                                            (13)
                             n
where the first inequality is the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, the second inequality is based on the
                              P
algorithmic guarantee that       ẑi ∈D̂ Iparam (ẑi )   ≤ ϵ in Eq. equation 3, and ϵ is a hyperparameter.
                                                       2
Given the second-order Taylor term, finally, we obtain the upper bound of the expected loss as
                                                                 ϵ   m
                                 sup |L(θ̂−D̂ ) − L(θ̂)| = O(      +   ).                              (14)
                                                                 n n2
The proof is complete.


Theorem 1 demonstrates that, if we hope to effectively decrease the upper bound of the generalization
gap due to dataset pruning, we should focus on constraining or even directly minimizing ϵ. The basic
idea of the proposed optimization-based dataset pruning method exactly aims at penalizing ϵ via
discrete optimization, shown in Eq. 3 and Eq. 4.
Moreover, our empirical results in the following section successfully verify the estimated general-
ization gap. The estimated generalization gap of the proposed optimization-based dataset pruning
approximately has the order of magnitude as O(10−3 ) on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, which is
significantly smaller the estimated generalization gap of random dataset pruning by more than one
order of magnitude.


6    E XPERIMENT

In the following paragraph, we conduct experiments to verify the validity of the theoretical results
and the effectiveness of the proposed dataset pruning method. In Section. 6.1, we introduce all
experimental details. In Section. 6.2, we empirically verify the validity of the Theorem. 1. In
Section. 6.3 and Section. 6.4, we compare our method with several baseline methods on dataset
pruning performance and cross-architecture generalization. Finally, in Section. 6.5, we show the
proposed dataset pruning method is extremely effective on improving the training efficiency.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: We compare our proposed optimization-based dataset pruning method with several sample-
selection baselines. Our optimization-based pruning method considers the ’group effect’ of pruned
examples and exhibits superior performance, especially when the pruning ratio is high.

6.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We evaluate dataset pruning methods on CIFAR10, CIFAR100 Krizhevsky (2009), and TinyIma-
geNet Le & Yang (2015) datasets. CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 contains 50,000 training examples
from 10 and 100 categories, respectively. TinyImageNet is a larger dataset contains 100,000 training
examples from 200 categories. We verify the cross-architecture generalization of the pruned dataset
on three popular deep neural networks with different complexity, e.g., SqueezeNet Hu et al. (2018)
(1.25M parameters), ResNet18 He et al. (2016) (11.69M parameters), and ResNet50 He et al. (2016)
(25.56M parameters). All hyper-parameters and experimental settings of training before and after
dataset pruning were controlled to be the same. Specifically, in all experiments, we train the model for
200 epochs with a batch size of 128, a learning rate of 0.01 with cosine annealing learning rate decay
strategy, SGD optimizer with the momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 5e-4, data augmentation of
random crop and random horizontal flip. In Eq. 2, we calculate the Hessian matrix inverse by using
seconder-order optimization trick Agarwal et al. (2016) which can significantly boost the Hessian
matrix inverse estimation time. To further improve the estimation efficiency, we only calculate
parameter influence in Eq. 2 for the last linear layer. In Eq. 3 and Eq. 4, we solve the discrete
optimization problem using simulated annealing Van Laarhoven & Aarts (1987), which is a popular
heuristic algorithm for solving complex discrete optimization problem in a given time budget.

6.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS V ERIFICATION

Our proposed optimization-based dataset pruning            0.5
                                                                        random, /n
method tries to collect the smallest subset by con-
                                                           0.4          random, ( ) ( )
straining the parameter influence ϵ. In Theorem. 1,                     ours, /n
we demonstrate that the generalization gap of dataset                   ours, ( ) ( )
                                                           0.3
pruning can be upper-bounded by O( nϵ + nm2 ). The
term of nm2 can be simply ignored since it usually has     0.2
a much smaller magnitude than nϵ . To verify the valid-
ity of the generalization guarantee of dataset pruning,    0.1
we compare the empirically observed test loss gap be-
                                                           0.0
fore and after dataset pruning L(θ̂−D̂ ) − L(θ̂) and our          0.5     1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0
theoretical expectation nϵ in Fig. 2. It can be clearly                         Pruning size m                1e4
observed that the actual generalization gap is highly
consistent with our theoretical prediction. We can also    Figure 2: The comparison of empirically ob-
observe that there is a strong correlation between the     served generalization gap and our theoretical
pruned dataset generalization and ϵ, therefore Eq. 3 ef-   expectation in Theorem. 1. We ignore the
fectively guarantees the generalization of dataset prun-   term of m/n2 since it has much smaller mag-
ing by constraining ϵ. Compared with random pruning,       nitude with ϵ/n.
our proposed optimization-based dataset pruning ex-
hibits much smaller ϵ and better generalization.

6.3   DATASET P RUNING

In the previous section, we motivated the optimization-based dataset pruning method by constraining
or directly minimizing the network parameter influence of a selected data subset. The theoretical


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: To evaluate the unseen-architecture generalization of the pruned dataset, we prune the
CIFAR10 dataset using a relatively small network and then train a larger network on the pruned
dataset. We consider three networks from two families with different parameter complexity, SENet
(1.25M parameters), ResNet18 (11.69M parameters), and ResNet50 (25.56M parameters). The
results indicate that the dataset pruned by small networks can generalize well to large networks.

result and the empirical evidence show that constraining parameter influence can effectively bound the
generalization gap of the pruned dataset. In this section, we evaluate the proposed optimization-based
dataset pruning method empirically. We show that the test accuracy of a network trained on the
pruned dataset is comparable to the test accuracy of the network trained on the whole dataset, and is
competitive with other baseline methods.
We prune CIFAR10, CIFAR100 Krizhevsky (2009) and TinyImageNet Le & Yang (2015) using a
random initialized ResNet50 network He et al. (2016). We compare our proposed method with the
following baselines, (a) Random pruning, which selects an expected number of training examples
randomly. (b) Herding Welling (2009), which selects an expected number of training examples that are
closest to the cluster center of each class. (c) Forgetting Toneva et al. (2019b), which selects training
examples that are easy to be forgotten. (d) GraNd Paul et al. (2021), which selects training examples
with larger loss gradient norms. (e) EL2N Paul et al. (2021), which selects training examples with
larger norms of the error vector that is the predicted class probabilities minus one-hot label encoding.
(f) Influence-score Koh & Liang (2017a), which selects training examples with high norms of the
influence function in Eq. 2 without considering the ’group effect’. To make our method comparable to
those cardinality-based pruning baselines, we pruned datasets using the cardinality-guaranteed dataset
pruning as in Eq. 4. After dataset pruning and selecting a training subset, we obtain the test accuracy
by retraining a new random initialized ResNet50 network on only the pruned dataset. The retraining
settings of all methods are controlled to be the same. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 1.
In Fig. 1, our method consistently surpasses all baseline methods. Among all baseline methods, the
forgetting and EL2N methods achieve very close performance to ours when the pruning ratio is small,
while the performance gap increases along with the increase of the pruning ratio. The influence-score,
as a direct baseline of our method, also performs poorly compared to our optimization-based method.
This is because all these baseline methods are score-based, they prune training examples by removing
the lowest-score examples without considering the influence iteractions between high-score examples
and low-score examples. The influence of a combination of high-score examples may be minor, and
vice versa. Our method overcomes this issue by considering the influence of a subset rather than each
individual example, by a designed optimization process. The consideration of the group effect make
our method outperforms baselines methods, especially when the pruning ratio is high.

6.4   U NSEEN A RCHITECTURE G ENERALIZATION

We conduct experiments to verify the pruned dataset can generalize well to those unknown or larger
network architectures that are inaccessible during dataset pruning. To this end, we use a smaller
network to prune the dataset and further use the pruned dataset to train larger network architectures.
As shown in Fig. 3, we evaluate the CIFAR10 pruned by SENet Hu et al. (2018) on two unknown
and larger architectures, i.e., ResNet18 He et al. (2016) and ResNet50 He et al. (2016). SENet
contains 1.25 million parameters, ResNet18 contains 11.69 parameters, and ResNet50 contains 25.56
parameters. The experimental results show that the pruned dataset has a good generalization on
network architectures that are unknown during dataset pruning. This indicates that the pruned dataset
can be used in a wide range of applications regardless of specific network architecture. In addition,
the results also indicate that we can prune the dataset using a small network and the pruned dataset


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can generalize to larger network architectures well. These two conclusions make dataset pruning a
proper technique to reduce the time consumption of neural architecture search (NAS).

6.5   DATASET P RUNING I MPROVES THE T RAINING E FFICIENCY.

The pruned dataset can significantly improve the training efficiency while maintaining the perfor-
mance, as shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, the proposed dataset pruning benefits when one needs to train
many trails on the same dataset. One such application is neural network search (NAS) Zoph et al.
(2018) which aims at searching a network architecture that can achieve the best performance for a
specific dataset. A potential powerful tool to accelerate the NAS is by searching architectures on the
smaller pruned dataset, if the pruned dataset has the same ability of identifying the best network to
the original dataset.
We construct a 720 ConvNets searching space with dif-                       (1250, 92.3)   (1800, 93.8)
ferent depth, width, pooling, activation and normalization                                                (3200, 95.1)
layers. We train all these 720 models on the whole CI-
FAR10 training set and four smaller proxy datasets that
are constructed by random, herding Welling (2009), for-
getting Toneva et al. (2019b), and our proposed dataset
pruning method. All the four proxy datasets contain only
100 images per class. We train all models with 100 epochs.                                 ×0.39
                                                                                              ×0.56
The proxy dataset contains 1000 images in total, which oc-
cupies 2% storage cost than training on the whole dataset.
Table.1 reports (a) the average test performance of the Figure 4: Dataset pruning significantly
best selected architectures trained on the whole dataset, (b) improves the training efficiency with mi-
the Spearmen’s rank correlation coefficient between the nor performance scarification. When
validation accuracies obtained by training the selected top pruning 40% training examples, the con-
10 models on the proxy dataset and the whole dataset, (c) vergence time is nearly halved with
time of training 720 architectures on a Tesla V100 GPU, only 1.3% test accuracy drop. The
and (d) the memory cost. Table. 1 shows that searching pruned dataset can be used to tune hyper-
720 architectures on the whole dataset raises huge timing parameters and network architectures to
cost. Randomly selecting 2% dataset to perform the archi- reduce the searching time.
tecture search can decrease the searching time from 3029
minutes to 113 minutes, but the searched architecture achieves much lower performance when trained
on the whole dataset, making it far from the best architecture. Compared with baselines, our proposed
dataset pruning method achieves the best performance (the closest one to that of the whole dataset)
and significantly reduces the searching time (3% of the whole dataset).
                                  Random    Herding     Forgetting   Ours   Whole Dataset
                Performance (%)    79.4      80.1         82.5       85.7         85.9
                  Correlation      0.21      0.23         0.79       0.94         1.00
                Time cost (min)    113       113          113        113         3029
                 Storage (imgs)    103       103          103        103        5 × 104
Table 1: Neural architecture search on proxy-sets and whole dataset. The search space is 720
ConvNets. We do experiments on CIFAR10 with 100 images/class proxy dataset selected by random,
herding, forgetting, and our proposed optimization-based dataset pruning. The network architecture
selected by our pruned dataset achieves very close performance to the upper-bound.

7     C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes a problem of dataset prunning, which aims at removing redundant training
examples with minor impact on model’s performance. By theoretically examining the influence
of removing a particular subset of training examples on network’s parameter, this paper proposes
to model the sample selection procedure as a constrained discrete optimization problem. During
the sample selection, we constrain the network parameter change while maximize the number of
collected samples. The collected training examples can then be removed from the training set. The
extensive theoretical and empirical studies demonstrate that the proposed optimization-based dataset
pruning method is extremely effective on improving the training efficiency while maintaining the
model’s generalization ability.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Naman Agarwal, Brian Bullins, and Elad Hazan. Second-order stochastic optimization in linear time.
  stat, 1050:15, 2016.
Pankaj K Agarwal, Sariel Har-Peled, and Kasturi R Varadarajan. Approximating extent measures of
  points. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 51(4):606–635, 2004.
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection
  for online continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 11816–
  11825, 2019.
Eden Belouadah and Adrian Popescu. Scail: Classifier weights scaling for class incremental learning.
  In The IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2020.
Davis Blalock, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Jonathan Frankle, and John Guttag. What is the state of
  neural network pruning? Proceedings of machine learning and systems, 2:129–146, 2020.
Ondrej Bohdal, Yongxin Yang, and Timothy Hospedales. Flexible dataset distillation: Learn labels
  instead of images. Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop, 2020.
Zalán Borsos, Mojmir Mutny, and Andreas Krause. Coresets via bilevel optimization for continual
  learning and streaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14879–14890,
  2020.
Francisco M Castro, Manuel J Marín-Jiménez, Nicolás Guil, Cordelia Schmid, and Karteek Alahari.
  End-to-end incremental learning. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), pp. 233–248, 2018.
George Cazenavette, Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Alexei A Efros, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dataset
  distillation by matching training trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11932, 2022.
Samprit Chatterjee and Ali S Hadi. Influential observations, high leverage points, and outliers in
  linear regression. Statistical science, 1986.
Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer look
 at few-shot classification. In ICLR, 2019.
R Dennis Cook. Detection of influential observation in linear regression. Technometrics, 19(1):15–18,
  1977.
R Dennis Cook. Assessment of local influence. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
  (Methodological), 48(2):133–155, 1986.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Characterizations of an empirical influence function for
  detecting influential cases in regression. Technometrics, 22(4):495–508, 1980.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Residuals and influence in regression. New York: Chapman
  and Hall, 1982.
Dan Feldman, Melanie Schmidt, and Christian Sohler. Turning big data into tiny data: Constant-size
  coresets for k-means, pca and projective clustering. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual
  ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pp. 1434–1453. SIAM, 2013.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In ICML, 2017.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Frank R Hampel, Elvezio M Ronchetti, Peter J Rousseeuw, and Werner A Stahel. Robust statistics:
  the approach based on influence functions. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
Sariel Har-Peled and Soham Mazumdar. On coresets for k-means and k-median clustering. In
  Proceedings of the thirty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 2004.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
   conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7132–7141, 2018.
Wei Jin, Lingxiao Zhao, Shichang Zhang, Yozen Liu, Jiliang Tang, and Neil Shah. Graph condensation
 for graph neural networks. ICLR, 2021.
Wei Jin, Xianfeng Tang, Haoming Jiang, Zheng Li, Danqing Zhang, Jiliang Tang, and Bing Yin.
 Condensing graphs via one-step gradient matching. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 720–730, 2022.
Mayank Kabra, Alice Robie, and Kristin Branson. Understanding classifier errors by examining
 influential neighbors. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, 2015.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017a.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70, pp. 1885–1894.
  JMLR. org, 2017b.
Pang Wei W Koh, Kai-Siang Ang, Hubert Teo, and Percy S Liang. On the accuracy of influence
  functions for measuring group effects. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Yong Liu, Shali Jiang, and Shizhong Liao. Efficient approximation of cross-validation for kernel
  methods using bouligand influence function. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  PMLR, 2014.
Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao Huang, and Trevor Darrell. Rethinking the value of
  network pruning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05270, 2018.
Pavlo Molchanov, Arun Mallya, Stephen Tyree, Iuri Frosio, and Jan Kautz. Importance estimation
  for neural network pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 11264–11272, 2019.
Timothy Nguyen, Zhourong Chen, and Jaehoon Lee. Dataset meta-learning from kernel-ridge
  regression. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=l-PrrQrK0QR.
Timothy Nguyen, Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, and Jaehoon Lee. Dataset distillation with infinitely
  wide convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13034, 2021b.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
 2021.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2001–2010, 2017.
Salah Rifai, Yoshua Bengio, Yann Dauphin, and Pascal Vincent. A generative process for sampling
  contractive auto-encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6434, 2012.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. ICLR, 2018a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018b.
Sidak Pal Singh, Aurelien Lucchi, Thomas Hofmann, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Phenomenology
  of double descent in finite-width neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
  Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 4077–4087, 2017.
Felipe Petroski Such, Aditya Rawal, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Generative
  teaching networks: Accelerating neural architecture search by learning to generate synthetic
  training data. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Ilia Sucholutsky and Matthias Schonlau. Soft-label dataset distillation and text dataset distillation.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02551, 2019.
William Thomas and R Dennis Cook. Assessing influence on predictions from generalized linear
 models. Technometrics, 1990.
Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and
 Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning.
 ICLR, 2019a.
Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and
 Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning.
 ICLR, 2019b.
Peter JM Van Laarhoven and Emile HL Aarts. Simulated annealing. In Simulated annealing: Theory
  and applications, pp. 7–15. Springer, 1987.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Tim Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Matching
  networks for one shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Kai Wang, Bo Zhao, Xiangyu Peng, Zheng Zhu, Shuo Yang, Shuo Wang, Guan Huang, Hakan Bilen,
  Xinchao Wang, and Yang You. Cafe: Learning to condense dataset by aligning features. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.01531, 2022.
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018.
Bo-Cheng Wei, Yue-Qing Hu, and Wing-Kam Fung. Generalized leverage and its applications.
  Scandinavian Journal of statistics, 1998.
Max Welling. Herding dynamical weights to learn. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1121–1128. ACM, 2009.
G W Wolf. Facility location: concepts, models, algorithms and case studies. 2011.
Shuo Yang, Lu Liu, and Min Xu. Free lunch for few-shot learning: Distribution calibration. In ICLR,
  2021a.
Shuo Yang, Songhua Wu, Tongliang Liu, and Min Xu. Bridging the gap between few-shot and many-
  shot learning via distribution calibration. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 2021b.
Chi Zhang, Yujun Cai, Guosheng Lin, and Chunhua Shen. Deepemd: Few-shot image classification
  with differentiable earth mover’s distance and structured classifiers. In CVPR, 2020.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with differentiable siamese augmentation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021a.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with distribution matching. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.04181, 2021b.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=mSAKhLYLSsl.
Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Learning transferable architectures
  for scalable image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 8697–8710, 2018.


                                               13
