Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D OMAIN -A DJUSTED R EGRESSION OR :
ERM M AY A LREADY L EARN F EATURES S UFFICIENT
FOR O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION G ENERALIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         A common explanation for the failure of deep networks to generalize out-of-
         distribution is that they fail to recover the “correct” features. We challenge this
         notion with a simple experiment which suggests that ERM already learns sufficient
         features and that the current bottleneck is not feature learning, but robust regres-
         sion. Our findings also imply that given a small amount of data from the target
         distribution, retraining only the last linear layer will give excellent performance.
         We therefore argue that devising simpler methods for learning predictors on ex-
         isting features is a promising direction for future research. Towards this end, we
         introduce Domain-Adjusted Regression (DARE), a convex objective for learning
         a linear predictor that is provably robust under a new model of distribution shift.
         Rather than learning one function, DARE performs a domain-specific adjustment
         to unify the domains in a canonical latent space and learns to predict in this space.
         Under a natural model, we prove that the DARE solution is the minimax-optimal
         predictor for a constrained set of test distributions. Further, we provide the first
         finite-environment convergence guarantee to the minimax risk, improving over
         existing analyses which only yield minimax predictors after an environment thresh-
         old. Evaluated on finetuned features, we find that DARE compares favorably to
         prior methods, consistently achieving equal or better performance.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The historical motivation for deep learning focuses on the ability of deep neural networks to automat-
ically learn rich, hierarchical features of complex data (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016).
Simple Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), with appropriate regularization, results in high-quality
representations which surpass carefully hand-selected features on a wide variety of downstream tasks.
Despite these successes, or perhaps because of them, the dominant focus of late is on the shortcomings
of this approach: recent work points to the failure of networks trained with ERM to generalize under
even moderate distribution shift (Recht et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2020). A common explanation
for this phenomenon is reliance on “spurious correlations” or “shortcuts”, where a network makes
predictions based on structure in the data which generalizes on average in the training set but may not
persist in future test distributions (Poliak et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2021).
Many proposed solutions implicitly assume that this problem is due to the entire neural network: they
suggest an alternate objective to be minimized over a deep network in an end-to-end fashion (Sun
& Saenko, 2016; Ganin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019). These objectives are complex, poorly
understood, and difficult to optimize. Indeed, the efficacy of many such objectives was recently
called into serious question (Zhao et al., 2019; Rosenfeld et al., 2021; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021).
Though a neural network is often viewed as a deep feature embedder with a final linear predictor
applied to the features, it is still unclear—and to our knowledge has not been directly asked or
tested—whether these issues are primarily because of (i) learning the wrong features or (ii) learning
good features but failing to find the best-generalizing linear predictor on top of them.
We begin with a simple experiment (Figure 1) to try to distinguish between these two possibilities:
we train a deep network with ERM on several domain generalization benchmarks, where the task is
to learn a predictor using a collection of distinct training domains and then perform well on a new,


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             OfficeHome                 VLCS                             DomainNet
                   1.0                                                     1.0

                   0.9


   Test Accuracy
                   0.8
                                                                           0.8
                   0.7

                   0.6
                                                                           0.6
                   0.5
                         A   C          P   R   C   L          S   V
                                 PACS
                   1.0
                                                    ERM                    0.4
   Test Accuracy


                   0.9                              DARE
                                                    Linear†                0.2
                   0.8
                                                    End-to-End†
                   0.7
                                                    Pretrained†            0.0
                         A   C          P   S                                    c   i   p       q   r   s

Figure 1: Accuracy via “cheating”: dagger (†) denotes access to test domain at train-time. Each letter
is a domain. Dark blue is approximate SOTA, orange is our proposed DARE objective, light grey
represents cheating while retraining the linear classifier only. All three methods use the same features,
attained without cheating. Dark grey is “ideal” accuracy, cheating while training the entire deep
network. Surprisingly, cheating only for the linear classifier rivals cheating for the whole network.
Cheating accuracy on pretrained features (light blue) makes clear that this effect is due to finetuning
on the train domains, and not simply overparameterization (i.e., a very large number of features).


unseen domain. After training, we freeze the features and separately learn a linear classifier on top
of them. Crucially, when training this classifier (i.e., retraining just the last linear layer), we give it
an unreasonable advantage by optimizing on both the train and test domains—henceforth we refer
to this as “cheating”. Since we use just a linear classifier, this process establishes a lower bound on
what performance we could plausibly achieve using standard ERM features. We then separately cheat
while training the full network end-to-end, simulating the idealized setting with no distribution shift.
Note that in neither case do we train on the test points; our cheating entails training on (different)
samples from the test domain, which are assumed unavailable in domain generalization.
Notably, we find that simple (cheating) logistic regression on frozen deep features learned via
ERM results in enormous improvements over current state of the art, on the order of 10-15%. In
fact, it usually performs comparably to the full cheating method—which learns both features and
classifier end-to-end with test domain access—sometimes even outperforming it. Put another way,
cheating while training the entire network rarely does significantly better than cheating while
training just the last linear layer. One possible explanation for this is that the pretrained model is
so overparametrized as to effectively be a kernel with universal approximation power; in this case, the
outstanding performance of a cheating linear classifier on top of these features would be unsurprising.
However, we find that this cheating method does not ensure good performance on pretrained features,
which implies that we are not yet in such a regime and that the effect we observe is indeed due to
finetuning via ERM. Collectively, these results suggest that training modern deep architectures
with ERM and established in-distribution training and regularization practices may be “good
enough” for out-of-distribution generalization and that the current bottleneck lies primarily in
learning a simple, robust predictor.
Motivated by these findings, we propose a new objective, which we call Domain-Adjusted Regression
(DARE). The DARE objective is convex and it learns a linear predictor on frozen features. Unlike
invariant prediction (Peters et al., 2016), which projects out feature variation such that a single
predictor performs acceptably on very different domains, DARE performs a domain-specific adjust-
ment to unify the environmental features in a canonical latent space. Based on the presumption that
standard ERM features are good enough (made formal in Section 4), DARE enjoys strong theoretical
guarantees: under a new model of distribution shift which captures ideas from invariant/non-invariant
latent variable models, we precisely characterize the adversarial risk of the DARE solution against
a natural perturbation set, and we prove that this risk is minimax. We further provide the first
finite-environment convergence guarantee to the minimax risk, improving over existing results which
merely demonstrate a threshold in the number of observed environments at which the solution is
discovered (Rosenfeld et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). Finally, we show how our
objective can be modified to leverage access to unlabeled samples at test-time. We use this to derive a
method for provably effective “just-in-time” unsupervised domain adaptation, for which we provide a
finite-sample excess risk bound.


                                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Evaluated on finetuned features, we find that DARE compares favorably to existing methods,
consistently achieving equal or better performance. We also find that methods which previously
underperformed on these benchmarks do much better in this frozen feature setting, often besting
ERM. This suggests that these approaches are beneficial for linear prediction (the setting in which
they are understood and justified) but using them to train deep networks may result in worse features.

2    ERM L EARNS S URPRISINGLY U SEFUL F EATURES
Our experiments are motivated by a simple question: is the observed failure of deep neural
networks to generalize out-of-distribution more appropriately attributed to inadequate feature
learning or inadequate robust prediction? Both could undoubtedly be improved, but we are
concerned with which currently serves as the primary bottleneck. It’s typical to train the entire
network end-to-end and then evaluate on a test distribution; in reality, this measures the quality of the
interaction of the features and the classifier, not of either one individually.
Using datasets and methodology from D OMAIN B ED (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021), we finetune a
ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) with ERM on the training domains to extract features. Next, we cheat
while learning a linear classifier on top of these frozen features by optimizing on both the train and
test domains. We compare this cheating linear classifier to a full cheating network trained on all
domains end-to-end. If it is the case that ERM learns features which do not generalize, we should
expect that the cheating linear classifier will not substantially improve over the current state of the art
and will perform significantly worse than cheating end-to-end, since the latter method can adapt the
features to better suit the test domain.
Instead, we find that simply giving the linear predictor access to all domains while training makes
up the vast majority of the gap between current state of the art (ERM with heavy regularization)
and the ideal setting where we train a network on all domains. In other words, ERM produces
features which are informative enough that a linear classifier on top of these frozen features is—in
principle—capable of generalizing almost as well as if we had access to the test domain when training
the entire network.1 Figure 2 in the Appendix depicts the evaluation methodology described above,
along with a more detailed explanation. We conjecture that this phenomenon occurs more broadly:
our findings suggest that for many applications, existing features learned via ERM may be “good
enough” for out-of-distribution generalization in deep learning. Based on this idea, we posit that
future work would benefit from modularity, working to improve representation learning and robust
classification/regression separately. There are several distinct advantages to this approach:
• More robust comparisons and better reproducibility: Current methods have myriad degrees
  of freedom which makes informative comparisons difficult; evaluating feature learning and robust
  regression separately eliminates many of these sources of experimental variation.
• Less compute overhead: Training large networks to learn both features and a classifier is expen-
  sive. Benchmarks could include files with the weights for ready-to-use deep feature embedders
  trained with various objectives—these models can be much larger and trained on much more data
  than would be feasible for many. Using these features, academic researchers could thus make
  faster progress on better classifiers with less compute.
• Modular theoretical guarantees: Conditioning on the frozen features, we can use more classical
  analyses to provide guarantees for the simpler parametric classifiers learned on top of these features.
  For example, Bansal et al. (2021) derive a generalization bound for simpler classifiers which is
  agnostic to the complexity of the features on which they are trained.
We conclude by emphasizing that while the predictor in our experiments is linear, future methods
need not be. Rather, we are highlighting that there may be no need for complex, expensive, highly
variable regularization of a deep network when much simpler approaches suffice.

3    T HE D OMAIN -A DJUSTED R EGRESSION O BJECTIVE
The goal of many prior methods in deep domain adaptation or generalization is to learn a single
network which does well on all environments simultaneously, often by throwing away non-invariant
    1
      On a few domains the linear method sees a gap of ∼5% accuracy from the idealized setting. We emphasize
that our use of a simple linear predictor serves as a lower bound on the achievable error using ERM features.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


components (Peng et al., 2019; Arjovsky et al., 2019). While invariance is a powerful framework,
there are some clear drawbacks , such as the need to throw away possibly informative features. In
settings where we expect the distribution shift to be less than worst-case, this would be unnecessarily
conservative. Instead, we reframe the problem by thinking of each training domain as a distinct
transformation from a shared canonical representation space. In this framing, we can “adjust” each
domain in order to undo these transformations, aligning the representations to learn a single robust
predictor in this unified space. Specifically, we propose to whiten each domain’s features to have
zero mean and identity covariance, which can be thought of as a “domain-specific batchnorm” but
using the full feature covariance. This idea is not totally new: some prior works align the moments
between domains to improve generalization. The difference is that DARE does not learn a single
featurizer which aligns the moments, but rather aligns the moments of already learned features; the
latter approach maintains useful variation between domains which would be eliminated by the former.
DARE is closer to methods which learn separate batchnorm parameters per domain over a deep
network, possibly adjusting at test-time (Seo et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2019; Segù et al., 2020)—these
methods perform well, but they are entirely heuristic based, difficult to optimize, and come with no
formal guarantees. Our theoretical analysis thus serves as preliminary justification for the observed
benefits of such methods, which have so far lacked serious grounding.
To begin, define E as the set of observed training environments, each of which is defined by a
distribution pe (x, y) over features x ∈ Rd and class labels y ∈ [k]. For each e ∈ E, denote the mean
and covariance of the features as µe , Σe . Our first step is to adjust the features via the whitening
                   −1/2
transformation Σe       (x − µe ). Unfortunately, we cannot undo the test transformation because we
have no way of knowing what the test mean will be. Interestingly, this is not a problem provided the
predictor satisfies a simple constraint. Suppose that the predictor’s output on the mean representation
of each environment is a multiple of the all-ones vector. As softmax is invariant to a constant offset,
this enforces that the environment mean has no effect on the final probability distribution, and thus
there is no need to adjust for the test-time mean. We therefore enforce this constraint during training,
with the hope that the same invariance will approximately hold at test-time. Formally, the DARE
objective finds a matrix β ∈ Rd×k which solves
             X                                                                  1
         min      Epe [`(β T Σ−1/2
                              e    x,  y)]  subject to softmax   β T −1/2
                                                                    Σ e    µe   = 1. ∀e ∈ E,         (1)
          β                                                                        k
            e∈E

where ` is the multinomial logistic loss and we omit the bias β0 for brevity. For binary classification,
β is a vector and the softmax is replaced with the logistic function—the constraint is then equivalent
to requiring the mean of the logits to be 0. Thus, the DARE objective explicitly regresses on the
adjusted features, while the constraint enforces that each environment mean has no effect on the output
distribution to encourage predictions to also be invariant to test-time transformations. The astute
reader will point out that we also do not know the correct whitening matrix for the test data—instead,
                                                      denoting this estimate as Σ̄, our prediction on a
we adjust using our best guess for the test covariance:
new sample x is f (x; β) = softmax β T Σ̄−1/2 x . We prove that this prediction is minimax so long
as our guess is “sufficiently close”, and in practice we find that simply averaging the training domain
adjustments performs well. Table 2 in the Appendix shows this average is actually quite close to the
sample covariance of the (unseen) test domain, explaining the good performance.
Unlike many prior methods, DARE does not enforce invariance of the features themselves. Rather, it
aligns the representations such that different domains share similar optimal predictors. To support
this claim, Table 3 displays the cosine similarity between optimal linear classifiers for individual
domains—we observe a large increase in average similarity as a result of the feature adjustment.
Further, in Section 5 we demonstrate that the DARE objective is in fact minimizing the worst-case
risk under a constrained set of possible distribution shifts, making it less conservative than methods
which require complete feature invariance. Though the objective (1) assumes a particular form
of invariance, this specific choice is by no means a requirement for the approach we take. We
justify this by noting that the minimax predictor can always be written as the solution to an objective
of this form, depending only on what we choose to assume holds constant:
Proposition 3.1 (informal). Assume the minimax-optimal predictor f ∗ lies in our hypothesis
class F. Let S : F × P(X × Y) → Rd be any “sufficient statistic” which encodes all in-
variances, i.e. S(f ∗ , pe ) = c ∀e, for some constant c, and ∀f ∈ F with lower risk than
f ∗ on at least P one environment, ∃e, e0 . S(f, pe ) 6= S(f, pe0 ). Then as |E| → ∞, f ∗ =
               1
arg minf ∈F |E| e∈E `(f (x), y) s.t. S(f, pe ) = c ∀e ∈ E.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This generic objective recovers IRM by defining S(f, pe ) = Epe [∇`(f (x), y))], c = 0
(the
                                   environment loss gradient), or CORAL with S(f, pe ) =
      “sufficient statistic” is the
 Epe [x], Epe [(x − µ)(x − µ)T ] (the feature mean and covariance) and letting c be arbitrary.
DARE instead allows for       domain-specific transformations Te , and we define S(f, pe ) =
softmax Epe [f (Te−1 (x))] —here Te−1 is the whitening operation detailed in the next section.

Implementation in practice. Due to its convexity, the DARE objective is extremely simple to
optimize. In practice, we finetune a deep network over the training data with ERM and then extract
the features. Next, treating the frozen features of the training data as direct observations x, we
minimize the empirical Lagrangian form:
                                      ne
              λ           1 X 1 X           T −1/2                 T −1/2         −1
            L̂cls (β) :=                 `(β Σ̂e   xi , yi ) + λ`(β Σ̂e    µ̂e , k 1) ,
                         |E|      ne i=1
                            e∈E

where µ̂e , Σ̂e are the usual sample estimates and ne is the number of samples in environment e. We
find that the solution is incredibly robust to the choice of λ, but it is natural to wonder whether each
of the components above is necessary for the performance gains we observe. We ablate both the
whitening operation and the use of the constraint (Appendix E) and see performance drops in both
cases. We also consider estimating the test-time mean rather than enforcing invariance, but this results
in substantially worse accuracy—the environment feature means vary quite a bit, so the estimate is
usually inaccurate. For regression, we consider the same setup but minimize mean squared error on
targets y ∈ R. Here, the DARE solution is constrained such that the mean output has no effect on the
prediction, meaning each domain’s mean prediction should be zero. We discuss this in more detail in
Appendix A.1, along with an interesting connection to anchor regression (Rothenhäusler et al., 2021).
Another benefit to our approach is that the adjustments for each domain do not depend on labels, so
given unlabeled samples from the test domain we can often do even better. Unlike methods which use
those samples while training (or even for test-time training), this adjustment can be done just-in-time,
without updating any parameters! We name this task Just-in-Time Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(JIT-UDA), and we provide finite-sample risk bounds for the DARE objective in this setting.

4    A N EW M ODEL OF D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT
The DARE objective is based on the intuition that all domains jointly share a representation space
and that they arise as unique transformations from this space. To capture this notion mathematically,
we model the joint distribution pe ( , y) over latents   ∈ Rd and label y ∈ {0, 1}, along with an
environment-specific transformation to observations x ∈ Rd for each domain. In the fully general
case, this transformation can take an arbitrary form and can be written as x = Te ( , y).
Our primary assumption is that pe (y |  ) is constant for all domains. Our goal is thus to invert each
transformation Te such that we are learning an invariant conditional p(y | Te−1 (x)) (throughout
we assume Te is invertible). One can also view this model as a generalization of covariate shift:
where the usual assumption is constancy of p(y | x), the inverse transformation gives a richer model
which can more realistically capture real-world variation across domains. It is important to note that
this model generalizes (and has strictly weaker requirements than) both IRM and domain-invariant
representation learning, which can be recovered by assuming Te is the same for all environments.
For a typical deep learning analysis we would model Te as a non-linear generative map from latents
to high-dimensional observations. However, our finding that ERM features are good enough suggests
that modeling the learned features as a simple function of the “true latents”   is not unreasonable. In
other words, we now consider x to represent the frozen features of the trained network, and we expect
this network to have already “undone” the majority of the complexity, resulting in observations which
are a simple function of the ground truth. Accordingly, we consider the following model:
                             =  0 + be , y = 1{β ∗T   + η ≥ 0}, x = Ae  .                           (2)
             e
Here,  0 ∼ p ( 0 ), which we allow to be any domain-specific distribution; we assume only that its
mean is zero (such that E[ ] = be ) and that its covariance exists. We fix β ∗ ∈ Rd for all domains
and model η as logistic noise. Finally, Ae ∈ Rd×d , be ∈ Rd are domain-specific. For regression, we
model the same generative process for x,  , while for the response, we have y ∈ R and η is zero-mean
independent noise: y = β ∗T   + η. We remark that the reason for separate definitions of pe ( 0 ) and


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


be is that our robustness guarantees are agnostic to the distribution of latent residuals pe ( 0 )—the
only aspect of the latent distribution p( ) which affects our bounds is the environment mean be .

Connection to Invariant Prediction. Statistical models of varying and invariant (latent) features
have recently become a popular tool for analyzing the behavior of deep representation learning
algorithms (Rosenfeld et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Wald et al., 2021). We see that Equation (2) can
model such a setting by assuming, e.g., that a subspace of the columnspan of Ae is constant for all
e, while the remaining subspace can vary. In such a case, the features x are expressed as the sum
of a varying and an invariant component, and any minimax representation must remove the varying
component, throwing away potentially useful information. Instead, DARE realigns these components
so that we can use them at test-time. We illustrate this with the following running example:
Example 1 (Invariant Latent Subspace Recovery). Consider the model (2) with   ∼ N (0, Id1 +d2 ).
                                                                    1/2
Define Π := blockdiag(Id1 , 0d2 ) and assume Ae = blockdiag(Σ1/2 , Σe ) for all e, where Σ ∈
  d1 ×d1                                        d2 ×d2
R        is constant for all domains but Σe ∈ R        varies.

Here we have a simple latent variable model: the features have the decomposition x = Ae   =
              1/2
Σ1/2 Π  + Σe (I − Π) , where the first component is constant across environments and the second
varies. It will be instructive at this point to analyze what an invariant prediction algorithm such
as IRM would do in this setting. Here, the IRM constraint would enforce learning a featurizer Φ
such that Φ(x) has an invariant relationship with the target. Under the above model, the solution is
Φ(x) = ΠA−1   e x=Σ
                       1/2
                           Π , retainining only the component lying in span(Π). Crucially, removing
these features actually results in worse performance on the training environments—IRM only does
so because using these features could harm test performance in the worst case. However, projecting
out the varying component in this manner is unnecessarily conservative, as we may expect that for a
future distribution, Σe0 will not be too different from what we have seen before. Instead of projecting
out this component, DARE performs a more nuanced alignment of environment subspaces, and it is
thus able to take advantage of this additional informaton. We will see shortly the resulting benefits.

5    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
Before we can analyze the DARE objective, we observe that there is a possible degeneracy in
Equation (2), since two identical observational distributions p(x, y) can have different regression
vectors β ∗ . We therefore begin with a simple non-degeneracy assumption:
Assumption 5.1. Write the SVD of Ae as Ue Se VeT . We assume Ve = V ∀e.
One special case where this holds is when Ae is constant for all domains; this is very similar to the
“additive intervention” setting of Rothenhäusler et al. (2021), since only pe , be can vary. We assume
WLOG that V = I, as any other value can be subsumed by the other parameters. We further let
E[ 0  T0 ] = I WLOG by the same reasoning (see Appendix A.2 for a discussion on these conditions).
With Assumption 5.1, we can uniquely recover Ae = Ue Se via the eigendecomposition of the
                                                                        1/2
covariance Σe = Ae ATe = Ue Se2 UeT . We therefore use the notation Σe to refer to Ae recovered in
this way. We allow covariances to have zero eigenvalues, in which case we write the matrix inverse to
implicitly refer to the pseudoinverse. As is standard in domain generalization analysis, unless stated
otherwise we assume full distribution access to the training domains, though standard concentration
inequalities could easily be applied.

A remark on our assumptions. Assumption 5.1 is not trivial. Domain generalization is an excep-
tionally difficult problem, and showing anything meaningful requires some assumption of consistency
between train and test. Our assumptions are only as strong as necessary to prove our results, but future
work could relax them, resulting in weaker performance guarantees. Experiments in Appendix E
demonstrate that our covariance estimation is indeed accurate, and the fact that our method exceeds
state of the art even with this strong constraint (and does worse without the constraint, see Figure 4)
is further evidence that our assumptions are reasonable.
We begin by deriving the solution to Equations (1) and (3) . Recall that the DARE constraint requires
that the mean representation of each domain has no effect on our prediction. To enforce this, the
DARE solution must project out the subspace in which the means vary. Given a set of E training
environments, define B as the d × E matrix whose columns are the environmental mean parameters be .


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Throughout this section, we make use of the matrix Π̂, which is defined as the orthogonal projection
onto the nullspace of BT : Π̂ := I − BB† = UΠ̂ SΠ̂ UΠ̂T ∈ Rd×d . This matrix projects onto the DARE
constraint set, and it turns out to be all that is necessary to state the solution:
Theorem 5.2. (Closed-form solution to the DARE population objective). Under model (2), the
solution to the DARE population objective (3) for linear regression is Π̂β ∗ . If   is Gaussian, then the
solution for logistic regression (1) is αΠ̂β ∗ for some α ∈ (0, 1].
In Example 1, we saw how invariant prediction will discard a large subspace of the representation
and why this is undesirable. Instead, DARE undoes the environment transformation and regresses
directly on   = Te−1 (x). Because we are performing a separate transformation for each environment,
we are aligning the varying subspaces rather than throwing them away, allowing us to make use of
additional information. Though the DARE solution also recovers β ∗ up to a projection, it is using
the adjusted features; DARE therefore only removes what cannot be aligned. In particular, whereas
Π has rank d1 in Example 1, Π̂ = I would have full rank—this retains strictly more information.
Indeed, in the ideal setting where we have a good estimate of Σe0 (e.g., under mild distribution shift
or when solving JIT-UDA), we can make the Bayes-optimal prediction as E[y | x] = β ∗T A−1        e0 x.
Thus we see a clear advantage that DARE enjoys over invariant prediction.
5.1   T HE A DVERSARIAL R ISK OF DARE
                                                      ∗
Moving forward, we denote the DARE solution βΠ̂          := Π̂β ∗ , with βI−
                                                                           ∗
                                                                             Π̂
                                                                                defined analogously. We
next study the behavior of the DARE solution under worst-case distribution shift. We consider the
setting where an adversary directly observes our choices of Σ̄, β̂ and chooses new environmental
parameters Ae0 , be0 so as to cause the greatest possible loss. Specifically, we study the square loss,
defining the excess test risk of a predictor as Re0 (β̂) := Epe0 [(β̂ T Σ̄−1/2 x − β ∗T  )2 ] (we leave the
dependence on Σ̄ implicit). For logistic regression we therefore analyze the squared error with respect
to the log-odds. With some abuse of notation, we also reference excess risk when only using a
                                                T −1/2       ∗T 2
particular subspace, i.e. RΠe0 (β̂) := Epe0 [(β̂Π Σ̄   x − βΠ   ) ].
Because we guess Σ̄ before observing any data from this new distribution, ensuring success is
impossible in the general case. Instead, we consider a set of restrictions on the adversary which will
                                                                                        1/2
make the problem tractable. Define the error in our test domain adjustment as ∆ := Σe0 Σ̄−1/2 − I;
observe that if Σ̄ = Σe0 , then ∆ = 0. Our first assumption2 says that the effect of our adjustment
error with respect to the interaction between subspaces Π̂ and (I − Π̂) is bounded:
Assumption 5.3. For a fixed constant B ≥ 0, k(I − Π̂)∆Π̂β̂k ≤ BkΠ̂β ∗ k.
Remark 5.4. To see specific cases when this would hold, consider
                                                                      the decomposition
                                                                                           of ∆ according to
                                                                ∆ 1    ∆ 12
its components in the subspaces Π̂ and I −Π̂: UΠ̂T ∆UΠ̂ =                     . A few settings automatically
                                                               ∆21 ∆2
                                                 T
satisfy Assumption 5.3 with B = 0, since UΠ̂ ∆UΠ̂ will be block-diagonal. In particular, this will be
the case if all domains share an invariant subspace—e.g., if ΠAe Π is constant as in Example 1. Below,
we show that exact recovery of this subspace occurs once we observe rank(I −Π) environments—this
matches (actually, it is one less than) the linear environment complexity of most invariant predictors
(Rosenfeld et al., 2021), and therefore Assumption 5.3 with B = 0 is no stronger than assuming a
linear number of environments.
Assumption 5.5. Using only covariates in the non-varying subspace, the risk of the ground truth
regressor β ∗ is less than that of the trivial zero predictor: RΠ̂     ∗        Π̂
                                                                 pe0 (β ) < Rpe0 (0).

The need for this restriction should be immediate—if our adjustment error were so large that this
did not hold, even the oracle regression vector would do worse than simply always predicting ŷ = 0.
Assumption 5.5 is satisfied for example if k∆Π̂k < 1, which again is guaranteed if there is an
invariant subspace. Note that we make no restriction on the risk in the subspace I − Π̂—the adversary
is allowed any amount of variation in directions where we have already seen variation in the mean
terms be , but introduction of new variation is assumed bounded. This is a no-free-lunch necessity: if
we have never seen a particular type of variation, we cannot possibly know how to use it at test-time.
   2
     Though we label these as assumptions, they are properly interpreted as restrictions on an adversary—we
consider an “uncertainty set” comprising all possible domains subject to these requirements.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With these restrictions on the adversary, our main result derives the supremum of the excess test risk
of the DARE solution under adversarial distribution shift. Furthermore, we prove that this risk is
minimax: making no more restrictions on the adversary other than a global bound on the mean, the
DARE solution achieves the best performance we could possibly hope for at test-time:
Theorem 5.6 (DARE risk and minimaxity). Denote the set of possible test environments Aρ which
contains all parameters (Ae0 , be0 ) subject to Assumptions 5.3 and 5.5 and a bound on the mean:
kbe0 k ≤ ρ. For logistic or linear regression, let β̂ be the minimizer of the corresponding DARE
                                                                        2    ∗ 2        ∗     ∗
objective as in Theorem 5.2. Then, sup(Ae0 ,be0 )∈AR ρ e
                                                         0 (β̂) = (1 + ρ )(kβ k + 2Bkβ kkβ
                                                                                        Π̂    I−Π̂
                                                                                                   k).
Furthermore, the DARE solution is minimax: β̂ ∈ arg minβ∈Rd sup(Ae0 ,be0 )∈Aρ Re0 (β).
A special case when our assumptions hold is when all domains share an invariant subspace and we
only predict using that subspace, but this is often too conservative. There are settings where allowing
for (limited) new variation can improve our predictions, and Theorem 5.6 shows that DARE should
outperform invariant prediction in such settings.
5.2    T HE E NVIRONMENT C OMPLEXITY OF DARE
An important new measure of domain generalization algorithms is their environment complexity,
which describes how the test risk behaves as a function of the number of (possibly random) domains
we observe. In contrast to Example 1, for this analysis we assume an invariant subspace Π outside of
which both Ae and be can vary arbitrarily—we formalize this as a prior over the be whose covariance
has the same span as I − Π. Our next result demonstrates that DARE achieves the same threshold as
prior methods, but we also prove the first finite-environment convergence guarantee, quantifying how
quickly the risk of the DARE predictor approaches that of the minimax-optimal predictor.
Theorem 5.7 (Environment complexity of DARE). Define the smallest gap between consecutive
eigenvalues: ξ(Σ) := mini∈[d−1] λi − λi+1 . Fix test parameters Ae0 , be0 and guess Σ̄. Suppose we
minimize the DARE regression objective (3) on environments whose means be are Gaussian vectors
with covariance Σb , with span(Σb ) = span(I − Π). After seeing E training domains:
                                                                                          ∗
1. If E ≥ rank(Σb ) then DARE recovers the minimax-optimal predictor almost surely: β̂ = βΠ .
2. Otherwise, if E ≥ r(Σb ) then with probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                                 r                  (r                     )!!
                               ∗        kΣb k        r(Σb )              log 1/δ log 1/δ
              Re0 (β̂) ≤ Re0 (βΠ )+O                        + max               ,                ,
                                        ξ(Σb )         E                    E       E

      where O(·) hides dependence on k∆k and r(Σ) := Tr(Σ)/kΣk is the effective rank.
For coherence we present the first item as a probabilistic statement, but it holds deterministically so
long as there are rank(Σb ) linearly independent observations of be .
Remark 5.8. Prior analyses of invariant prediction methods only show a discontinuous threshold
where the minimax predictor is discovered after seeing a fixed number of environments—usually
linear in the non-invariant latent dimension But one should expect that if the variation is not too large
then we can do better, and indeed Theorem 5.7 shows that if the effective rank of Σb is sufficiently
small, the risk of the DARE predictor will approach that of the minimax predictor as O(E −1/2 ).

5.3    A PPLYING DARE TO JIT-UDA
So far, we have only considered a setting with no knowledge of the test domain. As discussed in
Section 3, we’d expect that estimating the adjustment via unlabeled samples will improve performance.
Prior works have extensively explored how to leverage access to unlabeled test samples for improved
generalization—but while some suggest ways of using unlabeled samples at test-time, they are not
truly “just-in time”, nor have the advantages been formally quantified. Our final theorem investigates
the provable benefits of using the empirical moments instead of enforcing invariance, giving a
finite-sample convergence guarantee for the unconstrained DARE objective in the JIT-UDA setting:
Theorem 5.9 (JIT-UDA, shortened). Let ΣS , ΣT be the covariances of the source and target dis-
tributions, respectively. Define m(Σ) := λλmax3
                                                  (Σ)
                                                      . Assume we observe ns = Ω(m(ΣS )d2 ) source
                                              min (Σ)
samples and analogous nT target samples. Then after solving the DARE objective, with probability
at least 1 −  3d−1 , the excess squared risk
                                            of our predictor on the new environment is bounded as
                         m(ΣS )
RT (β̂) = O d2 kµT k2     nS
                                + m(Σ
                                   nT
                                     T)
                                            .


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Experimentally, we found that DARE does not outperform methods specifically intended for UDA,
possibly because n   d2 —but we believe this is a promising direction for future research, since it
doesn’t require unlabeled samples at train-time and it can incorporate new data on-the-fly.

6      E XPERIMENTS
 Dataset / Algorithm       Mean Accuracy by Domain (± 90% CI)              Dataset / Algorithm                    Mean Accuracy by Domain (± 90% CI)
 Office-Home               A            C            P            R        VLCS                      C            L            S            V
   ERM                 61.4 ± 1.9   52.1 ± 1.6   74.6 ± 0.7   75.8 ± 1.9    ERM                  97.6 ± 0.7   66.1 ± 0.6   71.9 ± 1.9   76.1 ± 2.3
   IRM                 62.1 ± 1.5   53.2 ± 1.7   75.2 ± 0.9   77.3 ± 0.8    IRM                  98.6 ± 0.6   64.9 ± 0.9   72.9 ± 0.7   74.1 ± 2.1
   GroupDRO            62.5 ± 0.5   53.1 ± 1.7   75.7 ± 0.5   77.7 ± 1.1    GroupDRO             98.5 ± 0.7   65.0 ± 0.5   73.9 ± 1.0   75.1 ± 1.8
    DARE               64.7 ± 0.8   55.4 ± 1.1   77.5 ± 0.3   79.2 ± 0.5     DARE                98.5 ± 0.2   62.5 ± 1.6   74.3 ± 1.4   75.5 ± 1.4
 PACS                      A            C            P            S        DomainNet                  c            i            p            q            r            s
   ERM                 84.3 ± 1.5   79.5 ± 1.9   96.7 ± 0.5   74.9 ± 3.7     ERM                 57.6 ± 0.6   17.9 ± 0.6   44.7 ± 0.7   12.6 ± 0.9   59.0 ± 0.7   48.6 ± 0.3
   IRM                 83.6 ± 0.4   79.2 ± 0.5   97.1 ± 0.2   76.4 ± 2.3     IRM                 60.9 ± 0.4   19.3 ± 0.2   47.6 ± 0.4   12.4 ± 0.4   61.9 ± 1.0   49.8 ± 0.6
   GroupDRO            83.6 ± 1.0   79.1 ± 0.2   96.9 ± 0.3   76.8 ± 2.8     GroupDRO            57.8 ± 0.7   18.8 ± 0.4   45.3 ± 0.4   11.9 ± 0.8   59.5 ± 1.0   47.9 ± 0.9
    DARE               85.6 ± 0.6   80.5 ± 1.0   96.6 ± 0.4   76.7 ± 2.0     DARE                61.7 ± 0.2   19.3 ± 0.1   47.4 ± 0.5   13.1 ± 0.7   61.2 ± 1.3   51.4 ± 0.3


Table 1: Performance of linear predictors on top of fixed features learned via ERM. Each letter is a
domain. Because all algorithms use the same set of features for each trial, results are not independent.
Therefore, bold indicates highest mean according to one-sided paired t-tests at p = 0.1 significance.
If not the overall highest, underline indicates higher mean than ERM under the same test.

Most algorithms implemented in the D OMAIN B ED benchmark are only applicable to deep networks;
many apply complex regularization to either the learned features or the network itself. We instead
compare to three popular algorithms which work for linear classifiers: ERM (Vapnik, 1999), IRM
(Arjovsky et al., 2019), and GroupDRO (Sagawa et al., 2020). We evaluate all approaches on four
datasets: Office-Home (Venkateswara et al., 2017), PACS (Li et al., 2017), VLCS (Fang et al., 2013),
and DomainNet (Peng et al., 2019). We find that DARE consistently matches or surpasses prior
methods. A detailed description of the evaluation and comparison methodology can be found in
Appendix D and evaluations of other end-to-end methods in Appendix E.
Prior methods now consistently outperform ERM. Interestingly, the previously observed gap
between ERM and alternatives disappears in this setting with a linear predictor. Gulrajani & Lopez-
Paz (2021) report IRM and GroupDRO performing much worse on DomainNet (5-10% lower accuracy
on some domains) but they surpass ERM when using frozen features. This suggests they are more
difficult to optimize over a deep network and when they do work, it is most likely due to learning a
better linear classifier. This further motivates work on methods for learning simpler robust predictors.

7      R ELATED W ORK
A popular approach to domain generalization matches the domains in feature space, either by aligning
moments (Sun & Saenko, 2016) or with an adversarial loss (Ganin et al., 2016), though these methods
are known to be inadequate in general (Zhao et al., 2019). DARE differs from these approaches
in that the constraint requires only that the feature mean projection onto the vector β be invariant.
Domain-invariant projections (Baktashmotlagh et al., 2013) were recently analyzed by Chen &
Bühlmann (2021), though notably under fully observed features and only for domain adaptation.
There has been intense recent focus on invariant prediction, based on ideas from causality (Peters
et al., 2016) and catalyzed by IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019). Though the goal of such methods is
minimax-optimality under major distribution shift, later work identifies critical failure modes of this
approach (Rosenfeld et al., 2021; Kamath et al., 2021). These methods eliminate features whose
information is not invariant, which is often overly conservative. DARE instead allows for limited
new variation by aligning the non-invariant subspaces, enabling stronger theoretical guarantees.
Some prior works “normalize” each domain by learning separate batchnorm parameters but sharing
the rest of the network. This was initially suggested for UDA (Li et al., 2016; Bousmalis et al., 2016;
Chang et al., 2019), which is not directly comparable to DARE since it requires unlabeled test data.
This idea has also been applied to domain generalization (Seo et al., 2019; Segù et al., 2020) but in
an ad-hoc manner. Because of the difficulty in training the network end-to-end, there is no consistent
method for optimizing or validating the objective—in particular, all deep domain generalization
methods were recently called into question when Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021) gave convincing
evidence that nothing beats ERM when evaluated fairly. Nevertheless, our analysis provides an initial
justification for these methods, suggesting that this idea is worth exploring further.


                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L IMITATIONS

Our experiments demonstrate that traditional training already learns excellent features for generalizing
to new distributions. This suggests that we should focus on methods learning to use these features, but
it also means that these features are likely to contain just as much spurious or sensitive information as
the original inputs. Thus, even if a method which uses frozen features performs better under shift
(such as on minority subpopulations), care must still be taken to account for possible biases in the
resulting classifier.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

A major advantage to evaluating only a linear predictor is that we can release the exact model weights
which were used to extract the frozen features on which all algorithms were trained. Code for our
experiments will be released along with these models.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, Mehrtash T. Harandi, Brian C. Lovell, and Mathieu Salzmann. Unsupervised
 domain adaptation by domain invariant projection. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on
 Computer Vision, pp. 769–776, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2013.100.
Yamini Bansal, Gal Kaplun, and Boaz Barak. For self-supervised learning, rationality implies
  generalization, provably. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Konstantinos Bousmalis, George Trigeorgis, Nathan Silberman, Dilip Krishnan, and Dumitru Erhan.
  Domain separation networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS’16, pp. 343–351, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016. Curran
  Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510838819.
Marcus Carlsson. Perturbation theory for the matrix square root and matrix modulus. 10 2018.
Woong-Gi Chang, Tackgeun You, Seonguk Seo, Suha Kwak, and Bohyung Han. Domain-specific
 batch normalization for unsupervised domain adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03950, 2019.
Yining Chen, Elan Rosenfeld, Mark Sellke, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Iterative feature
  matching: Toward provable domain generalization with logarithmic environments. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09913, 2021.
Yuansi Chen and Peter Bühlmann. Domain adaptation under structural causal models. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(261):1–80, 2021.
Ju L. Daleckii and S.G. Krein. Integration and differentiation of functions of hermitian operators and
   applications to the theory of perturbations. AMS Translations (2), 47(1-30), 1965.
Chen Fang, Ye Xu, and Daniel N. Rockmore. Unbiased metric learning: On the utilization of multiple
  datasets and web images for softening bias. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 1657–1664, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2013.208.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 17(1):2096–2030, jan 2016. ISSN 1532-4435.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge,
  MA, USA, 2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Patrick J. Heagerty and Scott L. Zeger. Marginalized multilevel models and likelihood inference
  (with comments and a rejoinder by the authors). Statistical Science, 15(1):1 – 26, 2000. doi:
  10.1214/ss/1009212671.
Pritish Kamath, Akilesh Tangella, Danica Sutherland, and Nathan Srebro. Does invariant risk
  minimization capture invariance? In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu (eds.), Proceedings
  of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 130 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4069–4077. PMLR, 13–15 Apr 2021.
Zeljko Kereta and Timo Klock. Estimating covariance and precision matrices along subspaces.
  Electronic Journal of Statistics, 15:554–588, 01 2021. doi: 10.1214/20-EJS1782.
Vladimir Koltchinskii and Karim Lounici. Concentration inequalities and moment bounds for sample
  covariance operators. Bernoulli, 23(1):110 – 133, 2017. doi: 10.3150/15-BEJ730.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  May 2015. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature14539.
D. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Song, and T. M. Hospedales. Deeper, broader and artier domain generalization. In
  2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5543–5551, Los Alamitos,
  CA, USA, oct 2017. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.591.
Ker-Chau Li and Naihua Duan. Regression Analysis Under Link Violation. The Annals of Statistics,
  17(3):1009 – 1052, 1989. doi: 10.1214/aos/1176347254.
Yanghao Li, Naiyan Wang, Jianping Shi, Jiaying Liu, and Xiaodi Hou. Revisiting batch normalization
  for practical domain adaptation. Pattern Recognition, 80, 03 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2018.03.
  005.
Dong C. Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale opti-
  mization. Mathematical Programming, 45(1):503–528, Aug 1989. ISSN 1436-4646. doi:
 10.1007/BF01589116.
John Miller, Karl Krauth, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt. The effect of natural distribution
  shift on question answering models. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 6905–6916. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Xingchao Peng, Qinxun Bai, Xide Xia, Zijun Huang, Kate Saenko, and Bo Wang. Moment matching
  for multi-source domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1406–1415, 2019.
Jonas Peters, Peter Bühlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal inference by using invariant
  prediction: identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 2016.
Adam Poliak, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita Haldar, Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin Van Durme.
  Hypothesis only baselines in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the Seventh Joint
 Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, pp. 180–191, New Orleans, Louisiana, June
  2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/S18-2023.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do ImageNet classifiers
  generalize to ImageNet? In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5389–5400. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. The risks of invariant risk minimization.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dominik Rothenhäusler, Nicolai Meinshausen, Peter Bühlmann, and Jonas Peters. Anchor regression:
  Heterogeneous data meet causality. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 83(2):
  215–246, 2021.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Mattia Segù, Alessio Tonioni, and Federico Tombari. Batch normalization embeddings for deep
 domain generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12672, 2020.
Seonguk Seo, Yumin Suh, Dongwan Kim, Geeho Kim, Jongwoo Han, and Bohyung Han. Learn-
  ing to optimize domain specific normalization for domain generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.04275, 2019.
Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep domain adaptation. In
  Gang Hua and Hervé Jégou (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2016 Workshops, pp. 443–450, Cham,
  2016. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-49409-8.
V.N. Vapnik. An overview of statistical learning theory. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 10
  (5):988–999, 1999. doi: 10.1109/72.788640.
Hemanth Venkateswara, Jose Eusebio, Shayok Chakraborty, and Sethuraman Panchanathan. Deep
  hashing network for unsupervised domain adaptation. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5385–5394, 2017.
Yoav Wald, Amir Feder, Daniel Greenfeld, and Uri Shalit. On calibration and out-of-domain
  generalization. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Haoxiang Wang, Haozhe Si, Bo Li, and Han Zhao. Provable domain generalization via invariant-
  feature subspace recovery. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari,
  Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 23018–23033. PMLR,
 17–23 Jul 2022.
Kai Yuanqing Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal:
  The role of image backgrounds in object recognition. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Y. Yu, T. Wang, and R. J. Samworth. A useful variant of the Davis–Kahan theorem for statisticians.
  Biometrika, 102(2):315–323, 04 2014. ISSN 0006-3444. doi: 10.1093/biomet/asv008.
Han Zhao, Remi Tachet Des Combes, Kun Zhang, and Geoffrey Gordon. On learning invariant
  representations for domain adaptation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7523–7532. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ISCUSSION
A.1    C ONNECTION TO A NCHOR R EGRESSION

The DARE objective for linear regression is written
            X
        min      Epe [(β T Σ−1/2
                            e    (x − µe ) − y)2 ]         s.t.   β T Σ−1/2
                                                                       e    µe = 0. ∀e ∈ E.          (3)
             β
                 e∈E

The idea of adjusting for domain projections has similarities to Anchor Regression (Rothenhäusler
et al., 2021), an objective which linearly regresses separately on the projection and rejection of the
data onto the span of a set of anchor variables. These variables represent some (known) measure of
variability across the data, and the resulting solution enjoys robustness to pointwise-additive shifts in
the underlying SCM. If we define the anchor variable to be a one-hot vector indicating a sample’s
environment, the Anchor Regression objective minimizes
                      1 X
                              Epe `(β T (x − µe ), y − µy,e ) + γ`(β T µe , µy,e )) ,

                     |E|
                        e∈E

where ` is the squared loss and µy,e = Epe [y]. Here we see that Anchor Regression is “adjusting”
in a sense, by regressing on the residuals, though the objective also regresses the mean prediction
onto the target mean. Unfortunately, this requires access to the h target mean,iwhich is unavailable
                                                                       p(y=1|x)
in logistic regression due to the lack of a good estimator for E log p(y=−1|x)    . Nevertheless, if we
(i) assume the feature covariance is fixed for all environments and (ii) assume the target mean is
zero for all environments, we observe that the above objective becomes equivalent to the Lagrangian
form of DARE for linear regression (3). Alternatively, we could imagine combining the two by
keeping Anchor Regression’s use of separate target means while adding DARE’s feature covariance
whitening which would give
                1 X       h                                                             i
                      Epe `(β T Σ−1/2
                                   e    (x − µe ), y − µy,e ) + γ`(β T Σ−1/2
                                                                        e    µe , µy,e ) ,
               |E|
                  e∈E

However, this still requires us to estimate the target mean, so it is unclear if or how this objective
could be applied to the task of classification.

A.2    O N THE C ONDITIONS A SSUMED W ITHOUT L OSS OF G ENERALITY

It may not be immediately clear why it is reasonable to assume both V = I and Σ  = I WLOG
simultaneously, so we clarify this point here. It is crucial to observe here that β ∗ and Ae do not need
to be directly identifiable, because we only care about the predictive distribution β ∗T  . We only need
Ae to be identifiable from x up to equivalence of this distribution. So if for example we recover
some invertible transformation Âe = Ae M , this is not at all a problem because we also learn the
corresponding β̂ = M T β ∗ such that β̂ T Â−1
                                            e x=β
                                                       ∗T
                                                          M M −1 A−1e x=β
                                                                             ∗T
                                                                                 .
In particular, suppose instead V 6= I and E[ 0  T0 ] = Σ0 . Then we can simply reparameterize as
          −1/2           −1/2            1/2                      1/2
 0 → Σ0  0 , be → Σ0 be , β ∗ → Σ0 β ∗ , Ae → Ae V −1 Σ0 . It is easy to see this results
in the same observed distribution over (x, y), and further that learning β ∗ to predict on  0 is the
                     1/2                 −1/2
same as learning Σ0 β ∗ to predict on Σ0  0 . So now we’ve reduced this to a setting where
      T
E[ 0  0 ] = I but perhaps V 6= I. However, when V 6= I it represents precisely the unidentifiable
transformation M above, which does not pose a problem for prediction because it will not change in
future environments.

B     P ROOFS OF M AIN R ESULTS
B.1   N OTATION

We use capital letters to denote matrices and lowercase to denote vectors or scalars, where the latter
should be clear from context. k · k refers to the usual vector norm, or spectral norm for matrices. For a
matrix M , we use λmax (M ) to mean its maximum eigenvalue—the minimum is defined analogously.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We write the pseudo-inverse as M † . For a collection of samples {xi }ni=1 , we frequently make use
of the sample mean, µ̂ := n1    xi , and the sample covariance, Σ̂ := n1 (xi − µ̄)(xi − µ̄)T . The
                             P                                           P
notation . means less than or equal to up to constant factors.

B.2   S TATEMENT AND PROOF OF L EMMA B.1, AND DISCUSSION OF RELATED RESULTS

Lemma B.1. Assume our data follows a logistic regression model with regression vector β ∗ and
                               p(y=1|z)
covariates z ∼ N (0, I): log p(y=−1|z)  = β ∗T z. Then the solution to the dimension-constrained
logistic regression problem
                          arg min Ez,y [− log σ(yβ T z)]   s.t. βS c = 0,
                               β

where S ⊆ [d] indexes a subset of the dimensions, is equal to αβS∗ for some α ∈ (0, 1].

Proof. The logistic regression model can be rewritten:
                                        y | z = 1{β ∗T z +   > 0},
where   is drawn from a standard logistic distribution. If we are restricted to not use zS c , we can see
that these can be modeled simply as an additional noise term. Thus, our new model is
                                   y | z = 1{βS∗T zS +   + τ > 0},
where τ := βS∗Tc zS c ∼ p is symmetric zero-mean noise, independent of zS . Because we are now
modeling the other dimensions as noise, moving forward we will drop the S subscript, writing simply
β ∗T z. Define F, f as the CDF and PDF of the distribution of  0 :=   + τ . Then the MLE population
objective can be written
 L(β) = −Ez [E 0 ∼f ( 0 ) [1{β ∗T z +  0 > 0} log σ(β T z) + 1{−(β ∗T z +  0 ) > 0} log σ(−β T z)]].
For a fixed z, note that E 0 [1{β ∗T z + 0 > 0}] = P( 0 ≥ −β ∗T z) = F (β ∗T z) (since f is symmetric),
and therefore taking the derivative of this objective we get
               ∇β L(β) = −∇β Ez [F (β ∗T z) log σ(β T z) + F (−β ∗T z) log σ(−β T z)]
                       = Ez [z · F (−β ∗T z)σ(β T z) − F (β ∗T z)σ(−β T z) ]


Because f is symmetric, we have F (z) = 1 − F (−z), giving
                          ∇β L(β) = Ez z · σ(β T z) − F (β ∗T z) .


Consider the directional derivative of the loss in the direction β ∗ , at the point β = αβ ∗ :
                     β ∗T ∇β L(αβ ∗ ) = Ez β ∗T z · σ(αβ ∗T z) − F (β ∗T z) .


Because F is the CDF of a logistic distribution convolved with p, by Fubini’s theorem we have
                                    Z z
                           F (z) =        f (z) dz
                                      −∞
                                    Z z    Z  ∞
                                                       0
                                 =               p(τ )σ (z − τ ) dτ dz
                                         −∞     −∞
                                        Z ∞            Z z−τ
                                    =         p(τ )            σ 0 (ω) dω dτ
                                         −∞             −∞
                                        Z ∞
                                    =         p(τ )σ(z − τ )
                                         −∞
                                    = Eτ ∼p [σ(z − τ )].
Further, because p is symmetric, this is equal to 12 (Eτ ∼p [σ(z − τ )] + Eτ ∼p [σ(z + τ )]). Thus, we
have

      ∗T          ∗         ∗T                   ∗T       1       ∗T               ∗T

     β ∇β L(αβ ) = Ez β z · Eτ ∼p σ(αβ z) −                   σ(β z − τ ) + σ(β z + τ )           .
                                                          2


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We first consider the case where α = 1. When β ∗T z > 0, the term inside the expectation is positive
for all τ 6= 0, and vice-versa when β ∗T z < 0 (this can be verified by writing the difference as a
                                                                                                   ∗T
function of β ∗T z, τ , and observing that all the terms are non-negative except for a factor of eβ z −1).
                                    ∗      ∗
It follows that at the point β = β , −β is a descent direction. Furthermore, since the objective is
continuous in α, we can follow this direction by reducing α (that is, moving in the direction −β ∗ )
until the directional derivative vanishes.
Next, consider α = 0. Then the directional derivative is
                               1
            β ∗T ∇β L(0) = Ez β ∗T z · Eτ ∼p 1 − (σ(β ∗T z − τ ) + σ(β ∗T z + τ )) .

                               2
Here, when β ∗T z > 0 the inner term is negative, and vice-versa for β ∗T z < 0, implying that the
directional derivative is now negative. Because the objective is convex, it follows that the optimal
choice for α lies in (0, 1], being equal to 1 when τ = 0 almost surely.
It remains to show that the optimal vector has no other component orthogonal to β ∗ —in other words,
that the solution is precisely αβ ∗ . For isotropic Gaussian z, we have for any δ perpendicular to β ∗
that E[δ T z|β ∗T z] = 0. Therefore, the gradient in the direction δ is
      Ez [δ T z · (σ(αβ ∗T z) − F (β ∗T z))] = Eβ ∗T z [EδT z|β ∗T z [δ T z](σ(αβ ∗T z) − F (β ∗T z))]
                                             = 0.
Since β and all orthogonal directions form a complete basis, it follows that ∇L(αβ ∗ ) = 0 and
        ∗

therefore that αβ ∗ is the optimal solution.

Though we prove this lemma only for Gaussian z, we found empirically that the result approximately
holds whenever z is dimension-wise independent and symmetric about the origin. We believe this is
a consequence of the Central Limit Theorem: our proof relies on the conditional expectation of inner
products with z which converge to Gaussian in distribution as the dimensionality of z grows.
We observe that Li & Duan (1989) prove a much simpler result under a general “linear conditional
expectation” condition which is similar to the property we exploit regarding zero-mean conditional
expectation of orthogonal inner products with isotropic Gaussians. Their result is more general, but
it allows for any value of α, including negative. In this case, we would actually be recovering the
opposite effects of the ground truth, which is clearly insufficient for test-time prediction. Heagerty
& Zeger (2000) give an analytical closed-form for the solution under a probit model with Gaussian
noise; since this is not a logistic model, the Gaussian noise represents significantly less model
misspecification, which explains why the exact closed-form is recoverable.

B.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

Theorem 5.2. (Closed-form solution to the DARE population objective). Under model (2), the
solution to the DARE population objective (3) for linear regression is Π̂β ∗ . If   is Gaussian, then the
solution for logistic regression (1) is αΠ̂β ∗ for some α ∈ (0, 1].

Proof. Observe that under the constraint, regressing on the centered observations is equivalent to
regressing on the non-centered observations (since the mean must have no effect on the output), so
the solutions to these two objectives must be the same and have the same minimizers. We therefore
consider the solution to the DARE objective but on non-centered observations.
It is immediate that the unconstrained solution to the DARE population objective on non-centered
data is β ∗ for both linear and logistic regression. For linear regression, we observe that because
the adjusted covariates in each environment have identity covariance, the excess training risk of a
predictor β is exactly kβ − β ∗ k2 . Therefore, the solution can be rewritten
                                   min kβ − β ∗ k2
                                     β

                                    s.t.   β T Σ−1/2
                                                e    µe = 0. ∀e ∈ E.
                 −1/2
Recalling that Σe      µe = be , the constraint can be written in matrix form as BT β = 0, and thus we
see that the solution is the `2 -norm projection of β ∗ onto the nullspace of BT (i.e., the intersection of
the nullspaces of the be ). By definition, this is given by (I − BB† )β ∗ = Π̂β ∗ .


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To derive the closed-form for logistic regression, write the spectral decomposition B = U DV T , and
consider regressing on U T   instead of  . As the predictor only affects the objective through its linear
projection, the solution to this objective will be U T times the solution to the original objective (that
is, for all vectors v, (U T β)T U T v = β T v). We will denote parameters for the rotated objective with
a tilde, e.g. ṽ := U T v.
The constraint in Equation (1) is equivalent to requiring that the mean projection is a constant vector
c1 and, with the inclusion of a bias term, we can WLOG consider c = 0. Thus, the constraint can be
written B̃T β̃ = V Dβ̃ = 0 ⇐⇒ Dβ̃ = 0. We can therefore see that this constraint is the same as
requiring that the dimensions of β̃ corresponding to the non-zero dimensions of D are 0.
Noting that U T   ∼ N (0, I), we now apply Lemma B.1 to see that the solution will be β̃ = α(I −
DD† )β̃ ∗ for some α ∈ (0, 1]. Finally, as argued above we can recover the solution to the original
objective by rotating back, giving the solution β = U β̃ = αU (I − DD† )U T β ∗ = αΠ̂β ∗ .

B.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.6

Theorem B.2 (Theorem 5.6, restated). For any ρ ≥ 0, denote the set of possible test environments
Aρ which contains all parameters (Ae0 , be0 ) subject to Assumptions 5.3 and 5.5 and a bound on
the mean: kbe0 k ≤ ρ. For logistic or linear regression, let β̂ be the minimizer of the corresponding
DARE objective (1) or (3). Then,
                          sup     Re0 (β̂) = (1 + ρ2 )(kβ ∗ k2 + 2BkβΠ̂
                                                                     ∗     ∗
                                                                        kkβI−Π̂
                                                                                k).
                      (Ae0 ,be0 )∈Aρ

Furthermore, the DARE solution is minimax:
                                       β̂ ∈ arg min           sup           Re0 (β).
                                                  β∈Rd   (Ae0 ,be0 )∈Aρ


                                                                                 −1/2
Proof. Recall that in an environment e, Ee [y | x] = β ∗T Σe                            x. So, for an environment e0 and
predictor β̂, we have the following excess risk decomposition:
                                            −1/2 0 2
Re0 (β̂) = Ee0 [(β̂ T Σ̄−1/2 x0 − β ∗T Σe0            x) ]
                                            T1                                                          T
          z                       }|                   { z                   }|2            {
                  T −1/2 0            ∗T −1/2 0       2            T −1/2        ∗T −1/2   2
        = Ee0 [(β̂ Σ̄   (x − µe0 ) − β Σe0 (x − µe0 )) ] + Ee0 [(β̂ Σ̄    µe0 − β Σe0 µe0 ) ] .
Observe that term T1 does not depend on the mean be0 .
Term T2 simplifies to
                                                                    v
                                                                                      2
                                                            z      }|         {
                                            −1/2           1/2
              Ee0 [(β̂ T Σ̄−1/2 µe0 − β ∗T Σe0 µe0 )2 ] = (Σe0 Σ̄−1/2 β̂ − β ∗ )T be0  ,
                                                                                       


and so we can write a supremum over T2 as
                                                 sup T2 = sup (v T be0 )2
                                                 Aρ          Aρ

                                                         = ρ2 sup kvk2 .
                                                                  Aρ

Next, observe that T1 simplifies to
                                                                           1/2             1/2
           β̂ T Σ̄−1/2 Σe0 Σ̄−1/2 β̂ + kβ ∗ k2 − 2β̂ T Σ̄−1/2 Σe0 β ∗ = kΣe0 Σ̄−1/2 β̂ − β ∗ k2
                                                                                   = kvk2 .
So, returning to the full loss and recalling that T1 is independent of be0 , we have
                                       sup Re0 (β̂) = sup T1 + T2
                                       Aρ                    Aρ

                                                         = (1 + ρ2 ) sup kvk2 .
                                                                           Aρ



                                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                       −1/2
Of course, the ideal would be for a given environment e0 to set β̂ := Σ̄1/2 Σe0 β ∗ =⇒ v = 0, but
we have to choose a single β̂ for all possible environments e0 parameterized by (Ae0 , be0 ) ∈ Aρ . We
will show that the choice of β̂ := αΠ̂β ∗ is minimax-optimal under this set for any α ∈ (0, 1].
Leaving the supremum over adversary choices implicit, we can rewrite the squared norm of v as

                         v T v = ((∆ + I)β̂ − β ∗ )T ((∆ + I)β̂ − β ∗ )
                                = β̂ T ∆T ∆β̂ + kβ̂ − β ∗ k2 + 2β̂ T ∆T (β̂ − β ∗ ).

By Lemma C.4, we can define an environment by defining the block terms of UΠ̂ ∆UΠ̂T directly.
                                       β̂          β̂ T
Consider the choice of ∆1 = λ kI−
                                β̂
                                   Π̂ I−Π̂
                                       k2
                                           , ∆2 = ∆12 = ∆21 = 0. This choice is in Aρ for any
                                             I−Π̂
λ ∈ R since it is block-diagonal and k∆2 k = 0. Now we can write

                    v T v = λ2 kβ̂I−Π̂ k2 + kβ̂ − β ∗ k2 + 2λβ̂I−
                                                               T
                                                                   (β̂
                                                                 Π̂ I−Π̂
                                                                            ∗
                                                                         − βI− Π̂
                                                                                  )
                            ≥ λ2 kβ̂I−Π̂ k2 − 2λkβ̂I−Π̂ kkβ̂ − β ∗ k),
via Cauchy-Schwarz and the triangle inequality. So, taking λ → ∞ means that the minimax risk is
unbounded unless β̂I−Π̂ = 0 ⇐⇒ β̂ = β̂Π̂ . For the remainder of the proof we consider only this
case.
With this restriction, we have

                      kvk2 = k(∆ + I)β̂Π̂ − β ∗ k2
                                                ∗     ∗
                              = k(∆ + I)β̂Π̂ − βΠ̂ − βI− Π̂
                                                            k2
                                                ∗ 2      ∗            ∗T
                              = k(∆ + I)β̂Π̂ − βΠ̂ k + kβI− Π̂
                                                               k2 − 2βI− Π̂
                                                                            ∆β̂Π̂ .

Assumption 5.3 implies that
                         ∗T
                       |βI− Π̂
                               ∆β̂Π̂ | = |β ∗T UΠ̂ (I − SΠ̂ )UΠ̂T ∆UΠ̂ SΠ̂ UΠ̂T β̂|

                                            ∗T                  ∆1 ∆12
                                       = β UΠ̂ (I − SΠ̂ )                     SΠ̂ UΠ̂T β̂
                                                              ∆21 ∆2
                                                 ∗     ∗
                                            ≤ BkβΠ̂ kkβI−Π̂
                                                            k,
                                   ∗
Consider the DARE solution β̂ = αβΠ̂ for α ∈ (0, 1]. Then using the equivalent supremized set
from Assumption 5.5 and Lemma C.3, the worst-case risk of this choice is
                                                                        ∗ 2      ∗              ∗     ∗
 sup Re0 (β̂) = (1 + ρ2 )             sup             (k(α∆ + (α − 1)I)βΠ̂ k + kβI− Π̂
                                                                                       k2 + 2BkβΠ̂ kkβI− Π̂
                                                                                                            k)
 Aρ                          k∆β ∗ k2 <kβ ∗ k2
                                 Π̂           Π̂
                                                                                                            (4)
                        2  ∗ 2      ∗             ∗     ∗
              = (1 + ρ )(kβΠ̂ k + kβI−Π̂
                                         k2 + 2BkβΠ̂ kkβI− Π̂
                                                              k).

It remains to show that any other choice of β̂ results in greater risk. Observe that the second two
terms of (4) are constant with respect to ∆, so we focus on the first term. That is, we show that any
                                                             ∗ 2        ∗ 2
other choice results in supk∆β ∗ k2 <kβ ∗ k2 k(∆ + I)β̂Π̂ − βΠ̂ k > kβΠ̂ k (except for β̂ = 0, which
                                Π̂     Π̂
we address at the end).
                                                                                      ∗              ∗
For any choice of β̂Π̂ , decompose the vector into its projection and rejection onto βΠ̂ as β̂Π̂ = αβΠ̂ +δ,
      T ∗                                                   T
with δ βΠ̂ = 0. The adversary can choose ∆2 = λδδ , which lies in Aρ for any λ. Then taking
λ → ∞ causes risk to grow without bound—it follows that we must have δ = 0.
Next, consider any choice α 6∈ (0, 1]. If α > 2 or α < 0, choosing ∆2 = 0 makes this term
           ∗ 2      ∗ 2                                                          ∗ 2      ∗ 2
(α − 1)2 kβΠ̂ k > kβΠ̂ k . If 2 ≥ α > 1, choosing ∆2 = α1 I makes this term α2 kβΠ̂ k > kβΠ̂ k .
                                                ∗ 2
Finally, if α = 0 then this term is equal to kβΠ̂ k —however, this value is the supremum of the
adversarial risk of the DARE solution and it cannot actually be attained.


                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.7

Theorem B.3 (Theorem 5.7, restated). Fix test environment parameters Ae0 , be0 and our guess Σ̄.
Suppose we minimize the DARE regression objective (3) on environments whose means be are
Gaussian vectors with covariance Σb , with span(Σb ) = span(I − Π). After seeing E training
domains:
                                                                                          ∗
1. If E ≥ rank(Σb ) then DARE recovers the minimax-optimal predictor almost surely: β̂ = βΠ .
2. Otherwise, if E ≥ r(Σb ) then with probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                             r                (r                 )!!
                           ∗          kΣb k      r(Σb )          log 1/δ log 1/δ
         Re0 (β̂) ≤ Re0 (βΠ ) + O                       + max           ,            ,
                                     ξ(Σb )        E                E       E
   where O(·) hides dependence on k∆k.

Proof. Define Π̂E as the projection onto the nullspace of BT after having seen E environments. Item
1 is immediate, since as soon as we observe E = rank(Σb ) linearly independent be we have that
span(B) = span(Σb ) and therefore Π̂E = Π (this occurs almost surely for any absolutely continuous
distribution). To prove item 2, we will write the solution learned after seeing E environments as
β̂E := Π̂E β ∗ . We can write the excess risk of the ground-truth minimax predictor βΠ
                                                                                     ∗
                                                                                       as
                                 ∗         ∗T −1/2        1/2
                           Re0 (βΠ ) = E[(βΠ Σ̄    Σe0   − β ∗T  )2 ]
                                                               1/2
                                     = E[(β ∗T ΠΣ̄−1/2 Σe0   − β ∗T  )2 ],
and likewise we have
                                             T −1/2      1/2
                           Re0 (β̂E ) = E[(β̂E Σ̄   Σe0   − β ∗T  )2 ]
                                                               1/2
                                    = E[(β ∗T Π̂E Σ̄−1/2 Σe0   − β ∗T  )2 ].
Taking the difference,
                                           :=v
                                     z    }|     {
                   ∗                         1/2                             1/2
      R(β̂E ) − R(βΠ ) = E[(β ∗T Π̂E Σ̄−1/2 Σe0   −β ∗T  )2 − (β ∗T ΠΣ̄−1/2 Σe0   − β ∗T  )2 ]
                         ≤ k(Π − Π̂E )E[vv T ](2I − Π − Π̂E )k + 2k(Π − Π̂E )E[v T ]k
                            h                                          i
                         ≤ 2 k(Π − Π̂E )E[vv T ]k + k(Π − Π̂E )E[v T ]k .
Now we note that
                                                   1/2               1/2
                            E[vv T ] = E[(Σ̄−1/2 Σe0  )(Σ̄−1/2 Σe0  )T ]
                                    = Σ̄−1/2 Σe0 Σ̄−1/2
and
                                                               1/2
                                       E[v T ] = Σ̄−1/2 Σe0 .
These matrices are bounded by k∆ + Ik2 , k∆ + Ik respectively and are constant with respect to the
training environments we sample. It follows that we can bound the risk difference as
                                               ∗
                                  R(β̂E ) − R(βΠ ) . kΠ̂E − Πk,
and all that remains is to bound the term kΠ̂E − Πk.
Combining Theorems 4 and 5 from Koltchinskii & Lounici (2017) with the triangle inequality, we
have that when r(Σb ) ≤ E, with probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                  (r                  )       (r                )!
                                      log 1/δ log 1/δ            r(Σb ) r(Σb )
         kΣ̄ − Σb k . kΣb k max               ,         + max           ,           .
                                         E        E                 E       E
Since r(Σb ) ≤ E, the first term of the second max dominates. Further, Corrolary 3 of Yu et al. (2014),
a variant of the Davis-Kahan theorem, gives us
                                                    kΣ̄ − Σb k
                                       kΠ̂E − Πk .             .
                                                      ξ(Σb )
Combining these facts gives the result.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.6   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.9

Theorem B.4 (Theorem 5.9, fully stated). Assume the data follows model (2) with   ∼ N (0, I).
Observing nS samples from a source distribution S with covariance ΣS , we use half to estimate Σ̂S
and the other half to learn parameters β which minimize the unconstrained (λ = 0), uncentered
DARE regression objective. At test-time, given nT samples {xi }ni=1
                                                                 T
                                                                    from the target distribution T
                                                          T −1/2
with mean and covariance µT , ΣT , we predict f (x; β) = β Σ̂T x.

Define m(Σ) := λλmax
                 3
                     (Σ)
                    (Σ)
                         , and assume nS = Ω(m(ΣS )d2 ), nT = Ω(m(ΣT )d2 ). Then with
                    min
probability at least 1 − 3d−1 , the excess squared error of our predictor on the new environment is
bounded as
                                                                                       
                                                 2

                                             E[η   ]    d          m(Σ S )    m(Σ  T )
       RT (f ) = O (1 + kµT k2 )             q            + d2           +              .
                                        1−O          d nS           nS          nT
                                                  nS


Proof. We begin by bounding the error of our solution kβ − β ∗ k. Observe that with our estimate
Σ̂S of the source environment moments, we are solving linear regression with targets β ∗T  i + ηi
                       −1/2        −1/2
and covariates x̂i = Σ̂S xi = Σ̂S ΣS 1/2  i . Thus, if we had access to the true gradient of the
modified least-squares objective (which is not the same as assuming nS → ∞, because in that case
we would have Σ̂S → ΣS ), the solution would be
                                                               −1
                        −1/2                             −1/2         −1/2
 E[x̂x̂T ]−1 E[x̂y] = Σ̂S ΣS 1/2 (I + µT µT T )ΣS 1/2 Σ̂S           Σ̂S ΣS 1/2 (I + µT µT T )β ∗
                      1/2
                 = Σ̂S ΣS −1/2 β ∗ .
                                                                                  1/2
Moving forward we denote this solution to the modified objective as β̂ := Σ̂S ΣS −1/2 β ∗ , and
                              −1/2
further define ∆S := ΣS 1/2 Σ̂S , with ∆T defined analogously. A classical result tells us that the
                                     σ2

OLS solution is distributed as N β̂, nSy M −1 , where M is the modified covariance ∆TS ∆S and
σy2 := E[η 2 ]. To show a rate of convergence to the OLS solution, we need to solve for the minimum
eigenvalue λmin (M )—this will suffice since the above fact implies finite-sample convergence of the
OLS estimator to the population solution. The well-known bound for sub-Gaussian random vectors
tells us that with probability ≥ 1 − δ1 ,
                                                      r        s           
                                    q                      d       log 1/δ1 
                       kβ − β̂k . λmax (M −1 )σy2            +               .
                                                          nS          nS
                                                               p
and moving forward we condition on this event. Now let γS :=       d/nS , with γT defined analogously.
Since M   0, it follows that
                                 λmax (M −1 ) = λmin (∆TS ∆S )−1 ,
and further,
                               λmin (∆TS ∆S ) ≥ 1 − k∆TS ∆S − Ik.

By Lemma C.1, we have that with probability ≥ 1 − d−1
                                       k∆TS ∆S − Ik . γS .
This implies that our solution’s error can be bounded as

         kβ − β ∗ k = k(β − β̂) + (β̂ − β ∗ )k
                      s              r          s          
                            σy2            d       log 1/δ 1      1/2
                    ≤                         +              + kΣ̂S ΣS −1/2 − Ikkβ ∗ k
                        1 − O(γS )        nS          nS


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We assume kβ ∗ k = 1 so we can avoid carrying it throughout the rest of the proof. Bounding the
second term with Lemma C.2 gives
                          s             r         s            
                                σ 2
                                 y           d        log 1/δ 1
                                                                      p
             kβ − β ∗ k .                      +                + γS d m(ΣS ).
                            1 − O(γS ))     nS           nS

On the target distribution, our excess risk with a predictor β is
                                              −1/2
                        Re0 (β) = E[(β T Σ̂T x − β ∗T ΣT −1/2 x)2 ]
                                    
                                                ∆T
                                                                   2 
                                          z     }|    {
                                              1/2 −1/2        ∗ T  
                                                                    
                                = E  ( Σ T    Σ̂ T   β − β  )     


                                    = (∆T β − β ∗ )T (I + µT µT T )(∆T β − β ∗ )
                                    ≤ (1 + kµT k2 )k∆T β − β ∗ k2
Now, we have
                     k∆T β − β ∗ k = k(∆T β − ∆T β ∗ ) + (∆T β ∗ − β ∗ )k
                                   ≤ k∆T (β − β ∗ )k + k(∆T − I)β ∗ k
                                   ≤ (1 + k∆T − Ik)kβ − β ∗ k + k∆T − Ik.
Once again invoking Lemma C.2, with probability ≥ 1 − d−1 ,
                                                p
                               k∆T − Ik . γT d m(ΣT ),
and using this plus the previous result, the triangle inequality, and (a + b)2 ≤ 2(a2 + b2 ) gives
         k∆T β − β ∗ k2 . (1 + k∆T − Ik)2 kβ − β ∗ k2 + k∆T − Ik2
                                 p                                          √
                        . (1 + γT d m(ΣT ))2 kβ − β ∗ k2 + (kΣ1/2 kkΣ−1 k3/2 dγT )2
                      . kβ − β ∗ k2 + γT2 d m(ΣT ),
                                         p
where the lower bound on nT enforces γT d m(ΣT ) ≤ 1. It follows that the excess risk can be
bounded as
                         Re0 . (1 + kµT k2 )k∆T β − β ∗ k2
                                . (1 + kµT k2 ) kβ − β ∗ k2 + γT2 d m(ΣT ) .


Letting δ1 = 1/d, combining all of the above via union bound, and eliminating lower-order terms,
we get
                                                                                    !
                                2
                                         σy2     d      2                2
           Re0 (β) . (1 + kµT k )                   + γS d m(ΣS ) + γT d m(ΣT )
                                     1 − O(γS ) nS
                                                                                     
                                              2
                                            σ

                                              y      d          m(Σ  S )    m(Σ  T )
                   = (1 + kµT k2 )           q          + d2             +           
                                     1−O         d  n S          n S         n T
                                                     nS

                           −1
with probability ≥ 1 − 3d       .

C    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
Lemma C.1. Suppose we observe n ∈ Ω(d + log 1/δ) samples X ∼ N (µ, Σ) with Σ   0 and
estimate the inverse covariance matrix Σ−1 with the inverse of the sample covariance matrix Σ̄−1 .
Then with probability ≥ 1 − δ, it holds that
                                                      r
                                 −1/2     −1/2          d + log 1/δ
                             kΣ̄      ΣΣ̄      − Ik .               .
                                                             n

                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. As Σ̄−1/2 ΣΣ̄−1/2 and Σ1/2 Σ̄−1 Σ1/2 have the same spectrum, it suffices to bound the latter.
Observe that
                      kΣ1/2 Σ̄−1 Σ1/2 − Ik = kΣ1/2 (Σ̄−1 − Σ−1 )Σ1/2 k.
Now applying Theorem 10 of Kereta & Klock (2021) with A = B = Σ1/2 yields the result.
Lemma C.2. Assume the conditions of Lemma C.1. Then under the same event as Lemma C.1, it
holds that                                             √
               kΣ1/2 Σ̄−1/2 − Ik . kΣ1/2 k kΣ−1 k3/2 dγ + kΣ−1 k2 γ 2 ,
           q
where γ = d+log
              n
                1/δ
                    . In particular, if δ = d−1 , then
                                                    r
                               1/2 −1/2                      d2
                           kΣ Σ̄           − Ik . kΣkkΣ−1 k3
                                                             n

Proof. We begin by deriving a bound for kΣ̄−1/2 − Σ−1/2 k. Define E = Σ̄−1 − Σ−1 . Observe that
                            kEk = kΣ−1/2 Σ1/2 EΣ1/2 Σ−1/2 k
                                 = kΣ−1/2 (Σ1/2 Σ̄−1 Σ1/2 − I)Σ−1/2 k
                                 ≤ kΣ−1 kkΣ1/2 Σ̄−1 Σ1/2 − Ik,
and now apply Lemma C.1 (since Σ̄−1/2 ΣΣ̄−1/2 and Σ1/2 Σ̄−1 Σ1/2 have the same spectrum), giving
                                       kEk . kΣ−1 kγ.
                                                                  √
Let U DU T be the eigendecomposition of Σ, and define the matrix [ ·, α]i,j = √ 1√         as in
                                                                                   Dii +   Djj
Carlsson (2018). The Daleckii-Krein theorem (Daleckii & Krein, 1965) tells us that
                                                √
                       kΣ̄−1/2 − Σ−1/2 k = kU ([ ·, α] ◦ E)U T k + O(kEk2 ).
                     √               p                    √         p
Note that maxi,j |[ ·, α]i,j | = 1/2 λmin (Σ) =⇒ k[ ·, α]k ≤ dkΣ−1 k, and therefore by
sub-multiplicativity of spectral norm under Hadamard product,
                                              p
                         kΣ̄−1/2 − Σ−1/2 k . dkΣ−1 kkEk + kEk2
                                                        √
                                            . kΣ−1 k3/2 dγ + kΣ−1 k2 γ 2 .
Finally, noting that
                          kΣ1/2 Σ̄−1/2 − Ik = kΣ1/2 (Σ̄−1/2 − Σ−1/2 )k
                                             ≤ kΣ1/2 kkΣ̄−1/2 − Σ−1/2 k
                                                                                          √
completes the main proof. To see the second claim, note that n ≥ 2kΣ−1 k implies kΣ−1 k3/2 d ≥
kΣ−1 k2 γ, meaning the first of the two terms dominates.
                                                                               ∗ 2      ∗ 2
Lemma C.3. Let Σ̄ be fixed. Then Assumption 5.5 is satisfied if and only if k∆βΠ̂ k < kβΠ̂ k .

                                                                           1/2
Proof. The claim follows by rewriting the risk terms. Recall that ∆ = Σe0 Σ̄−1/2 − I. Writing out
the excess risk of the ground truth β ∗ in the subspace Π̂,
                                            h                              i
                                 ∗              ∗T −1/2         ∗T −1/2 2
                         RΠ̂
                           pe0 (β ) = Epe0 (βΠ̂ Σ̄       x − βΠ̂  Σe0 x)
                                            h                                i
                                                              1/2
                                    = Epe0 (β ∗T Π̂Σ̄−1/2 Σe0   − β ∗T Π̂ )2
                                            h               i
                                    = Epe0 (β ∗T Π̂∆T  )2
                                  = k∆Π̂β ∗ k2 .
Next, the excess risk of the null vector β̂ = 0 in the same subspace is
                                                     ∗T    −1/2
                                  RΠ̂
                                   pe0 (0) = Epe0 [(βΠ̂ Σe0        x)2 ]
                                           = Epe0 [(β ∗T Π̂ )2 ]
                                           = kΠ̂β ∗ k2 .


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma C.4. For a fixed Σ̄, choosing an environmental covariance Σe0 is equivalent to directly
choosing the error terms ∆1 , ∆2 , ∆12 , ∆21 .

Proof. For a fixed Σ̄, due to the unique definition of square root as a result of Assumption 5.1, the
              1/2
map Σe0 → Σe0 Σ̄−1/2 − I is one-to-one. Recall that we can write

                                       T            ∆1 ∆12
                                      UΠ̂ ∆UΠ̂ =
                                                    ∆21 ∆2
which defines a one-to-one map from ∆ to the error terms. Since the composition of bijective
functions is bijective, the claim follows.


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

D.1    E VALUATION PIPELINE

                                      Test Domain Accuracy                                     Cheat on Test Domain
                                                                                                 to Learn Features
                                                                                                   and Classi er
                     Learn Features
                      and Classi er

                                                                                                Training
       Training                                                                                 Domains
       Domains

                                                             Cheat to Learn   Learn Features
                                                             just Classi er



Figure 2: Depiction of evaluation pipeline. Standard training on train domains leads to poor perfor-
mance. Cheating while training the full network (features and classifier) does substantially better.
However, cheating on just the linear classifier does almost as well, implying that the features learned
without cheating are already good enough for massive improvements over SOTA.

Figure 2 depicts the overall pipeline for evaluation of the different approaches we describe in Section 2.
Our baselines are three distinct pipelines, each slightly different:
1. The first pipeline (dark blue in Figure 2) is the standard method of evaluating ERM on a new
   domain. We train the entire network (the combination of a feature embedder comprising all
   layers except the last linear layer, and the last layer linear classifier) end-to-end on the training
        fi
        fi fi


   domains, simultaneously learning the features and the linear classifier on the training domains
   via backpropagation. When evaluated on a new domain, this achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
   (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021), but it still performs quite poorly.
2. The second pipeline (red) is very similar to the first, but we include the test domain among the
   domains on which the network is trained end-to-end. Because this means that the test distribution
   is one of the training domains, this simulates an “ideal” setting where no distribution shift occurs
   from train-time to test-time. As such, it is unsurprising that this approach performs substantially
   better (though it still leaves a bit to be desired—this raises a separate question about failures of
   in-distribution learning with multiple domains). As this approach requires cheating, it is completely
   unrealistic to expect current methods to even begin to approach this baseline, but it gives a good
   sense of what would be the best performance to hope for.
3. The final pipeline (grey) is our main experimental contribution. Here, the features (all but the
   last layer) are learned without cheating, as in the first pipeline. Next, we freeze the features and
   cheat only while learning a linear classifier on top of these features. Not only does this method do
   significantly better than the first baseline, it actually performs almost as well as—and sometimes
   better than—the second pipeline. Thus, we find that standard features learned via ERM without
   cheating are already good enough for generalization and that the main bottleneck to reaching
   the accuracy of the second baseline is in learning a good linear classifier only. This has several
   important advantages to current methods which attempt to change the entire end-to-end process,
   which we explicate in Section 2 in the main body.

D.2    N UMERICAL C OMPARISONS

The features used for each trial are the default hyperparameter sweep of D OMAIN B ED. For com-
putational reasons, we used fewer random hyperparameter choices per trial, meaning the reported
accuracies are not directly comparable. Nevertheless, our results are significant because they are
consistently evaluated according to the same methodology.
All algorithms use the same set of features for each trial, so their performances are highly dependent.
To account for this, we perform a one-sided paired t-test between algorithms to determine the best
performers. The fact that DARE consistently bests ERM is somewhat surprising: it is intended to
guard against a worst-case distribution shift and depends on the quality of our guess Σ̄, so we would
in general expect worse performance on some datasets.


                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3    C ODE DETAILS

All features were learned by finetuning a ResNet-50 using the default settings and hyperparameter
sweeps of the D OMAIN B ED benchmark (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). We extracted features from
3 trials, with 5 random hyperparameter choices per trial, picking the one with the best training domain
validation accuracy. We used the default random splits of 80% train / 20% test for each domain.
Using frozen features, the cheating linear classifier was trained by minimizing the multinomial
logistic loss with full-batch SGD with momentum for 3000 steps. We did not use a validation set.
For the main experiments, all algorithms were trained using full-batch L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal,
1989). We used the exact same optimization hyperparameters for all methods; the default learning
rate of 1 was unstable when optimizing IRM, frequently diverging, so we lowered the learning rate
until IRM consistently converged (which occurred at a learning rate of 0.2). Since the IRM penalty
only makes sense with both a feature embedder and a classification vector, we used an additional
linear layer for IRM, making the objective non-convex. Presumably due to their convexity for linear
classifiers, all other methods were unaffected by this change. For all methods, we halted optimization
once 20 epochs occurred with no increase in training domain validation accuracy; the maximum
validation accuracy typically occurred within the first 5 epochs.
For stability when whitening (and because the number of samples per domain was often less than the
feature dimension), in estimating Σ̂e for each environment we shrank the sample covariance towards
                                                      Pn
the identity. Specifically, we define Σ̂e = (1 − ρ) n1 i=1 xi xTi + ρI, with ρ = 0.1, and ρ = 0.01 for
DomainNet due to its much larger size. We found that increasing λ beyond ∼1 had little-to-no effect
on the accuracy, loss, or penalty of the DARE solution (see Appendix E for ablations). However,
we did observe that choosing a very large value for λ (e.g., 105 or higher) could result in poor
conditioning of the objective, with the result being that the L-BFGS optimizer took several epochs
for the loss to begin going down.

E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
Here we present additional experimental results. All reported accuracies represent the mean of three
trials, and all error bars (where present) display 90% confidence intervals calculated as ±1.645 √σ̂n .
Note though that the results are not independent across methods, so simply checking if the error
bars overlap is overly conservative in identifying methods which perform better.

E.1   ACCURACY OF THE T EST C OVARIANCE W HITENER

As we do not have access to the true test-time covariance, we estimate the adjustment with the
average of the train-time adjustments. Table 2 reports the normalized squared Frobenius norm of
                                                                      kŴ −W k2                −1/2
our estimate’s error to the sample covariance adjustment, defined as kW k2 F , where W := Σ̂e0
                                                                            F
                                                   1
                                                     P      −1/2
is the sample covariance adjustment and Ŵ := |E|      e∈E Σe     is our averaging estimate. We find
that this normalized error is consistently small, meaning our estimated adjustment is reasonably
close to the “true” adjustment, relative to its spectrum (we put “true” in quotation marks because
the best we can do is estimate it via the sample covariance). This helps explain why our averaging
adjustment performs so well in practice, though we expect future methods could improve on this
estimate (particularly on the last domain of PACS).

E.2   A LIGNMENT OF D OMAIN -S PECIFIC O PTIMAL C LASSIFIERS

As discussed in Section 3, DARE does not project out varying subspaces but rather aligns them such
that the adjusted domains have similar optimal classifiers simultaneously. To verify that this is actually
happening, we learn the optimal linear classifier for each domain individually and evaluate the inter-
domain cosine similarity for these vectors for each class. We see that without adjustment, different
domains’ optimal linear decision boundaries have normals with small alignment on average, which
explains why trying to learn a single linear classifier which does well on all domains simultaneously
performs poorly in most cases. After alignment, the individually optimal classifiers are more aligned,
which allows a single classifier to perform better on all domains. Furthermore, this is done without


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Dataset           Normalized Error
                                Office-Home
                                  A                     0.033
                                  C                     0.040
                                  P                     0.022
                                  R                     0.019
                                PACS
                                  A                     0.052
                                  C                     0.016
                                  P                     0.025
                                  S                     0.217
                                VLCS
                                 C                      0.094
                                 L                      0.039
                                 S                      0.051
                                 V                      0.029


Table 2: Mean normalized adjustment estimation error for each dataset and each train-domain/test-
domain split.

throwing away the varying component (as would be done by invariant prediction (Peters et al., 2016)),
allowing DARE to use more information and resulting in higher test accuracy.

                  Dataset          With Adjustement       Without Adjustement
                  Office-Home
                    A                     0.693                    0.596
                    C                     0.710                    0.691
                    P                     0.695                    0.636
                    R                     0.642                    0.590
                  PACS
                    A                     0.903                    0.863
                    C                     0.896                    0.776
                    P                     0.905                    0.827
                    S                     0.903                    0.791
                  VLCS
                   C                      0.598                    0.200
                   L                      0.723                    0.436
                   S                      0.674                    0.231
                   V                      0.591                    0.210


Table 3: Mean cosine similarity between linear classification vectors which are individually optimal
for their respective domains (learned via logistic regression). For each dataset and each train-
domain/test-domain split we report the average similarity across all class normal vectors and all
domain pairs.


E.3   R ESULTS ON A DDITIONAL E ND - TO -E ND M ETHODS

Though ERM represents approximate state-of-the-art accuracy, for completeness we include a few
additional end-to-end methods to confirm that this fact still holds under our experimental conditions.
We also include additional results on ColoredMNIST:


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Dataset / Algorithm          Mean Accuracy by Domain (± 90% CI)
           Office-Home                 A             C             P             R
             ERM                   61.4 ± 1.9    52.1 ± 1.6    74.6 ± 0.7    75.8 ± 1.9
             Fish                  61.2 ± 1.0    50.1 ± 1.7    75.1 ± 1.0    76.5 ± 0.2
             CORAL                 61.1 ± 0.7    52.4 ± 1.1    75.2 ± 0.7    77.0 ± 0.3
           PACS                        A             C             P             S
             ERM                   84.3 ± 1.5    79.5 ± 1.9    96.7 ± 0.5    74.9 ± 3.7
             Fish                  83.8 ± 2.6    76.4 ± 0.6    96.6 ± 1.2    75.6 ± 3.8
             CORAL                 82.4 ± 1.0    78.6 ± 1.3    96.7 ± 0.4    73.0 ± 2.9
           VLCS                        C             L             S             V
            ERM                    97.6 ± 0.7    66.1 ± 0.6    71.9 ± 1.9    76.1 ± 2.3
            Fish                   98.8 ± 0.4    63.6 ± 0.6    72.0 ± 1.6    78.6 ± 1.6
            CORAL                  97.7 ± 0.3    64.0 ± 2.0    72.2 ± 1.8    74.0 ± 0.7


Table 4: Performance of other algorithms under our experimental conditions. Our results confirm that
ERM remains approximate state of the art among end-to-end methods.

                Dataset / Algorithm     Mean Accuracy by Domain (± 90% CI)
                ColoredMNIST               90%           80%             10%
                  ERM                   71.2 ± 0.8    72.8 ± 0.2      10.1 ± 0.2
                  IRM                   71.3 ± 0.6    72.6 ± 0.3      10.1 ± 0.1
                  GroupDRO              71.2 ± 0.5    72.6 ± 0.3      10.1 ± 0.1
                  DARE                  71.4 ± 0.3    72.9 ± 0.1      10.1 ± 0.1


                             Table 5: Performance on ColoredMNIST.

E.4   A BLATIONS


Figure 3: Demonstration of the effect of whitening. NoSigmaDARE is the exact same algorithm
as DARE but with no covariance whitening. In almost all cases, covariance whitening + guessing
at test-time results in better performance. We expect under much larger distribution shift that this
pattern may reverse.



                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Effect of penalty term λ on the two algorithms which use it. λ = 0 corresponds to no
constraint, and the lower performance demonstrates that this invariance requirement is essential to the
quality of the learned classifier. For λ 6= 0, DARE accuracy is extremely robust, effectively constant
for all λ ≥ 1; in practice we also found the penalty term itself to always be ∼0. In contrast, IRM
accuracy appears to decrease with increasing λ, implying that the observed benefit of IRM primarily
comes from the domain reweighting as in our GroupERM method.


Figure 5: Effect of final feature bottleneck dimensionality on cheating accuracy. Reducing the
dimensionality reduces accuracy of all methods to varying degrees, though in some cases it actually
increases test accuracy. We observe that the main pattern persists, though the gap between cheating
on finetuned features and traditional ERM shrinks as the dimensionality is reduced substantially. To
reduce dimensionality of the pretrained features we use a random projection; unsurprisingly, the
quality dramatically falls as the number of dimensions is reduced.



                                                  27
