Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ODEL - AGNOSTIC M EASURE OF G ENERALIZATION
D IFFICULTY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The measure of a machine learning algorithm is the difficulty of the tasks it can
         perform, and sufficiently difficult tasks are critical drivers of strong machine learn-
         ing models. However, quantifying the generalization difficulty of machine learning
         benchmarks has remained challenging. We propose what is to our knowledge
         the first model-agnostic measure of the inherent generalization difficulty of tasks.
         Our inductive bias complexity measure quantifies the total information required to
         generalize well on a task minus the information provided by the data. It does so
         by measuring the fractional volume occupied by hypotheses that generalize on a
         task given that they fit the training data. It scales exponentially with the intrinsic
         dimensionality of the space over which the model must generalize but only polyno-
         mially in resolution per dimension, showing that tasks which require generalizing
         over many dimensions are drastically more difficult than tasks involving more
         detail in fewer dimensions. Our measure can be applied to compute and compare
         supervised learning, reinforcement learning and meta-learning generalization diffi-
         culties against each other. We show that applied empirically, it formally quantifies
         intuitively expected trends, e.g. that in terms of required inductive bias, MNIST <
         CIFAR10 < Imagenet and fully observable Markov decision processes (MDPs) <
         partially observable MDPs. Further, we show that classification of complex images
         < few-shot meta-learning with simple images. Our measure provides a quantitative
         metric to guide the construction of more complex tasks requiring greater inductive
         bias, and thereby encourages the development of more sophisticated architectures
         and learning algorithms with more powerful generalization capabilities.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Researchers have proposed many benchmarks to train machine learning models and test their general-
ization abilities, from ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) for image recognition to Atari games Belle-
mare et al. (2013) for reinforcement learning (RL). More complex benchmarks promote the develop-
ment of more sophisticated learning algorithms and architectures that can generalize better.
However, we lack rigorous and quantitative measures of the generalization difficulty of these bench-
marks. Generalizing on a task requires both training data and a model’s inductive biases, which
are any constraints on a model class enabling generalization. Inductive biases can be provided by
a model designer, including the choice of architecture, learning rule or hyperparameters defining
a model class. While prior work has quantified the training data needed to generalize on a task
(sample complexity), analysis of the required inductive biases has been limited. Indeed, the concept
of inductive bias itself has not been rigorously and quantitatively defined in general learning settings.
In this paper, we develop a novel information-theoretic framework to measure a task’s inductive bias
complexity, the information content of the inductive biases. Just as sample complexity is a property
inherent to a model class (without reference to a specific training set), inductive bias complexity is a
property inherent to a training set (without reference to a specific model class). To our knowledge,
our measure is the first quantification of inductive bias complexity. As we will describe, our measure
quantifies the fraction of the entire hypothesis space that is consistent with inductive biases for a task
given that hypotheses interpolate the training data; see Fig 1 for an illustration and Definition 1 for a
formal definition. We use this inductive bias complexity measure as a measure of the generalization
difficulty; we hope our measure can guide the development of tasks requiring greater inductive bias.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             a                                                                                   b                                        c
              high sample
              complexity                                                                                            hypothesis space
                                                                                                                                               inductive bias complexity =


                      training data
                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                 good
                                                              generalization
                                                                                                                                              -log
                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                     fit data        fit inductive bias
                                               poor
                 low sample                generalization
                 complexity


                                      bias complexity


                                                                               bias complexity
                                                        inductive bias


                                                                               high inductive
                                      low inductive
                                                                                                                        generalize well


Figure 1: Dividing the hypothesis space of a task. (a) plots the trade-off between the amount of
training data required (sample complexity) vs. the amount of inductive bias required (inductive bias
complexity) to generalize well. Achieving a lower sample complexity for a fixed generalization
performance target requires higher inductive bias complexity to further restrict the hypothesis space.
While many papers have quantified sample complexity, we quantify inductive bias complexity. (b)
categorizes hypotheses by whether or not they fit the training data or contain particular inductive
biases. Both training data and inductive biases are required to generalize well. (c) shows how
inductive bias complexity is computed: we quantify inductive bias complexity as negative log of the
fraction of hypotheses that generalize well among the hypotheses that fit the training data.


As one concrete, but widely-applicable, suggestion, we find that adding Gaussian noise to the inputs
of a task can dramatically increase its required inductive bias. We summarize our contributions as 1 :

       • We propose a feature-based task framework to analyze generalization difficulty in various
         learning problems, including supervised learning, RL and meta-learning.
       • We provide a formal, information-theoretic definition of inductive bias complexity.
       • We develop a novel and to our knowledge first quantifiable measure of inductive bias
         complexity, which we propose using as a measure of the generalization difficulty of a task.
         This measure also allows us to quantify the relative inductive biases of different model
         architectures applied to a task.
       • We propose a practical algorithm to estimate and compare the inductive bias complexities
         of tasks across the domains of supervised learning, RL and few-shot meta-learning tasks.
         Empirically, we find that 1) partially observed RL environments require much greater
         inductive bias compared to fully observed ones and 2) simple few-shot meta-learning tasks
         can require much greater inductive bias than complex, realistic supervised learning tasks.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   M ODEL O RIENTED G ENERALIZATION D IFFICULTY

The generalizability of machine learning models is traditionally quantified with learning curves, which
relate the generalization error on a task to amount of training data (i.e. sample complexity) (Cortes
et al., 1994; Murata et al., 1992; Amari, 1993; Hestness et al., 2017). Generalization error can
be bounded by model class capacity measures, including Rademacher complexity (Koltchinskii &
Panchenko, 2000) and VC dimension (Blumer et al., 1989), with simpler model classes achieving
lower generalization error. While valuable, these measures often provide only loose, non-specific
generalization bounds on particular tasks because they typically do not leverage a task’s structure.
More recently proposed data-dependent generalization bounds yield tighter bounds on generalization
error (Negrea et al., 2019; Raginsky et al., 2016; Kawaguchi et al., 2022; Lei et al., 2015; Jiang et al.,
2021). These measure leverage the properties of a dataset to show that particular model classes will
generalize well on the dataset. Relatedly, recent work on neural network scaling laws (Bahri et al.,
2021; Hutter, 2021; Sharma & Kaplan, 2022) has modeled learning as kernel regression to show
  1
    An anonymized version of our code can be found at: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
task-difficulty-CF26


                                                                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


among other results that sample complexity scales exponentially with the intrinsic dimensionality of
data. Our approach is aligned in spirit to this line of work; however, instead of leveraging the structure
of a task to bound generalization error or sample complexity, we instead bound the inductive bias
complexity of a task; see Figure 1. We believe inductive bias complexity is a more appropriate measure
of a task’s difficulty compared to sample complexity. Notably, sample complexity assumes a specific
model class; it is not model-agnostic. Thus, sample complexity only quantifies the contribution of
training data towards solving a task given a particular model class; it does not quantify the difficulty
of choosing an appropriate model class (e.g. a model architecture).

2.2   I NFORMATION - THEORETIC M EASURES OF G ENERALIZATION D IFFICULTY

Recent works have analyzed the properties of neural networks using information theory; for instance,
information bottleneck can be used to extract well generalizing data representations (Shwartz-Ziv &
Tishby, 2017; Saxe et al., 2019; Shamir et al., 2008). DIME (Zhang et al., 2020) uses information
theory to estimate task difficulty, bounding the best case error rate achievable by any model on a
dataset given the underlying data distribution. Achille et al. (2021) defines task difficulty based on
the Kolmogorov complexity required to model the relationship between inputs and outputs. Although
these measures can be related to generalization, they do not directly quantify the information needed
to generalize. Alternatively, generalization difficulty can be expressed as the amount of information
required to perform a task in addition to any training data provided to a learning system (Chollet,
2019). This aligns with other literature assessing the prior knowledge contained in a learning system
whether through specific abilities (Hernández-Orallo, 2016), biases (Haussler, 1988), or model
architectures (Du et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021). In this work, we take a similar approach, defining
generalization difficulty as the amount of information in inductive biases required on top of training
data in order to solve a task within the hypothesis space.

3     F EATURE - BASED TASK F RAMEWORK
It is well known that generalization from limited data                     Table 1: Table of symbols.
can be viewed in a mathematically unified way for
                                                               Symbol     Meaning
many learning problems including regression, clas-             f (·; θ)   Function from the hypothesis space, parameterized by θ
sification and unsupervised learning (Vapnik, 1999).              p       Input distribution, denotes the test distribution
                                                                  q       Input distribution, denotes the training distribution
To analyze the generalization difficulty of many learn-        e(θ, p)    Error of f (·; θ) on input distribution p
ing problems using common notation, we provide a                  L       Loss function
                                                                  T       Event that the hypothesis fits the training dataset
unified notational framework that explicitly reveals              K       Event that the hypothesis fits inductive biases
                                                                  ε       Desired test error
the dimensions along which a learning system needs                I˜      Inductive bias complexity
to generalize. Tab 1 summarizes our notation.                    Θq       Set of hypotheses that fit the training dataset
                                                                 LL       Lipschitz constant for L
                                                                 Lf       Constant used in second-order condition on f
                                                                  m       Intrinsic dimensionality of the data
3.1   S ETUP AND N OTATION                                        k       Number of submanifolds
                                                                  r       Radius of the sphere on which datapoints lie
                                                                  d       Dimensionality of the model output f (x; θ)
We define a task as consisting of instances x and                 fi      A single component of f
actions y; a learning system aims to learn a map-                 b       Upper bound on ∥f (x; θ)∥
                                                                  n       Size of training dataset
ping from instances to actions. We assume that each              M        Maximum frequency of eigenfunctions considered
instance x is described by a set of features: x has               δ       Spatial resolution of f ; equalp to 2πr/M
                                                                  K       Maximum integer satisfying K(K + m − 1) ≤ M
Kc continuous features c1 , c2 , ...cKc and Kd discrete           E       # of eigenfunctions with frequency ≤ M ; O(M m )
features d1 , d2 , ...dKd . Finally, we assume that the
features uniquely describe all possible points x: there exists an invertible function A such that:
                                  x = A(c1 , c2 , ...cKc , d1 , d2 , ...dKd )                                                (1)

for all possible values of x and the features on their respective manifolds. Note that such a decom-
position of x always exists by using a single feature c1 = x or d1 = x; tasks with a more complex
structure may have instances with a further decomposition reflecting the task structure.
We assume that for each instance x, there is a unique desired action y ∈ Y among the set of possible
actions Y; the optimal mapping is denoted by y = f ∗ (x). In general, learning the exact mapping f ∗
may be intractable. Instead, it may be feasible to closely match the function f ∗ within some error.
Given a loss function L, we define the error of a function f under a particular distribution p over x as:
                                        ê(f, p) = Ep [L(f (x), x)]                                                          (2)


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   M APPING THE FRAMEWORK TO DIVERSE LEARNING SETTINGS

Although the task framework above used notation that resembled supervised learning, our framework
incorporates many different learning scenarios including unsupervised, reinforcement and meta
learning. We summarize the notational mapping between our framework and various learning
scenarios in Tab 6. Further details of this mapping are given in App A.
Our framework reveals the dimensions along which a task requires generalization. We use this in
Section 4 where we quantify the difficulty of generalizing on a task. However, our framework may
conceal aspects of a task relevant to other notions of difficulty. For instance, in online RL, we do
not capture the policy-dependence of the training data; thus, we cannot quantify the exploration-
exploitation trade-off. However, our framework captures exactly the generalization-relevant aspects of
a task: in RL, for instance, generalization can be viewed in much the same way as supervised learning,
except with different policies inducing different distributions during training and testing (Kakade,
2003). Importantly, in our analysis, we do not require that training and testing must be done on the
same distribution (see Section 4.2); thus, we believe our framework applies to studying generalization
in situations like online RL and beyond where the training and test distributions may be quite different.


4     M EASURING I NFORMATION C ONTENT OF I NDUCTIVE B IASES

It is well known by the No Free Lunch theorem (Wolpert, 1996) that no learning algorithm can
perform well on any task; only learning algorithms that possess appropriate inductive biases relevant
to a particular task(s) can be expected to generalize well given a finite amount of data. Thus,
generalizing on a task requires both training data and inductive biases (i.e. a choice of model class)
(see Fig 1). In Section 1, we formally define inductive bias complexity as the amount of inductive
bias required to generalize. In Section 4.2, we exactly bound this quantity in terms of the desired
error rate of a task and distance between training and test distributions. In Section 4.3, we further
approximate the bound to produce a practically computable estimate.


4.1   F ORMALLY D EFINING I NDUCTIVE B IAS C OMPLEXITY

We formally relate inductive biases and generalization using the concept of a hypothesis space.
Hypotheses may or may not satisfy a training set or a set of inductive biases (see Fig 1 (b));
generalization fundamentally requires both inductive biases and training data to specify a set of
well-generalizing hypotheses. Note that there is a trade-off between the amount of training data and
inductive bias required to generalize (see Fig 1 (a)). We aim to quantify the level of inductive bias
required for generalization given a fixed amount of training data. We call this measure the inductive
bias complexity (see Fig 1 (c)). Just as sample complexity quantifies the amount of training data
required to generalize given a fixed inductive bias (i.e. a fixed model class), inductive bias complexity
measures the amount of inductive bias required given a fixed amount of training data.
We begin by defining a (very broad and general) hypothesis space, consisting of functions f (x; θ)
parameterized by a vector θ. The hypothesis space is not the same as the model class (e.g. neural net-
works) used to solve a task. Instead, the hypothesis space is ideally a massive space that encompasses
all possible model classes that might reasonably be used to solve a task. We view the hypothesis
space constructed here simply as a mathematical tool to analyze the properties of the task itself rather
than relating to the actual models trained on a task. We use a Bayesian framework, assuming that f
is drawn from some distribution and that the prior distribution of θ is uniform (which can generally
be made to hold by reparameterizing). We assume that the true (target) function to be learned is
expressible within this large hypothesis space, and we define it to be given by f ∗ (x) = f (x; θ∗ ).The
generalization error of a specific θ and input distribution p is denoted e(θ, p) = ê(f (·; θ), p). We aim
to find a hypothesis θ achieving generalization error below a threshold ε: e(θ, p) ≤ ε. The training
data and inductive biases both provide constraints on the hypothesis space; we wish to quantify how
much the inductive biases need to constrain the space to yield a well-generalizing set of hypotheses.
Intuitively, the inductive bias required to achieve a particular error rate is related to additional
information required by the inductive biases beyond any task-relevant information provided by
training data. Specifically, inductive bias complexity can be viewed as the additional information


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


required to specify the well-generalizing hypotheses given the set of hypotheses that fit the training
data. Thus, we formally define inductive bias complexity I˜ as follows:
Definition 1. Suppose a probability distribution is defined over a set of hypotheses, and let random
variable θ correspond to a sample from this distribution. Given an error threshold ϵ which models
are optimized to reach on the training set, the inductive bias complexity required to achieve error
rate ε is on a task
                               I˜ = − log P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) ≤ ϵ)                              (3)

Observe that this is exactly the information content of the probabilistic event that a hypothesis that
fits the training set also generalizes well. For ease of analysis, we define ”fitting” the training set as
perfectly interpolating it (setting ϵ = 0). A well-generalizing hypothesis, achieving a low but non-zero
error rate, might not interpolate the training set. Nevertheless, the regime of perfect interpolation can
be relevant for training overparameterized deep networks; we leave other regimes as future work and
briefly outline how to extend to these regimes in App G.

4.2   A N E XACT U PPER B OUND ON I NDUCTIVE B IAS C OMPLEXITY

We are able to provide an exact upper bound on the inductive bias complexity given above, under
some technical assumptions. These assumptions may not hold in all settings; nevertheless, we believe
they hold in many common settings (e.g. when the loss function is a square loss and the model f
is twice differentiable with bounded inputs and parameters); App C discusses the validity of these
assumptions. Assume that the input, parameter, and output spaces are equipped with standard distance
metrics d(·, ·) and norms ∥ · ∥. Let p denote the test distribution, q denote the training distribution,
and W (·, ·) denote the 1-Wasserstein distance. Additionally define Θq = {θ | e(θ, q) = 0} to be the
set of hypotheses that perfectly interpolate the training dataset.
Theorem 1. Suppose that the loss function satisfies L(y, x) ≥ 0, and equality holds if and only if
y = f ∗ (x). Suppose that the loss function is invariant to shifts in x in the sense that L(y + f ∗ (x2 ) −
f ∗ (x1 ), x2 ) = L(y, x1 ) for all y, x1 , x2 . We also L has a Lipschitz constant LL :
                                     L(y + δ, x) − L(y, x) ≤ LL ∥δ∥                                    (4)
for all y, δ, x. We also assume a second-order condition on f for some constant Lf :
             ∥f (x1 ; θ1 ) − f (x1 ; θ2 ) − f (x2 ; θ1 ) + f (x2 ; θ2 )∥ ≤ Lf d(x1 , x2 )d(θ1 , θ2 )   (5)
for all x1 , x2 , θ1 , θ2 . Then we have the following upper bound on the inductive bias complexity:

                              ˜                   ∗          ε
                             I ≤ − log P d(θ, θ ) ≤                   | θ ∈ Θq ,                     (6)
                                                       LL Lf W (p, q)

The bound depends on the following key quantities: desired error rate ε, interpolating hypothesis
space Θq and 1-Wasserstein distance between the training and test distributions W (p, q). See App B
for a proof. Observe that the proof is quite general: it does not rely on any specific assumptions on
the hypothesis space, nor does it assume any relationship between the test and training distributions.

4.3   E MPIRICAL I NDUCTIVE B IAS C OMPLEXITY A PPROXIMATION

We now apply a series of approximations on the general bound of Theorem 1 to achieve a practically
computable estimate. We present this approximation in the setting of supervised classification, but
note that it can be applied to other settings as we show in our experiments (see App D for full details
on our empirical computation). As we propose the first measure of inductive bias complexity, our
focus is on capturing general trends (scalings) rather than producing precise estimates. We hope
future work may further refine these estimates or further relax our assumptions.

Supervised Classification Setting We assume data points x lie on d non-overlapping m-spheres of
radius r, where each sphere corresponds to a class. Furthermore, we assume that the test distribution
p is uniform over all the m-spheres and the training distribution q is the empirical distribution of n
points drawn i.i.d. from p. This approximation captures key characteristics of data distributions in
actual classification tasks: 1) bounded domain, 2) similar density over all points, 3) non-overlapping
distributions for different classes. We assume the dimensionality of f (x; θ) is d, the number of


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


classes. Let b be a constant such that ∥f (x; θ)∥ ≤ b for all x, θ. Let δ be the “spatial resolution”
of f , defined such that perturbing the input x by amounts less than δ does not significantly change
the output f (x; θ) (i.e. δ is the minimum change that f is sensitive to). In our case of supervised
classification, δ corresponds to the distance between classes.

Parametrization of Hypotheses In order to compute Equation 6, we must make a specific choice
of parameterization for f (x; θ). Recall from Section 1 that we wish to select a broad and general
hypothesis space encompassing all model classes practically applicable to a task. Hypotheses that we
may not want to consider include functions which are sensitive to changes on x below the task relevant
resolution θ. Thus, we consider only bandlimited functions with frequencies less than M = 2πr/δ.
More formally, to construct a basis of functions below a certain frequency on a sphere, we use
the approach in McRae et al. (2020), which parameterises functions as a linear combination of
eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the manifold. The Laplace-Beltrami operator is
a generalization of the Laplacian to general manifolds; eigenfunctions of this operator are analogous
to Fourier basis functions in Euclidean space. See Fig 6 for a visualization in the Euclidean case.
For each nonnegative integer k, the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the m-sphere has m+k
                                                                                           m+k−2
                                                                                      m   −     m
                                 p
eigenfunctions withpfrequency k(k + m − 1) (Dai & Xu, 2013). Taking K to be the maximum
integer k such that k(k + m − 1) ≤ M , there are
                      K
                     X    m+k           m+k−2             m+K −1              m+K
               E=                   −                =                   +                         (7)
                             m               m                 m                 m
                    k=0
eigenfunctions with frequency at most M . Note that for large M , E scales as O(M m ) since
K scales as M . Since each coefficient has a real and imaginary part, the dimensionality of the
parameterization of a single component fk is 2E. There are d components on each of d submanifolds,
so the dimensionality of the full parameterization θ is 2d2 E. Each training point constrains the
dimensionality of the possible values of θ by d. Therefore, the dimensionality of Θq is 2d2 E − nd.
Next, we obtain a bound on ∥θ∥. If the parameters of a component fk are θk , Parseval’s identity (Stein
& Shakarchi, 2011) states that ∥θk ∥2 equals the average value of ∥fk (x; θk )∥2 , which is bounded by
b2 . Since there are d2 components, we have ∥θ∥ ≤ bd.
Next, to approximate the volume of Θq , we must make an assumption on the shape of Θq . Given that
we have a bound on θ, we simply approximate Θq as a disk of dimensionality 2d2 E − nd and radius
bd; note that the disk is embedded in a 2d2 E dimensional space. This disk approximation retains key
properties of interpolating manifolds (low-dimensionality and boundedness) while being analytically
tractable; see App C.3 for further discussion.
        n                                   o
The set θ ∈ Θq | d(θ, θ∗ ) ≤ LL Lf W ε                                     ε
                                       (p,q) is a disc with radius LL Lf W (p,q) . Therefore,
                                                                       ε
                                                                               !2d2 E−nd
                                     ε                         L   L   W (p,q)
                P d(θ, θ∗ ) ≤                  | θ ∈ Θq ≈        L   f
                                                                                         .        (8)
                               LL Lf W (p, q)                         bd
To arrive at this approximation, we set the hypothesis space as a linear combination of eigenfunctions
of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the manifold, and then approximated volumes in the hypothesis
space as balls. Since we do not make specific assumptions on the manifold of x to construct our
hypothesis space, we expect the overall scaling of our result to hold for general tasks.

Approximating Wasserstein Distance We obtain a simple scaling result for the Wasserstein
distance W (p, q), the expected transport distance in the optimal transport between p and q. In the
optimal transport plan, each training point is associated with a local region of the sphere; the plan
moves probability density between each point and the local region around each point. These regions
must be equally sized, disjoint, and tile the entire sphere. Although the regions’ shapes depend on the
specific distribution q, if q is near uniform, we expect these regions to be similarly shaped.
We approximate these regions as hypercubes because they are the simplest shape capable of tiling
m-dimensional space. In order to fill the full area of the sphere, the hypercubes must have side length
                                             !1/m                             !1/m
                        1 2π (m+1)/2 m                     −1/m    2π (m+1)/2
                s=        ·              r           = rn                          .                (9)
                        n Γ m+1                                     Γ m+1

                                   2                                     2


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                             p
The expected distance between two randomly chosen points in a hypercube is at most s m/6
(Anderssen et al., 1976). We use this distance as an approximation of the optimal transport distance
between each point and its associated local hypercube. The final W (p, q) can then simply be
approximated as the optimal transport distance corresponding to each point:
                                                               !1/m
                                                m 2π (m+1)/2
                           r                 r
                              m        −1/m
              W (p, q) ≈ s        = rn                                ∈ O(rn−1/m )               (10)
                                                      Γ m+1

                              6                 6          2

In App C.4, we empirically compute Wasserstein distances on a sphere and find that the distances
follow this approximation. Although this particular approximation is valid when the empirical training
distribution q is drawn i.i.d. from a uniform underlying data distribution p, our framework can be
applied to non-i.i.d. settings by simply modifying our Wasserstein distance approximation to reflect
the train-test distributional shift.

Final Approximation Since f is a linear combination of basis functions with coefficients θ, Lf
upper bounds thep norm of the gradient of the basis functions. A basis function with a single output
and frequency k(k + m − 1) has a gradient √       with magnitude at most k/r. Since f ’s output has
dimensionality d, we can take Lf = K d/r. Substituting the result of Equation 8 along with our
approximation for W (p, q) into Equation 6 gives an approximated inductive bias complexity of

            ˜       2                    3                    1              ε
           I ≈ (2d E − nd) log b + log d + log K −              log n − log     + log c .         (11)
                                         2                    m             LL
                                1/m
                    2π (m+1)/2
where c = m
            p
               6     Γ( m+1
                                    , which is roughly constant for large intrinsic dimensionality m.
                         2 )

Recall that d is the number of classes, n is the number of training data points, ε is the target error,
LL is the Lipschitz constant of the loss function, b is a bound on the model output, and K and E are
functions of m and the maximum frequency M = 2πr/δ.

Properties of Inductive Bias Complexity The dominant term in our expression, Equation 11, for
inductive bias complexity is 2d2 E −nd. Since E ∈ O(M m ), inductive bias complexity is exponential
in the data’s intrinsic dimensionality m (see App G for further intuition). Additionally, M = 2πr/δ,
so for a fixed m, inductive bias complexity is polynomial in 1/δ. Thus, δ impacts inductive bias
complexity less than m, but can still be significant for large m. Inductive bias complexity increases
roughly linearly in Z and D, so these values have less impact than m and δ. Inductive bias complexity
decreases roughly linearly with the number of training points n; intuitively, this is because each
training point provides a roughly equal amount of information. Finally, inductive bias complexity
increases logarithmically as the desired error ε decreases. Intuitively, the inductive bias complexity
depends on the desired performance level: achieving the performance of a random classifier on a
classification task is trivial, for example.

5    E MPIRICAL G ENERALIZATION D IFFICULTY OF B ENCHMARKS
Here, we use our quantification of inductive bias complexity as a measure of the generalization
difficulty of a task (or task difficulty). Inductive bias complexity corresponds to the effort that a model
designer must apply to generalize on a task, while sample complexity corresponds to the contribution
of the training data; thus, inductive bias complexity is an appropriate measure of the generalization
difficulty of a task from a model designer’s perspective. We empirically validate our measure on
several supervised classification, meta-learning, and RL tasks. We also quantify the relative inductive
biases of different model architectures on different tasks and empirically show task difficulty trends
over parametric task variations.
Computing the difficulty I˜ of Equation 11 for specific tasks specifying several parameters. The target
generalization error ε is fixed at a level based on the type of the task (see App D Tab 3). We estimate
the data dimensionality m by relating the decay rate of nearest neighbor distances in the training set
to intrinsic dimensionality (Pope et al., 2021). The required detail (resolution) per dimension δ is
set to the inter-class margin for classification tasks and a scale at which state perturbations do not
significantly affect trajectories for RL tasks. See App D for full details.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.1   TASK D IFFICULTY OF S TANDARD B ENCHMARKS

Image classification We estimate the task difficulty of the commonly used image classification
benchmarks MNIST, SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and Ima-
geNet (Deng et al., 2009). As shown in Fig 2, models solving these tasks encode large amounts of
inductive bias, with more complex tasks requiring models with more inductive bias.

Few-shot learning We estimate the task difficulty of 1-
shot, 20-way classification on Omniglot (Lake et al., 2015).
The model must learn a function f mapping a dataset of 20
images from an alphabet to a classifier g, which itself maps
an image to a probability distribution over 20 classes. Both
the inputs and outputs of f have much larger dimensionality
than for typical image classification. This yields very large
task difficulties: Omniglot has task difficulty ≈ 10145 bits
(vs. 1041 for ImageNet); see Fig 2.

RL We find the task difficulty of the Reacher, Hopper,
and Half-Cheetah control tasks in MuJoCo (Todorov et al.,
2012; Duan et al., 2016). Fig 2 shows that more complex en-
vironments with higher dimensional observation and action Figure 2: Task difficulties of various
spaces have higher task difficulties as intuitively expected. benchmark tasks across domains.
Moreover, the range of task difficulties is comparable with
image classification: task difficulties are comparable across domains.

5.2   I NDUCTIVE B IAS C ONTRIBUTED BY D IFFERENT M ODELS TO VARIOUS TASKS

Although our task difficulty measure is model-agnostic, we can use it to compare how much inductive
bias different models contribute to various tasks. To do this, we find the test set performance of a
trained model from the model class (e.g. test set accuracy for classification tasks). We then use this
performance level to compute ε in the task difficulty expression in Equation 11 (importantly, we do
not directly use the test set data). This method is motivated by the idea that a model class enables
generalization by providing an inductive bias, and its generalization ability can be quantified using
test set performance. Thus, we quantify a model class’s inductive bias as the minimum inductive
bias required to achieve the performance of the model class: greater performance requires greater
inductive bias. As observed in Tab 2 (see Tab 7 for full results), the increase in information content
resulting from using a better model architecture (such as switching from ResNets (He et al., 2016) to
Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)) is generally larger for more complex tasks. In other
words, more complex tasks extract more of the inductive bias information present in a model.

Table 2: The inductive bias information contributed by different model architectures for image
classification tasks. (FC-N refers to a fully connected network with N layers.)
                                 CIFAR10                                                      ImageNet
        Model                                    Information         Model                                    Information
                                              Content (×1032 bits)                                         Content (×1041 bits)
        Linear (Nishimoto, 2018)                    2.250            Linear (Karpathy, 2015)                     2.063
        AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)           2.709            AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)           2.290
        ResNet-50 (Wightman et al., 2021)           3.195            ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016)                 2.362
        BiT-L (Kolesnikov et al., 2020)             3.453            BiT-L (Kolesnikov et al., 2020)             2.449
        ViT-H/14 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)         3.513            ViT-H/14 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)         2.461



5.3   T RENDS OF TASK D IFFICULTY

In this section, we consider how task difficulty changes as we parametrically vary aspects of a task.
Please see App F for additional task variations.

Varying training data We vary the amount of training data provided in ImageNet and find in Fig 3a
that the task difficulty decreases with more training points. Observe that even when training data is
increased by many orders of magnitude, the scale of task difficulty remains large, suggesting that
training data provides relatively little information to solve a task relative to inductive biases. Intuitively,


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


this is because in the absence of strong inductive biases, training data only provides information
about the approximated function in a local neighborhood around each training point; inductive
biases, by contrast, can provide global constraints on the function. See App G for further discussion.


Varying desired error rate
In Fig 3b, we vary the de-
sired error on the Reacher task
and find that task difficulty de-
creases with desired error rate
as expected. As with vary-
ing training data, the scale of
task difficulty remains large       (a) Varying training data         (b) Varying desired error
even when dramatically reduc-       on ImageNet                       on Reacher
ing the desired error rate.

Varying intrinsic dimension
We consider a noisy version
of Cartpole (Florian, 2007),
an inverted pendulum control
task where agents apply binary
forces to control a pole. In
noisy Cartpole, the agent ob-
                                     (c) Varying intrinsic dim         (d) Varying intrinsic dim
serves a noisy version of the        on Cartpole                       on ImageNet
pole’s angular position and ve-
locity, requiring possibly mul-       Figure 3: Task difficulties on variations of benchmark tasks.
tiple observations to find the
optimal action. The agent must learn a function with a higher-dimensional input, making the task
more difficult. As Fig 3c shows, task difficulty is exponential in the number of observations needed
to find the optimal action. We also increase the intrinsic dimensionality of ImageNet classification by
adding perturbations to the images outside the original image manifold; creating classifiers robust
to such perturbations is known theoretically and empirically to be difficult (Madry et al., 2017; Yin
et al., 2019). Fig 3d shows that task difficulty drastically increases with added intrinsic dimensions.
Thus, increasing the intrinsic dimension of a task is a powerful way of increasing its difficulty.


6    D ISCUSSION

For all tasks, inductive bias complexities are quite large, much larger than practical model sizes. This
is due to the vast size of the hypothesis space constructed in Section 4.3; it includes any bandlimited
function below a certain frequency threshold. Specifying a well-generalizing subset in such a massive
hypothesis space requires massive amounts of information. See App G for further discussion.
Our measure reveals that tasks with inputs on higher dimensional manifolds require far more inductive
bias relative to other variations of tasks. This yields counter-intuitive findings: meta-learning on
simple Omniglot handwritten characters requires far more inductive bias than than classification
of complex, realistic ImageNet images. These findings suggest that to construct tasks requiring
high inductive bias, prioritizing generalization over many degrees of variation is more important
than increasing the richness of the task within each dimension of variation. Good benchmarks
would require generalization over high dimensional spaces, but, like Omniglot, may appear simple.
Examples of such benchmarks include few-shot learning, adversarially robust image classification, and
MDPs with very limited observations. Our measure provides a quantitative guide to designing such
benchmarks. As a specific, but broadly-applicable example of increasing the number of dimensions
of variation, we suggest adding Gaussian noise to task inputs.
To our knowledge, we provide the first measure of inductive bias complexity; thus, it is not designed
to be quantitatively precise. We hope future work may be able to further refine our estimates. Never-
theless, we hope our measure may encourage the development of tasks requiring well-generalizing
architectures and learning rules with many built-in inductive biases.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille, Giovanni Paolini, Glen Mbeng, and Stefano Soatto. The information complexity
  of learning tasks, their structure and their distance. Information and Inference: A Journal of the
  IMA, 10(1):51–72, 2021.

Shunichi Amari. A universal theorem on learning curves. Neural Networks, 6(2):161–166, 1993.
  ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(93)90013-M.

Sanghyeon An, Minjun Lee, Sanglee Park, Heerin Yang, and Jungmin So. An ensemble of simple
  convolutional neural network models for mnist digit recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.10400,
  2020.

R. S. Anderssen, R. P. Brent, D. J. Daley, and P. A. P. Moran.                                Concerning
                               2 1/2
  R1       R1 2
   0
     · · ·  0
              (x 1 + · · · + x k )   dx 1 · · · , dxk and a Taylor series method. SIAM Journal on Applied
  Mathematics, 30(1):22–30, 1976. doi: 10.1137/0130003.

Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural
  scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06701, 2021.

M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An
 evaluation platform for general agents. JAIR, 47:253–279, Jun 2013. doi: 10.1613/jair.3912.

Anselm Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Learnability and the
 vapnik-chervonenkis dimension. J. ACM, 36(4):929–965, oct 1989. doi: 10.1145/76359.76371.

François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint, 2019.

Dan Ciregan, Ueli Meier, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Multi-column deep neural networks for image
  classification. In CVPR, 2012.

Corinna Cortes, L. D. Jackel, Sara Solla, Vladimir Vapnik, and John Denker. Learning curves:
  Asymptotic values and rate of convergence. In NeurIPS, 1994.

Feng Dai and Yuan Xu. Approximation theory and harmonic analysis on spheres and balls, volume 23.
  Springer, 2013.

A. L. M. Dekkers, J. H. J. Einmahl, and L. De Haan. A moment estimator for the index of an
  extreme-value distribution. The Annals of Statistics, 1989.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.

Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. ICLR, 2021.

Simon S. Du, Yining Wang, Xiyu Zhai, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Aarti
  Singh. How many samples are needed to estimate a convolutional or recurrent neural network?
  NeurIPS, 2018.

Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In ICML, 2016.

Razvan V Florian. Correct equations for the dynamics of the cart-pole system. Center for Cognitive
  and Neural Studies (Coneural), Romania, 2007.

Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization
  for efficiently improving generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01412, 2020.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ian J Goodfellow, Yaroslav Bulatov, Julian Ibarz, Sacha Arnoud, and Vinay Shet. Multi-digit number
  recognition from street view imagery using deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6082, 2013.
David Haussler. Quantifying inductive bias: Ai learning algorithms and valiant’s learning framework.
  Artificial Intelligence, 36(2):177–221, 1988.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In CVPR, 2016.
José Hernández-Orallo. Evaluation in artificial intelligence: from task-oriented to ability-oriented
  measurement. Artificial Intelligence Review, Aug 2016.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md. Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint, 2017.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In CVPR, 2017.
Marcus Hutter. Learning curve theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04074, 2021.
Yiding Jiang, Parth Natekar, Manik Sharma, Sumukh K Aithal, Dhruva Kashyap, Natarajan Subra-
  manyam, Carlos Lassance, Daniel M Roy, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Suriya Gunasekar, et al.
  Methods and analysis of the first competition in predicting generalization of deep learning. In
  NeurIPS 2020 Competition and Demonstration Track, 2021.
Sham Machandranath Kakade. On the sample complexity of reinforcement learning. University of
  London, University College London (United Kingdom), 2003.
Andrej Karpathy. Breaking linear classifiers on imagenet. Andrej Karpathy blog, 2015.
Kenji Kawaguchi, Zhun Deng, Kyle Luh, and Jiaoyang Huang. Robustness implies generalization
  via data-dependent generalization bounds. In ICML, 2022.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Peter
  Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. ICLR,
  2017.
Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Jessica Yung, Sylvain Gelly,
  and Neil Houlsby. Big transfer (BiT): General visual representation learning. In ECCV, 2020.
Vladimir Koltchinskii and Dmitriy Panchenko. Rademacher processes and bounding the risk
  of function learning. High Dimensional Probability II, pp. 443–457, 2000. doi: 10.1007/
  978-1-4612-1358-1 29.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. Cifar-10 and cifar-100 datasets. 2009. URL
  https://www.cs.toronto.edu/kriz/cifar.html.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2012.
B. Lake, R. Salakhutdinov, and J. Tenenbaum. Human-level concept learning through probabilistic
  program induction. Science, 350:1332 – 1338, 2015.
Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
  recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
Chen-Yu Lee, Saining Xie, Patrick Gallagher, Zhengyou Zhang, and Zhuowen Tu. Deeply-supervised
  nets. In AISTATS, 2015.
Yunwen Lei, Urun Dogan, Alexander Binder, and Marius Kloft. Multi-class svms: From tighter
  data-dependent generalization bounds to novel algorithms. NeurIPS, 2015.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss landscape
  of neural nets. NeurIPS, 2018.
Zhiyuan Li, Yi Zhang, and Sanjeev Arora. Why are convolutional nets more sample-efficient than
  fully-connected nets? ICLR, 2021.
Zhouhan Lin, Roland Memisevic, and Kishore Konda. How far can we go without convolution:
  Improving fully-connected networks. arXiv preprint, 2015.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Lukas Mauch and Bin Yang. A novel layerwise pruning method for model reduction of fully
  connected deep neural networks. In ICASSP, 2017.
Andrew McRae, Justin Romberg, and Mark Davenport. Sample complexity and effective dimension
  for regression on manifolds. NeurIPS, 2020.
Hrushikesh Mhaskar, Qianli Liao, and Tomaso Poggio. When and why are deep networks better than
  shallow ones? In AAAI, 2017.
mrgrhn.   Alexnet with tensorflow, 2021. URL https://medium.com/swlh/
  alexnet-with-tensorflow-46f366559ce8.
Noboru Murata, Shuji Yoshizawa, and Shun-ichi Amari. Learning curves, model selection and
  complexity of neural networks. In NeurIPS, 1992.
Jeffrey Negrea, Mahdi Haghifam, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Ashish Khisti, and Daniel M Roy.
  Information-theoretic generalization bounds for sgld via data-dependent estimates. NeurIPS, 2019.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. NeurIPS, 2011.
Bruno Eidi Nishimoto. Linear classifier, 2018.                  URL https://github.com/
  brunonishimoto/linear-classifier.
Tomaso Poggio, Kenji Kawaguchi, Qianli Liao, Brando Miranda, Lorenzo Rosasco, Xavier Boix,
  Jack Hidary, and Hrushikesh Mhaskar. Theory of deep learning iii: explaining the non-overfitting
  puzzle. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00173, 2017.
Phillip Pope, Chen Zhu, Ahmed Abdelkader, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. The intrinsic
  dimension of images and its impact on learning. ICLR, 2021.
Maxim Raginsky, Alexander Rakhlin, Matthew Tsao, Yihong Wu, and Aolin Xu. Information-
 theoretic analysis of stability and bias of learning algorithms. In IEEE Information Theory
 Workshop (ITW), 2016.
Jorge Sánchez and Florent Perronnin. High-dimensional signature compression for large-scale image
  classification. In CVPR, 2011.
Andrew M Saxe, Yamini Bansal, Joel Dapello, Madhu Advani, Artemy Kolchinsky, Brendan D
 Tracey, and David D Cox. On the information bottleneck theory of deep learning. Journal of
 Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2019(12):124020, 2019.
Ohad Shamir, Sivan Sabato, and Naftali Tishby. Learning and generalization with the information
  bottleneck. In ALT, 2008.
Utkarsh Sharma and Jared Kaplan. Scaling laws from the data manifold dimension. JMLR, 23:9–1,
  2022.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural networks via information.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00810, 2017.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.M. Stein and R. Shakarchi. Fourier Analysis: An Introduction. Princeton lectures in analysis.
  Princeton University Press, 2011. ISBN 9781400831234.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In IROS, 2012.
François Treves. Topological Vector Spaces, Distributions and Kernels: Pure and Applied Mathemat-
  ics, Vol. 25, volume 25. Elsevier, 2016.
Vladimir N Vapnik. An overview of statistical learning theory. IEEE transactions on neural networks,
  10(5):988–999, 1999.
Lokesh Veeramacheneni, Moritz Wolter, Reinhard Klein, and Jochen Garcke. Canonical convolutional
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01509, 2022.
Ross Wightman, Hugo Touvron, and Hervé Jégou. Resnet strikes back: An improved training
  procedure in timm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.00476, 2021.
David H Wolpert. The lack of a priori distinctions between learning algorithms. Neural computation,
  8(7):1341–1390, 1996.
Dong Yin, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Rademacher complexity for adversarially robust
  generalization. In ICML, 2019.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Avnish Narayan, Hayden Shively, Adithya
  Bellathur, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and
  evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. CoRL, 2019.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146,
  2016.
Peiliang Zhang, Huan Wang, Nikhil Naik, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. DIME: An
  information-theoretic difficulty measure for AI datasets. NeurIPS Workshop DL-IG, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    S ETTINGS OF THE F EATURE - BASED TASK F RAMEWORK

In this section, we provide detailed descriptions of the mapping of various learning settings to our
framework.

Supervised classification In a supervised classification setting, instances can be viewed as con-
sisting of two features: a discrete feature d1 corresponding to a class and a continuous feature c1
specifying a particular example within the class:
                                             x = A(c1 , d1 ).                                        (12)
The optimal action function is to output the class f ∗ (x) = d1 . Observe that the continuous feature c1
is irrelevant to the task; the goal of this task is to learn from training data how to extract the feature
d1 while maintaining invariance to c1 .
As a concrete example, consider the MNIST (Deng, 2012) classification dataset; here labels corre-
spond to d1 , and c1 corresponds to all other information necessary to specify each image (e.g. line
width, rotation, overall size). In general, c1 may not directly extractable from images; one method of
estimating a representation of c1 is to train a class-conditional autoencoder on MNIST images, and
extract the latent representation of each image as c1 .

Meta-learning for few-shot supervised classification In a few-shot meta-learning setting, in-
stances can be viewed as consisting of two features: a continuous feature c1 corresponding to a set of
related classes, and a continuous feature c2 corresponding to a set of samples from those classes.
                                             x = A(c1 , c2 )                                         (13)
The objective is to output a function g such that g maps inputs in set of classes to corresponding
labels: f ∗ (x) = g. Note that g here depends only on c1 ; the desired function f ∗ is invariant to c2 .
Typically, a meta-learning system will receive instances from a subset of c1 values, and will be asked
to generalize to a different subset within the same distribution. To allow the meta-learning system to
associate instances with classes on the unseen c1 values, a few inputs with the unseen c1 are provided
for each class.
An example of such a meta-learning problem is few-shot classification on the Omniglot (Lake et al.,
2015) dataset. Here, c1 corresponds to an alphabet, and c2 corresponds to a set of sample images
within that alphabet.

Reinforcement learning In a reinforcement learning setting, instances can be viewed as consisting
of a single feature specifying all the information in an instance. In the language of reinforcement
learning, instances may typically correspond to the state of an environment for a fully-observed
Markov decision process (MDP), or a sequence of observations for a partially-observed MDP. The
single feature describing the instance may in general be discrete or continuous; for notational purposes,
we default to continuous features when features may be either continuous or discrete.
                                               x = A(c1 )                                            (14)
Here, f ∗ (x) denotes the optimal action to take given state or observation sequence c1 . The goal of
the learning system is to generalize over unseen states or observation sequences. However, note that
the agent is not asked to generalize over parameters of the underlying MDP; the MDP may be fixed.
Note that our framework does not capture certain important aspects of RL settings; for instance, for
online RL, it does not capture the fact that instances observed during may depend on the previous
actions of the agent. This dependence is important to analyze the exploration-exploitation tradeoff
of an RL task, for instance. Nevertheless, our framework is sufficient to assess the difficulty of
generalizing in RL. The fact that the set of states or observation sequences over which is trained
depends on the behavior of the agent has limited relevance to the generalization difficulty of the task.
As an example, consider the Cartpole continuous control task from the MuJoCo suite (Tassa et al.,
2018). Here, c1 corresponds to the observed state of the environment from which the agent is trained
to extract the optimal action.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Unsupervised autoencoding In unsupervised autoencoding, the optimal action function f ∗ (x) is
simply the identity function f ∗ (x) = x. The goal is to generalize on a test set after observing a set of
training instances. Usually, this is non-trivial as the learning system is constrained such that learning
an identity function is infeasible. However, we highlight that our measure is model-agnostic; in this
case the task difficulty can be viewed as a measure of complexity of the instance set. A specific
example of such a problem may be unsupervised autoencoding of MNIST digits, each of which has a
single continuous valued feature.

Meta-reinforcement learning In a meta-reinforcement learning setting, instances correspond to
trajectories through environments, which consist of two features: a continuous feature c1 parameteriz-
ing the environment and a continuous feature c2 corresponding to the specific trajectory within the
environment. Both features may in general be discrete or continuous; we use continuous features for
our notation:
                                           x = A(c1 , c2 )                                       (15)
The objective is to output a policy g such that g that maps states in an environment to actions:
f ∗ (x) = g. Note that g depends only on c1 ; the desired function f ∗ is invariant to c2 . The learning
system is required to learn from the set of c1 in the training set and generalize to an unseen set of c1 .
As an example, consider the Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019) meta-reinforcement learning benchmark in
which an agent controlling a robotic arm must generalize from a set of training skills to an unseen
set of test skills. The skills include simple manipulations such as pushing, turning, placing etc. In
our formulation, c1 corresponds to the skill and c2 corresponds to specific trajectories of the arm
performing the skill.

B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Note that for any x1 , x2 , θ, we have

        L(f (x1 ; θ), x1 ) = L f (x2 ; θ) + (f (x1 ; θ∗ ) − f (x2 ; θ∗ ))

                                    + (f (x1 ; θ) − f (x1 ; θ∗ ) − f (x2 ; θ) + f (x2 ; θ∗ )), x1       (16)

                            ≤ L f (x2 ; θ) + (f (x1 ; θ∗ ) − f (x2 ; θ∗ )), x1
                                     + LL ||f (x1 ; θ) − f (x1 ; θ∗ ) − f (x2 ; θ) + f (x2 ; θ∗ )||     (17)
                            ≤ L(f (x2 ; θ), x2 )
                                + LL ∥f (x1 ; θ) − f (x1 ; θ∗ ) − f (x2 ; θ) + f (x2 ; θ∗ )∥            (18)
                            ≤ L(f (x2 ; θ), x2 ) + LL Lf d(x1 , x2 )d(θ, θ∗ ),                          (19)
where equation 17 is a result of the Lipschitz condition on L, equation 18 is a result of the shift-
invariance of L and equation 19 is a result of our condition on f . This allows us to bound the
difference
                   e(θ, p) − e(θ, q) = Ep [L(f (x; θ), x)] − Eq [L(f (x; θ), x)]               (20)
as follows: let γ be a distribution on (x1 , x2 ) with marginal distributions p and q, respectively. Then
                      e(θ, p) − e(θ, q) = Eγ [L(f (x1 ; θ), x1 ) − L(f (x2 ; θ), x2 )]                  (21)
                                        ≤ Eγ [LL Lf d(x1 , x2 )d(θ, θ∗ )].                              (22)
By the definition of Wasserstein distance,
           e(θ, p) − e(θ, q) ≤ LL Lf d(θ, θ∗ ) inf Eγ [d(x1 , x2 )] = LL Lf d(θ, θ∗ )W (p, q),          (23)
                                                  γ

where the infimum is taken over all distributions γ with marginal distributions p, q. Therefore, for
all θ ∈ Θq with d(θ, θ∗ ) ≤ LL Lf W
                                  ε
                                     (p,q) , we have e(θ, p) ≤ e(θ, q) + ε = ε (since e(θ, q) = 0).
Recall that we assume a uniform prior on θ. Note that this can typically be made to hold with an
appropriate choice of reparameterization: if our original density on θ is P (θ), then we may choose
new parameters θ̃ = g(θ) satisfying |det( ∂g(θ)
                                             ∂θ )| = P (θ) to yield a uniform density over θ̃.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using the uniform prior assumption on θ, this gives
                      I˜ = − log P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)                                          (24)

                                           ∗            ε
                         ≤ − log P d(θ, θ ) ≤                   | θ ∈ Θq ,                             (25)
                                                 LL Lf W (p, q)
as desired.

C     VALIDITY OF T HEORETICAL A SSUMPTIONS
To arrive at our final expression for task difficulty in Equation 11, we make a number of assumptions.
In this section, we further discuss the validity of each of our assumptions.

C.1   S HIFT- INVARIANCE OF L OSS F UNCTION

In many supervised classification and regression settings, the shift invariance assumption is satisfied
by a squared error loss function. For clarity, in supervised regression, we denote inputs as x and
outputs as y. A squared error loss function is constructed as L(y, x) = ||y − f ∗ (x)||22 which is shift
invariant since


 L(y+f ∗ (x1 )−f ∗ (x2 ), x1 ) = ||y+f ∗ (x1 )−f ∗ (x2 )−f ∗ (x1 )||22 = ||y−f ∗ (x2 )||22 = L(y, x2 ). (26)
Next, in a few-shot meta-learning setting, there are reasonably broad conditions under which shift-
invariance holds: Instances correspond to datasets and actions correspond to functions mapping from
inputs to the outputs of the inner loop task. For clarity, we define the inner task inputs and outputs as
i and o; the goal is to learn a mapping from datasets x to functions y that map o = y(i). Furthermore,
suppose a loss function L(o, i) is defined for the inner loop task. Then, suppose the meta-loss function
is defined as L(y, x) = Ei∼x [L(y(i), i)]. We assume that functions y are additive in the following
sense: for any y1 , y2 , x, (y1 + y2 )(x) = y1 (x) + y2 (x). Finally, we assume a generalized version of
shift-invariance for the inner loss function L:
                   Ei∼x2 [L(y(i), i))] = Ei∼x1 [L(y(i) + f ∗ (x2 )(i) − f ∗ (x1 )(i), i)]           (27)
This then implies shift-invariance for the meta-loss L:
                                 L(y, x2 ) = L(y + f ∗ (x2 ) − f ∗ (x1 ), x1 )                      (28)
The shift invariance assumption implies addition is defined over the action space. We believe that such
additivity is reasonable for most learning problems. For instance, in classification settings, action
spaces typically correspond to a vector of logits over all classes; these action spaces are Euclidean
and actions can be added. Similarly, in reinforcement learning, both continuous and discrete action
spaces are often additive, with the logits of a probability distribution over possible actions outputted
in the discrete case. Moreover, shift-invariance is a property of the commonly used squared error loss,
and indeed any loss function that has the form L(y, x) = G(y − f ∗ (x)) for some function G.
At the same time, we note that many loss functions may not satisfy shift invariance. For example the
error rate (computed as the fraction of incorrectly classified points in supervised classification), is
neither differentiable nor shift-invariant. Thus, during training, differentiable proxy loss functions
such as squared error or cross-entropy loss are often used, to similar effect. In other words, shift-
invariant proxies can exist for non-shift-invariant losses. In reinforcement learning, loss functions may
correspond to a Q function computing the cumulative negative reward over an episode conditioned on
taking a particular action. In this case, loss functions often cannot be written in closed form, making
it difficult to show shift invariance for these functions even if they are actually shift invariant.
For these reasons, we believe shift-invariance is a useful approximation that allows us to theoretically
prove properties of task difficulty. We further note that the result of Theorem 1, which we used
shift-invariance to prove, may hold even for loss functions without without shift invariance:

                    L(f (x1 ; θ), x1 ) − L(f (x2 ; θ), x2 ) ≤ LL Lf d(x1 , x2 )d(θ, θ∗ )               (29)
Intuitively, it states that when parameters are near their optimal values, small changes in inputs x
yield only small changes in the loss, and this feels like a very simple and general requirement.


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   S ECOND - ORDER C ONDITION ON M ODEL

The second order condition in Equation 4 (∥f (x1 ; θ1 ) − f (x1 ; θ2 ) − f (x2 ; θ1 ) + f (x2 ; θ2 )∥ ≤
Lf d(x1 , x2 )d(θ1 , θ2 )) assumes that changes in the model f can be bounded when the inputs and
parameters of f change a small amount. First, observe that if f is twice differentiable, then the
condition always holds for some choice of Lf assuming x and θ are defined on a bounded domain.
As a concrete example, consider the case of image classification with a Tanh activated neural network
where each input pixel is bounded in range [0, 1] and network parameters are bounded by a large
radius (the bounded parameter assumption is reasonable since practically speaking, trained neural
network parameters can be bounded by some radius depending on the amount of training).
As an example of a function that does not satisfy the condition, note that neural networks with the
ReLU activation function may not satisfy Equation 8. However, it has been observed that ReLU
networks behave like neural networks with smooth, polynomial activation functions (Poggio et al.,
2017); thus, it may be reasonable to apply our assumption even to ReLU networks.

C.3   S HAPE OF I NTERPOLATING H YPOTHESIS S PACE

Regarding our approximation of the interpolating hypothesis space, we first note that the dimension-
ality of the interpolating hypothesis is lower than the full dimensionality of the hypothesis space.
Taking an interpolating hypothesis and slightly perturbing it in an arbitrary direction will likely break
interpolation. By contrast, we expect that there exists some subspace in which perturbations along the
subspace maintain interpolation (i.e. there is a continuous manifold of interpolating hypotheses). This
is analogous to how in neural networks, local minima can often be in flat regions in which perturbing
parameters along those directions does not significantly affect the loss (Keskar et al., 2017).
We approximate the interpolating hypothesis space as a disk in the overall hypothesis space (for
clarity, we have revised our terminology from ”ball” to ”disk”); this disk has lower dimensionality
than the overall hypothesis space but is embedded in a higher dimensional space. The disk assumption
preserves key properties that we may reasonably expect of interpolating hypothesis spaces, namely 1)
low-dimensionality and 2) boundedness, while being analytically tractable.
Finally, we emphasize that the disk approximation is made to approximate the volume of the
interpolating hypothesis space. The detailed shape of the interpolating hypothesis space is not itself
central to our result, but rather the scaling of its volume is more important. We believe the disk
assumption captures the key scalings: the dependence of the volume on b and d.

C.4   E MPIRICALLY VALIDATING WASSERSTEIN D ISTANCE A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we empirically validate our approximation of Wasserstein distance made in Section D.
Recall that We approximate the Wasserstein distance between a uniform distribution p on a sphere of
radius 4 and an empirical distribution q of n randomly sampled points on the sphere as:

                                        W (p, q) ∈ O(rn−1/m )                                       (30)

Note that this expression grows linearly with r and decays sub-linearly with n, with a slower decay
with larger m for which more points may be required for all regions to be within a fixed radius of any
point. Theoretically, we may expect this approximation to hold for large n to achieve near uniform q.
If this scaling holds, then we would expect log W (p, q) to decrease linearly with log n (with slope
−1/m). Similarly, we would expect log W (p, q) to decrease linearly with 1/m (with slope − log n).
We conduct experiments on a unit sphere (r = 1). We approximate a uniform distribution by sampling
10000 points on a unit sphere and calculate the exact Wasserstein distance between the empirical
distribution of 10000 points and the empirical distribution of n < 10000 points (we vary n from 10
to 500). Distances are computed for varying choices of m varied from 3 to 19.
As illustrated in Figure 4, we find that the relationship between log W (p, q) and log n is linear with a
steeper slope for small m, as expected. We also observe that the relationship between log W (p, q)
and log m is nonlinear, with distances for large m being larger than expected by a linear trend-line.
Nevertheless, a linear trend-line still produces a strong fit to the empirical data.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Wasserstein distance estimates between a uniform and empirically sampled uniform
distribution on a unit sphere as a function of the dimensionality of the sphere m and the number of
sampled points n. Results are shown for five trials in each setting, and linear trend-lines are fitted to
the results.


D    E MPIRICALLY A PPROXIMATING TASK D IFFICULTY
In Section 4.3, we presented our inductive bias complexity approximation for supervised classification.
Here, we provide more details on how to apply and compute our approximation to other settings.
First, we write a slightly modified version of our task difficulty approximation

      ˜                             1                            1              ε
      I ≈ (2dzE − nd) log b + log z + log d + log K −              log n − log    + log c . (31)
                                    2                           m              LL
                                 1/m
                     2π (m+1)/2
where c = m
            p
               6      Γ( m+1
                                     , and K and E are functions of m and the maximum frequency
                          2 )

M = 2πr/δ. In supervised classification settings, z = d.
In general settings, the parameters controlling task difficulty (m, n, ε, LL , r, b, d, z) can be interpreted
as follows: m is the intrinsic dimensionality of the manifold on which instances lie. n is the number
of training points. ε is the desired error rate on the task. LL is the Lipschitz constant of the loss
function; for tasks without an explicit, differentiable loss function (such as in reinforcement learning),
it can be interpreted as the overall sensitivity of the loss with respect to the model output. r and b is
are bound on the size of the model input and output respectively. d corresponds to the dimensionality
of the model output. z corresponds to the number of submanifolds on which instances lie (with
each combination of discrete features of instances corresponding to a submanifold). In supervised
classification settings, the number of submanifolds is simply the number of classes, which is why z is
set equal to d in these settings.
In order to compute the difficulty I˜ of a task, we must determine the values of these parameters. For
all tasks, we set ε/LL as the desired performance level, which is the distance in the output space
corresponding to an error of ε. For each task, we set a fixed desired performance level corresponding
to the category of the task (i.e. a fixed error rate of 1.0% for image classification tasks and a fixed
error rate of 0.001 for RL tasks); see Table 3 However, because typical well-performing models in
the literature trained on MNIST/ImageNet achieve error significantly better/worse performance than
1.0%, we adjust the desired error rate to 0.1% and 10.0% for MNIST and ImageNet respectively.
This is done to properly quantify the difficulty of these tasks in the error rate regimes in which these
tasks are typically used. However, our task difficulty numbers are relatively insensitive to the precise
choice of desired performance level: using a fixed error rate of 1.0% for all tasks, we find that the
scale of task difficulties do not significantly change. Specifically, task difficulty falls incrementally
for MNIST from 1.09 × 1016 bits to 9.03 × 1015 bits, and rises incrementally for ImageNet from
2.48 × 1043 bits to 2.81 × 1043 bits.
While intrinsic dimensionality m is known for some tasks (e.g. MuJoCo (Du et al., 2018) tasks), it
must be estimated for others; we use the nearest neighbors estimation approach described in Pope


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Desired error rates for different tasks used to compute a measure of inductive bias complexity.
For each task, desired error rate is set as the performance of typical well-performing models proposed
in the literature trained on the task. For classification tasks, error rate corresponds to test set accuracy.
For Cartpole, error rate corresponds to the probability of making an incorrect action at any given time
step. For MuJoCo continuous control tasks with continuous action spaces, error rate corresponds to
desired distance in from the optimal action.

  Quantity    MNIST   SVHN     CIFAR-10        ImageNet    Omniglot      Cartpole     Reacher   Hopper   Half-cheetah
 Error rate   0.1 %    1.0 %     1.0 %          10.0 %         1.0 %         0.001     0.001    0.001       0.001



et al. (2021). The spatial resolution δ is set based on the nature of each task. For classification tasks,
it is natural to set the spatial resolution as the margin between classes. For RL tasks, it is set as a
scale on which trajectories with perturbations of size δ are not likely to be meaningfully different.
For all tasks, we approximate r to be the maximum norm of the training data points.

D.1    E MPIRICALLY C OMPUTING C LASSIFICATION TASK D IFFICULTY

For an image classification task, the model output is a probability distribution on the classes so b to
be 1. We set δ to be the minimum distance between points of different classes, as this is the minimum
distance between inputs that f must be able to distinguish. For large datasets where computing
δ exactly is impractical, we estimate it using statistical methods. This procedure is explained in
Appendix E.
We estimate m using the technique described by Pope et al. (2021), which gives an MLE estimate
based on distances to nearest neighbors. We use k = 5 nearest neighbors for our estimation. For
large datasets where computing nearest neighbors for all points is impractical, we use the anchor
approximation from Pope et al. (2021), selecting a random sample of points to use as anchors and
finding their nearest neighbors in the entire dataset. To estimate m for ImageNet, we randomly select
2000 points to be our anchors. See Table 4 for our estimates of m and δ for image classification
benchmarks.

Table 4: Estimated m and δ for various image classification benchmarks. These estimates are used to
estimate the amount of inductive bias required to solve each task.

                       Quantity     MNIST          SVHN          CIFAR-10            ImageNet
                           m             14          19                27              48
                           δ             2.4         1.6               2.8             65


D.2    E MPIRICALLY C OMPUTING M ETA -L EARNING TASK D IFFICULTY

The Omniglot one-shot classification task is to identify the class of an image given an example image
of each of 20 letters. Thus, the meta-learning task is to learn a function f that maps a set of 20
images to a function g that can map a single image to a probability distribution over 20 classes. In the
following discussion, for quantities such as z, d, and E, a subscript f will be used to denote that we
are considering these values for the function f , and a subscript g will be used to denote that we are
considering these values for the function g.
In our framework, the input to f has no discrete features, so zf = 1. Since g is the output of
f , df equals the dimensionality of the parameterization of g, which is 2zg dg Eg . The function g
classifies an image among 20 classes, so zg = 20 and dg = 19. We can compute Eg as a function
of Mg = 2πrg /δg and mg . As with image classification tasks, we set rg to be the maximum norm
of an image in the dataset and δg to be the minimum distance between images of different classes.
We set mg to be the dimensionality m0 of an image drawn from a single alphabet. This is done by
estimating the dimensionality of each alphabet in the dataset and averaging the results.
                                          √
Since the input to f is 20 images, rf = rg 20. To compute mf , let m1 > m0 be the dimensionality
of an image drawn from the entire dataset. Then the dimensionality of the alphabet underlying


                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the input to f is m1 − m0 , and the dimensionality of the images themselves is 20m0 . Therefore,
mf = m1 + 19m0 . We want f to be sensitive to a change in only one of the 20 images, so we set
δf = δg .
The training dataset consists of several alphabets. We write ℓa for the number of letters in alphabet
a. We set n to be the number of sets of 20 images that can be drawn from the training dataset that
represent 20 different letters in the same alphabet. Since the training dataset contains 20 images
representing each letter,
                                        X  max{ℓa , 20}
                                   n=                       · 2020 ,                             (32)
                                         a
                                                  20
where the sum is taken over all training alphabets a.
Finally, bf is the maximum norm p of f ’s output, which contains the parameterization of g. We found
that this can be bounded by bg zg dg . We have already computed zg and dg , and since g outputs a
probability distribution, bg = 1. We then use the values zf , df , mf , δf , n, bf , and the state-of-the-art
error rate ε/LL to compute the task difficulty.

D.3    E MPIRICALLY C OMPUTING R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING TASK D IFFICULTY

For evaluating task difficulty for reinforcement learning tasks, we use some different approximations
than for the supervised classification that are more suited to our particular setting; in particular, we
use a different assumption for the manifold on which instances lie and a different approximation for
Wasserstein distance W (p, q).
We first write our general version of the task difficulty expression without applying the Wasserstein
distance approximation in Section 4.3:

                                 1                                                       ε
    I˜ ≈ (2dzE − nd) log b + log z + log d + log K − log r + log W (p, q) − log              . (33)
                                 2                                                      LL
In the reinforcement learning tasks we evaluate, z = 1, so we can write:

            ˜                                                                  ε
            I ≈ (2dE − nd) log b + log d + log K − log r + log W (p, q) − log      .                    (34)
                                                                              LL
The input to f is an m-dimensional observation, which can be considered as a point in the hypercube
[−π, π]m after scaling. Parameterizing f as a sum of eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator,
                                                 X           ⊤
                                      f (x; θ) =       θp eip x                                 (35)
                                                    p∈Zm

Treves (2016). The wavelength of the component corresponding to p is 2π/∥p∥, so we restrict our
parameterization to components satisfying ∥p∥ ≤ 2π/δ. Thus, we have Lf = 2π/δ. The number of
eigenfunctions E is the number of vectors p ∈ Zm satisfying ∥p∥ ≤ 2π/δ, which we approximate as
the volume of an m-dimensional ball with radius 2π/δ, giving
                                                m
                                               2π
                                        E≈            Vm ,                                 (36)
                                                δ
                   m/2
where Vm = Γ πm +1 is the volume of an m-dimensional ball with radius 1. We now find the
                (2 )
Wasserstein distance W (p, q). In the optimal transport, each training data point is associated with
an equally-sized region of the hypercube. We approximate these regions as hypercubes with side
length s = 2πn−1/m . The
                       p expected distance between two randomly chosen points in one of these
hypercubes is at most s m/6 Anderssen et al. (1976), so
                                               r
                                                 m
                                   W (p, q) ≈       · 2πn−1/m .                                 (37)
                                                  6
                                                                                                       d
Finally, we note that f ’s output is a force in {−1, +1}
                                                      √ in the discrete case and an element of [−1, 1]
in the continuous case. Therefore, we can set b = d in all cases. Using these values, we find
              m
                                         4π 2

   ˜          2π                                        1                   1              ε
  I≈d 2                Vm − n        log √ + log d + log m − log δ −          log n − log       . (38)
               δ                           6            2                  m              LL

                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall that d is the dimensionality of the output space, and m is the dimensionality of the observation
space. In the noisy Cartpole task, T > 1 observations may be needed to determine the optimal action.
Each observation is a two-dimensional state (containing the pole’s angular position and velocity), so
we set m = 2T . For fully observed tasks, note that T = 1.
It remains to choose values for the parameters n, δ, and ε/LL . We choose the relatively small value
of 0.001 for δ and ε/LL for all tasks. We choose a small value for δ because small changes in initial
conditions can lead to large changes over time, and we choose a small value for ε/LL because agents
should be able to perform near-optimal actions to achieve the task’s goal. In the noisy Cartpole task,
we set n = 10000, corresponding to observing 100 episodes with 100 timesteps each. In the MuJoCo
environments, we set n = 1000000, corresponding to observing 1000 episodes with 1000 timesteps
each. We emphasize that the most important factor contributing to task difficulty is m, which is
determined by the task specification.

E     E STIMATING δ FOR C LASSIFICATION TASKS
If we cannot compute δ exactly, we estimate it using extreme value theory Dekkers et al. (1989).
We wish to find the maximum value of a distribution, in this case the distribution of the reciprocal of
the distance between a random pair of points from different classes. The extreme value distribution is
characterized by the extreme value index γ. Let X1 , . . . , Xn be values drawn from the distribution,
and let X1,n ≤ · · · ≤ Xn,n be these values in sorted order. For a fixed k < n, define
                                           k−1
                                         1X
                              Mn(r) =          (log Xn−i,n − log Xn−k,n )r .                               (39)
                                         k i=0

Then we can estimate γ as
                                                                         !−1
                                                                   (1)
                                                  1             (Mn )2
                                γ̂n = Mn(1) + 1 −          1−      (2)
                                                                               .                           (40)
                                                     2           Mn
Empirically, we typically find γ̂n > 0. In this case, we estimate δ by estimating the quantile
corresponding to the top 1/P of the distribution, where P is the number of pairs of training data
points from different classes. By assuming that training data points are evenly distributed among the
classes, we approximate P as n2 (1 − 1/C), where C is the number of classes. If an = kP/n, this
gives an estimate of
                                 aγ̂nn − 1
                                           · Xn−k,n Mn(1) + Xn−k,n                               (41)
                                     γ̂n
for 1/δ.
The theoretical results Dekkers et al. (1989) require that k and n/k go to infinity as n → ∞. For
ImageNet, we choose n = 40000 and k = 200. To reduce the noise in our estimation, we compute
10 estimates for 1/δ and average the results to obtain our final estimate for 1/δ.

F     A DDITIONAL TASK VARIATIONS
In this section, in order to provide more intuition for our empirical results on inductive bias complexity,
we compute the inductive bias complexity of additional variations of tasks.

F.1   TASK C OMBINATIONS

Setup We first consider inductive bias complexities of task combinations. We assume we are
given two tasks, corresponding to the mapping between instances x1 to y1 = f¯1∗ (x1 ) and x2 to
y2 = f¯2∗ (x2 ) respectively. Furthermore, we assume that training and test distributions q1 , p1 and
p2 , q2 are provided. We then construct a combination of the two tasks as the mapping from (x1 , x2 )
to f ∗ (x1 , x2 ) = (f¯1∗ (x1 ), f¯2∗ (x2 )). The test distribution of instances for the new task is constructed
as:
                                               p(x1 , x2 ) = p1 (x1 )p2 (x2 )                               (42)


                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


And the training distribution constructed as:
                                       q(x1 , x2 ) = q1 (x1 )q2 (x2 )                                  (43)
Note that if q1 and q2 each correspond to training sets of size n1 and n2 , q corresponds to a training
set of size n1 n2 . We assume that the two tasks have loss functions L1 and L2 respectively. For
the purposes of our analysis in this section, we assume that the loss functions satisfy Li (y, x) ≥ 0,
and equality holds if and only if y = fi∗ (x) for i = 1, 2. We construct the loss function L for the
combined task as:
                      L((y1 , y2 ), (x1 , x2 )) = αL1 (y1 , x1 ) + (1 − α)L2 (y2 , x2 )                (44)
for a parameter α in (0, 1). We denote a hypothesis as θ parameterizing a function that inputs (x1 , x2 )
and outputs the predictions for each task: f (x1 , x2 ; θ) = (f1 (x1 , x2 ; θ), f2 (x1 , x2 ; θ)). Then, the
generalization error of a particular hypothesis θ under distribution p (and analogous for q) is:

  e(θ, p) = ê(f (·; θ), p) = Ep [L(f (x1 , x2 ; θ), (x1 , x2 ))]
                                  = αEp [L1 (f1 (x1 , x2 ), x1 )] + (1 − α)Ep [L2 (f2 (x1 , x2 ), x2 )] (45)
For notational convenience, we will also define ei (θ, p) as (and analogous for q):
                                  ei (θ, p) = Ep [Li (fi (x1 , x2 ; θ), xi )]                          (46)
for i = 1, 2. Thus, we may express e(θ, p) as:
                                 e(θ, p) = αe1 (θ, p) + (1 − α)e2 (θ, p)                               (47)
Note that e1 (θ, p) and e2 (θ, p) do not correspond to errors of hypothesis of θ on tasks 1 and 2
directly because θ parameterizes a function which takes both x1 and x2 as input. Instead, e1 (θ, p)
(and analogously for e2 (θ, p)) corresponds to the error of a variant of task 1 where instances x1 are
augmented with a distractor input x2 which is irrelevant to the task (producing instances (x1 , x2 )),
but the task output y1 is constructed the same way as y1 = f¯1∗ (x1 ). For clarify, we define this
mapping as y1 = f1∗ (x1 , x2 ) (and analogously for the variant of task 2). Importantly, note that this
variant of task 1 has an input with a larger intrinsic dimensionality.
Now, we consider the inductive bias complexity of the combined task corresponding to f ∗ . Recall
that we define inductive bias complexity as:

                                I˜ = − log P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)                                (48)
We relate this inductive bias complexity to the inductive bias complexities of tasks corresponding to
f1∗ and f2∗ :
                               I˜i = − log P(ei (θ, p) ≤ ε | ei (θ, q) = 0)                      (49)
where I˜i corresponds to the inductive bias complexity for the task corresponding to fi∗ . Under certain
conditional independence assumptions, we are able to relate I˜ and the I˜i . Specifically, we assume
that if θ interpolates task 1, then additionally interpolating task 2 does not change the probability
that θ will generalize on task 1 (and vice versa). We also assume that if θ interpolates both task 1
and task 2, then generalizing on task 1 does not affect the probability that θ generalizes on task 2
(and vice versa). This is reasonable if we consider task 1 and task 2 to be constructed independently
in the sense that inputs x2 do not provide information on f1∗ (x1 , x2 ) and vice versa; being able to
interpolate or generalize on one task does not affect the ease of generalization on the other. Thus, we
are able to make the following statement:
Theorem 2. Assume the following conditional independencies:
                               e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε ⊥
                                             ⊥ e2 (θ, q) = 0|e1 (θ, q) = 0                             (50)

                               e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε ⊥
                                             ⊥ e1 (θ, q) = 0|e2 (θ, q) = 0                             (51)
                        e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε ⊥
                                      ⊥ e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε|e1 (θ, q) = 0, e2 (θ, q) = 0                     (52)
Then,
                                          ˜      ˜
                                  − log(e−I1 + e−I2 ) ≤ I˜ ≤ I˜1 + I˜2                                 (53)


                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. First, that by conditional independence:

  P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)P(e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)
                                               = P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε ∧ e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) (54)
Note that e(θ, p) ≤ ε ⇐= e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε ∧ e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε. This implies:

  P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) ≥ P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε ∧ e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)
                               = P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)P(e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) (55)
Also, observe that e(θ, p) ≤ ε =⇒ e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε ∨ e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε. This implies:
 P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) + P(e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) ≥ P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) (56)
Next, using our first two conditional independence assumptions:
 P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e1 (θ, q) = 0)P(e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e2 (θ, q) = 0) ≤ P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0) (57)
  P(e1 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e1 (θ, q) = 0) + P(e2 (θ, p) ≤ ε | e2 (θ, q) = 0) ≥ P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) = 0)
                                                                                                  (58)
Finally, taking the negative log of both sides:
                                         ˜      ˜
                                 − log(e−I1 + e−I2 ) ≤ I˜ ≤ I˜1 + I˜2                               (59)
as desired.
                     ˜       ˜
Note that − log(e−I1 + e−I2 ) ≈ min{I˜1 , I˜2 }. Thus, the statement intuitively says that the combined
task requires inductive bias up to the total inductive bias of the two tasks treated individually, and
requires at least the inductive bias of the easier task. We emphasize again that I˜i does not correspond
to the inductive bias required to solve task i, but rather the inductive bias required to solve a variant
of task i with a distractor added to instances provided from the other task.

Experiments Next, we empirically compute inductive bias complexities for combinations of image
classification tasks. To do this, we compute the task difficulty of a version of each task with a
task-irrelevant distractor from the other task appended to each instance (I˜1 or I˜2 as described above).
                                                                     ˜         ˜
We then report the upper bound I˜1 + I˜2 and lower bound − log(e−I1 + e−I2 ) of I.    ˜
In order to compute task difficulties for tasks with distractor-appended instances, we first revisit our
generalized approximation of inductive bias complexity from Equation 31:

                                   1                             1              ε
      I˜ ≈ (2dzE − nd) log b + log z + log d + log K −             log n − log     + log c .        (60)
                                   2                            m              LL
                                1/m
                    2π (m+1)/2
where c = m
             p
                6       m+1
                     Γ( 2 )
                                    , which is roughly constant for large intrinsic dimensionality m.
Recall that d is the output dimensionality, z is the number of manifolds that the input data lie on, n
is the number of training data points, ε is the target error, LL is the Lipschitz constant of the loss
function, and K and E are functions of m and the maximum frequency M = 2πr/δ. Typically for
classification problems, z = d is set as the number of classes.
When we append task-irrelevant distractors to the instances of a task, five key parameters change:
the number of training points n, the intrinsic dimensionality m, the number of manifolds z and
the bound on model output b and bound on model input r. Importantly, all other parameters stay
fixed (namely, δ, d, ε and LL ). The number of training points scales with the number of different
distractor instances; if task 1 with n1 training points is augmented with instances from task 2 with
n2 training points, the new task has n1 n2 training points. Also, the new intrinsic dimensionality
of the task is the sum of the intrinsic dimensionalities of the individual tasks since the combined
manifold of (x1 , x2 ) is the product of the manifolds of x1 and x2 individually. Thus, if task 1 has
intrinsic dimensionality m1 and task 2 has intrinsic dimensionality m2 , the intrinsic dimensionality
of the augmented task is m1 + m2 . The number of manifolds of the input of the combined task is the
number of manifolds corresponding to (x1 , x2 ), which is simply z1 z2 if task 1 and task 2 have z1 and
z2 classes respectively. If task 1 and task 2 have model outputs bounded by b1 and b2 respectively,


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                         p                                          p
then the combined model is bounded by b21 + b22 . Similarly, the new value of r is r12 + r22 . We
may then compute the task difficulty of distractor-appended task using the formula above.
We compute task difficulties for pairwise combinations of MNIST, SVHN and CIFAR-10 (which
have individual task difficulties (in bits) of: 1 × 1016 , 1 × 1031 , 3 × 1032 ). As found in Table 5,
combined task difficulties are significantly greater than the difficulties of individual tasks. As a very
rough rule of thumb, the combined task difficulty is approximately the product of the individual
task difficulties. This makes sense since the task difficulty scales exponentially with the intrinsic
dimension of the data and combining together two tasks *adds* together the intrinsic dimensionality
of the two tasks (and thus multiplies their task difficulties).

Table 5: Combined task difficulty bounds (in bits) for combinations of image classification tasks.
Difficulties are reported as ”lower bound / upper bound.” Individual task difficulties of MNIST,
SVHN and CIFAR-10 are (in bits): 1 × 1016 , 1 × 1031 , 3 × 1032 respectively.

                         MNIST                         SVHN                          CIFAR-10
                                  26              26            39              45
           MNIST         1 × 10        / 3 × 10        6 × 10        / 5 × 10        3 × 1042 / 8 × 1044
           SVHN          -                             4 × 1054 / 8 × 1054           4 × 1050 / 4 × 1061
           CIFAR-10      -                             -                             2 × 1055 / 3 × 1055

Why does combining together two simple tasks like MNIST result in a much more difficult task?
This is because separating the two parts of the combined task requires a lot of inductive bias. Without
this inductive bias, solving a combination of two tasks looks like solving a single task with a higher
dimensional input, which correspondingly requires much greater inductive bias. This also suggests
how practical model classes like neural networks may be able to provide such vast amounts of
inductive bias to a task: namely, by breaking down the input into lower-dimensional components.

F.2   P REDICTING Z ERO - OUTPUT

To gain intuition for the properties of task difficulty, we compute task difficulties for a task in which
the target function always has output 0: f ∗ (x). To compute the task difficulty, we return to the
definition of inductive bias complexity from Definition 1:

                                I˜ = − log P(e(θ, p) ≤ ε | e(θ, q) ≤ ϵ)                                    (61)
Keeping ϵ = 0 as we have done throughout the paper, observe that just as with the general case, the
inductive bias complexity is based on the fraction of interpolating hypotheses that generalize well. In
the case of zero output, generalizing well means that f (·; θ) should be sufficiently close to 0 on the
distribution p. Note that interpolating hypotheses may not necessarily have near-zero output over
distribution p; thus, solving the a zero-output task may require significant levels of inductive bias.
The key to determining the difficulty of a zero-output task is setting the hypothesis space. Recall
that in Section 4.3, we constructed the hypothesis space to be a linear combinations of a set of basis
functions sensitive to a task-relevant resolution (or larger). In the case of zero-output, all resolutions
are task-irrelevant: the true output f ∗ (x) is not sensitive to any changes in the input. Thus, if we
were to use the approach of Section 4.3 to construct hypotheses, we would find that there is only a
single hypothesis in the hypothesis space, namely f ∗. Since f ∗ interpolates the training data and
perfectly generalizes, the probability of generalizing given interpolation is 1. Thus, the task difficulty
is 0.
However, other choices of the base hypothesis space may lead to very large task difficulties. Consider
a version of ImageNet in which all inputs are mapped to a 1000-dimensional zero vector. If we
construct the base hypothesis space in the same way as for the original ImageNet task, assuming
we wish to achieve the same generalization error target as we set for the original ImageNet task, the
task difficulty approximation for the zero-output ImageNet would be the same as for the original
ImageNet: 3.55 × 1041 bits.
How can the inductive bias required to generalize on ImageNet stay the same even when the target
function is made much simpler (assuming the hypothesis space is kept the same)? This is because


                                                           24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a) Varying number of classes                      (b) Varying spatial resolution
                     on ImageNet                                       on ImageNet

              Figure 5: Task difficulties on parametric variations of benchmark tasks.


inductive bias complexity corresponds to the difficulty of specifying a generalizing set of hypotheses
from the interpolating hypotheses. Due to the large size of the base hypothesis space, the size of
the interpolating hypothesis space can be expected to be the same for both the true ImageNet target
function and the zero target function: we may expect a the same fraction of hypothesis to satisfy
the zero target training samples as the true ImageNet training samples. The base hypothesis space
does not over-represent hypotheses near the zero target function relative to other hypotheses. Then,
given similarly sized interpolating hypothesis spaces, the difficulty of specifying the true hypothesis
is similar for the two tasks.

F.3   P REDICTING R ANDOM TARGETS

Next, we consider a variation of ImageNet where the ImageNet target function is replaced with a
random function selected from the base hypothesis space used for the original ImageNet. In this case,
the training set would appear to be a version of ImageNet with randomized outputs for each image.
Importantly, note that this is different than independently selecting a random output for each point
in the training set: we would training points that are sufficiently close (with distances around the
spatial resolution δ or smaller) to have similar outputs. We consider this formulation of randomizing
the outputs of ImageNet instead of selecting independent random targets for each ImageNet input
since constructing independently chosen random targets for all possible input of ImageNet may not
correspond to a well-defined target function.
Assume we wish to achieve the same generalization error rate as for the original ImageNet task.
The parameters governing task difficulty would remain the same as in Equation 11: namely, the
parameters specific to the input distribution (m, n, d, r), model output and loss function (b, LL ) and
error rate (ε) would remain the same. Thus, the task difficulty would be the same as for the original
ImageNet: 3.55 × 1041 bits.
How can solving a randomized version of ImageNet require no more inductive bias than the original
task despite having a less structured target function? Intuitively, this is because the base hypothesis
space considers all hypothesis equally: it does not over-represent structured hypotheses (such as
the target function of ImageNet) relative to other ones. Thus, the difficulty of specifying a well
generalizing region in the hypothesis space is the same for both the randomized and original versions
of ImageNet.

F.4   VARYING N UMBER OF C LASSES

We vary the number of classes in ImageNet (while keeping all other task parameters fixed including
the number of training points n) and find in Figure 5a that task difficulty grows with the number of
classes. As the number of classes increased from 10 to 1000, the task difficulty increases by roughly 5
orders of magnitude. This is primarily due to the increased size of the input space when more classes


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


are added. The results indicate that adding more classes to a classification task can be a moderately
powerful way of increasing the difficulty of a task, although not as powerful as increasing the intrinsic
dimensionality of a task.


F.5   VARYING S PATIAL R ESOLUTION

We vary the spatial resolution used to construct the base hypothesis space of ImageNet (while keeping
all other task parameters fixed) and find in Figure 5b that task difficulty drastically shrinks with the
spatial resolution. This makes sense: as the spatial resolution used to construct the hypothesis space
grows, the hypothesis space shrinks, and it becomes much more difficult to specify regions in the
hypothesis space. These results emphasize the critical effect of the selection of base hypothesis space
on task difficulty.


G     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION

G.1    H OW TO EXTEND THE INDUCTIVE BIAS COMPLEXITY MEASURE TO THE
       NON - INTERPOLATING CASE ?

One limitation of our work is that we only consider interpolating hypotheses (in other words, we
only consider training error ϵ = 0 in Definition 1). Although we will leave a formal extension of our
results to non-interpolating hypotheses as a future work, we briefly outline how are results might be
extended:
First, we may provide an analogous result to Theorem 1 in the non-interpolating case by arguing that
non-interpolating hypotheses may generalize well as long as they are within a smaller radius of the
true hypotheses (relative to the radius for interpolating hypotheses). Specifically, we may expect the
more general expression for the radius to be LL Lfε−ϵW (p,q) .

Next, in order to quantify probabilities in the hypothesis space and find a practical estimate for
inductive bias complexity, we must quantify the size of the hypothesis space that fits the training data
up to error ϵ. Intuitively, we may expect it to be a region around the interpolating hypothesis space
with dimensionality equal to that of the base hypothesis space. We may expect the size of this region
to scale polynomially with ϵ. As with the interpolating case, we can then estimate the fraction of the
near-interpolating hypothesis space that is close enough to the true hypothesis to find a generalized,
practically-computable expression for task difficulty.


G.2    W HY DOES INDUCTIVE BIAS EXPONENTIALLY DEPEND ON DATA DIMENSION ?

Intuitively, inductive bias scales exponentially with data dimension because inductive bias scales with
the dimensionality of the hypothesis space, and the dimensionality of the hypothesis space scales
exponentially with data dimension.
First, we consider the intuition for why inductive bias scales with the dimensionality of the hypothesis
space: recall that generalizing requires specifying a specific set of well-generalizing hypotheses in
the hypothesis space. The amount of information needed to specify a point in an m dimensional
space scales with m since it is simply the number of coordinates of the point. Thus, assuming
well-generalizing hypotheses are concentrated in a region around a point, the amount of information
required to specify the region also scales with the dimensionality of the hypothesis space.
Next, we consider the intuition for why the dimensionality of the hypothesis space scales with
data dimensionality: consider a very simple ”grid-based” method of constructing hypotheses in
which the input manifold is divided into equally sized hypercubes that tile the entire manifold. A
hypothesis consists of a mapping between hypercubes and outputs. Note that the dimensionality of
each hypothesis scales with the number of hypercubes since each hypothesis can be specified by its
output at each hypercube. The number of hypercubes scales exponentially with the dimensionality
of the input manifold; thus the hypothesis space dimensionality also scales exponentially with the
dimensionality of the input manifold.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We view this exponential dependence as fundamental: generalizing over more dimensions of variation
significantly expands the hypothesis space regardless of how we parameterize hypotheses, and thus
dramatically increases inductive bias complexity.

G.3   W HY DO TRAINING POINTS PROVIDE SO LITTLE INDUCTIVE BIAS ?

Experimentally, we observe that changing the amount of training data, even by many orders of
magnitude, does not significantly affect the amount of inductive bias required to generalize. We can
interpret this as training data providing relatively little information on which to generalize. Why
do training points provide so little information? Intuitively, it is because in the absence of strong
constraints on the hypothesis space, training points only provide information about the function we
aim to approximate in a local neighborhood around each training point. By contrast, inductive biases
can provide more global constraints on the hypothesis space than can dramatically reduce the size of
the hypothesis space and allow for generalization. Without strong inductive biases, training points
need to cover large regions of the input manifold to allow for generalization. With high dimensional
manifolds, this can require very large numbers of training points.
Through simple scaling arguments, we can estimate the number of training samples we need to gener-
alize on ImageNet in the absence of strong inductive biases. We estimate the intrinsic dimensionality
of ImageNet to be 48 and the task-relevant resolution δ of ImageNet to be 65. We can then estimate
the number of training points needed to generalize as the number such that any region on the manifold
is within radius δ of a training point. With n training points, we can expect
                                                                           √to cover a volume of about
n6548 on the manifold. Given a manifold of volume about (255 × 224 × 3)48 (corresponding to the
[0, 255] pixel range and 224 ×√224 × 3 extrinsic dimensionality of ImageNet images), we would then
require about (255 × 224 × 3/65)48 ≈ 10153 points to generalize. Indeed, following the linear
trend of Figure 3, we may expect to approximately halve the required inductive bias with this number
of training points. However, with only 1017 points, strong inductive biases would be necessary to
generalize as indicated in Figure 3.

G.4   W HY IS THE SCALE OF INDUCTIVE BIAS COMPLEXITY SO LARGE ?

Across all settings, our measure yields very large inductive information content, many orders of
magnitude larger than parameter dimensionalities of practical models. These large numbers can
be attributed to the vast size of the hypothesis space constructed in Section 4.3: it includes any
bandlimited function on the data manifold below a certain frequency threshold. Typical function
classes may already represent only a very small subspace of the hypothesis space: for instance,
neural networks have biases toward compositionality and smoothness that may significantly reduce
the hypothesis space (see Li et al. (2018); Mhaskar et al. (2017)), with standard initializations and
optimizers further shrinking the subspace. Moreover, functions that can be practically implemented
by reasonably sized programs on our computer hardware and software may themselves occupy a
small fraction of the full hypothesis space. Future work may use a base hypothesis space that already
includes some of these constraints, which could reduce the scale of our measured task difficulty.


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H     A DDITIONAL TABLES AND F IGURES

    Table 6: Mapping notation in the feature-based task framework to different learning settings.

  Setting                       x                      Features                             f ∗ (x)
  Supervised classification     input                  d1 : class                           class
                                                       c1 : instance within class

  Reinforcement learning        state or observation   c1 : state or                        desired action
                                sequence               observation sequence

  Meta-learning for             samples from a set     c1 : a set of related classes        classifier mapping inputs
  few-shot classification       of related classes     c2 : choice of samples from c1       to their class

  Unsupervised autoencoding     input                  c1 : input                           x


  Meta-reinforcement learning   trajectories through   c1 : environment                     policy mapping states
                                environments           c2 : trajectory within environment   to desired actions


Figure 6: An example of constructing a hypothesis space for a binary-classification task with a
1 dimensional input. The black line indicates the data manifold and the blue and red dots on the
line indicate training points. The hypothesis space is constructed using basis functions of three
different frequencies; observe that the highest frequency is chosen to have scale corresponding to the
minimum distance between classes. Two specific hypothesis are illustrated in the hypothesis space,
the true hypothesis (in orange), f ∗ and another hypothesis f (in purple). Both can be expressed as
linear combinations of the basis functions, and thus correspond to points in the hypothesis space as
illustrated. The f ∗ hypothesis fits the training data, and thus is part of the interpolating hypothesis set
indicated by the light orange oval.


                                                        28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: The inductive bias information contributed by different model architectures for image
classification tasks. (FC-N refers to a fully connected network with N layers.)

                                                                                              SVHN
                           MNIST
                                                                   Model                                      Information
 Model                                    Information
                                                                                                           Content (×1031 bits)
                                       Content (×1016 bits)
                                                                   FC-6 (Mauch & Yang, 2017)                     0.870
 Linear (Lecun et al., 1998)                 0.705
                                                                   AlexNet (Veeramacheneni et al., 2022)         0.985
 FC-3 (Lecun et al., 1998)                   0.817
                                                                   Deep CNN (Goodfellow et al., 2013)            1.049
 AlexNet (mrgrhn, 2021)                      0.888
                                                                   DSN (Lee et al., 2015)                        1.060
 LeNet-5 (CNN) (Lecun et al., 1998)          0.907
                                                                   DenseNet (Huang et al., 2017)                 1.075
 DSN (Lee et al., 2015)                      0.976
                                                                   WRN-16-8 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis,              1.077
 MCDNN (Ciregan et al., 2012)                1.020
                                                                   2016)
 Ensembled CNN (An et al., 2020)             1.094
                                                                   WRN-28-10 (Foret et al., 2020)                 1.114

                                                                                            ImageNet
                          CIFAR10                                  Model                                      Information
 Model                                    Information                                                      Content (×1041 bits)
                                       Content (×1032 bits)        Linear (Karpathy, 2015)                       2.063
 Linear (Nishimoto, 2018)                    2.250                 SIFT + FVs (Sánchez & Perronnin,             2.261
 FC-4 (Lin et al., 2015)                     2.354                 2011)
 MCDNN (Ciregan et al., 2012)                2.704                 AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)              2.290
 AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)           2.709                 DenseNet-121 (Huang et al., 2017)              2.348
 DSN (Lee et al., 2015)                      2.786                 ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016)                    2.362
 DenseNet (Huang et al., 2017)               3.010                 DenseNet-201 (Huang et al., 2017)              2.363
 ResNet-50 (Wightman et al., 2021)           3.195                 WRN-50-2-bottleneck (Zagoruyko & Ko-           2.368
 BiT-L (Kolesnikov et al., 2020)             3.453                 modakis, 2016)
 ViT-H/14 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)         3.513                 BiT-L (Kolesnikov et al., 2020)                2.449
                                                                   ViT-H/14 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)            2.461


                                                              29
