Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C ONTEXT AND H ISTORY AWARE OTHER -S HAPING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Cooperation failures, in which self-interested agents converge to collectively
         worst-case outcomes, are a common failure mode of Multi-Agent Reinforce-
         ment Learning methods. Methods such as Model-Free Opponent Shaping and
         The Good Shepherd address this issue by shaping their co-player’s learning into
         mutual cooperation. However, these methods fail to capture important co-player
         learning dynamics or do not scale well to co-players parameterised by deep neural
         networks. To address these issues, we propose Context and History Aware Other-
         Shaping (CHAOS). A CHAOS agent is a meta-learner that learns to shape its co-
         player over multiple trials. CHAOS considers both the context (inter-episode in-
         formation), and history (intra-episode information) to shape co-players. CHAOS
         also successfully scales to shaping co-players parameterised by deep neural net-
         works. In a set of experiments, we show that CHAOS achieves state-of-the-art
         shaping in matrix games. We provide extensive ablations, motivating the impor-
         tance of both context and history. CHAOS also successfully shapes on a grid-
         world-based game, demonstrating CHAOS’ scalability empirically. Finally, we
         provide empirical evidence that, counterintuitively, the widely-used Coin Game
         environment does not require history to learn shaping because states are often
         indicative of past actions, making it unsuitable for investigating shaping.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Multi-agent learning has shown great success in strictly competitive (Silver et al., 2016) and fully
cooperative settings (Foerster et al., 2019; Rashid et al., 2018). In competitive games, agents can
learn Nash equilibrium strategies by iteratively best-responding to suitable mixtures of past oppo-
nents. Similarly, best-responding to rational co-players leads to the desirable equilibria in coopera-
tive games (assuming joint training). In contrast, Nash equilibria often coincide with globally worst
welfare outcomes in general-sum games, rendering the aforementioned learning paradigms ineffec-
tive. For example, in the iterated prisoner’s dilemma (IPD) (Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981; Harper
et al., 2017), naive best-response dynamics converge on unconditional mutual defection (Foerster
et al., 2018).
The above methods ignore a crucial factor: when multiple learning agents interact in a shared envi-
ronment, the actions of one agent influence the environment and, often, the reward of other agents,
which in turn influences their learning dynamics. For example, a car merging into the middle lane
in heavy traffic makes it unattractive for fellow collision-averse motorists to move to the middle lane
at the same time. Our paper investigates methods which allow agents to exploit this interconnection
between their actions and the learning outcome of other agents and leverage it to their advantage.
Such “shaping” methods explicitly account for other agent’s learning and have achieved promising
results, e.g. discovering the prosocial tit-for-tat strategy in the IPD (Foerster et al., 2018; Letcher
et al., 2019b; Willi et al., 2022; Balaguer et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022). However, early shaping meth-
ods are myopic (only shape the next learning step of the co-player), require white-box access to the
co-player’s parameters and require higher-order derivatives. To overcome these shortcomings, both
Model-Free Opponent Shaping (Lu et al., 2022, M-FOS) and The Good Shepherd (Balaguer et al.,
2022, GS) frame shaping as a meta reinforcement learning problem. In these approaches, the meta-
agent learns to shape others by observing full training runs of the co-players in each meta-training
episode before updating its policy. M-FOS and GS showed promising empirical success. However,
both methods have shortcomings: M-FOS’s meta-agent outputs a policy parameterisation for the
inner-agent (similar to HyperNetworks (Ha et al., 2017)). This limits M-FOS to games where the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


policies can be represented compactly, such as in infinitely-iterated matrix games. While M-FOS
reports results in a higher-dimensional game (in which neural networks represent the policies), it
uses a hierarchical architecture. GS does not output whole parameterisations but instead keeps its
policy fixed during the entire duration of a trial. This prevents GS from using the training context to
shape the co-player adaptively.
To address both issues, we propose Context and History Aware Other-Shaping1 (CHAOS). In
CHAOS, the meta-agent and the inner agent it controls are parameterised by a single recurrent
neural network (RNN). A CHAOS agent meta-learns by retaining its hidden state throughout an en-
tire meta-episode, similar to RL2 (Duan et al., 2016) in single-agent RL. This hidden state enables
CHAOS agents to react to two components of the co-player’s learning: The context - inter-episode
learning and the history - intra-episode behaviour. In shaping problems, history captures the co-
player’s current policies whilst context captures the co-player’s learning rules. Together these two
enable CHAOS to dynamically shape agents. Combining the meta-agent and the inner agent into
one recurrent meta-learner avoids outputting policy parameterisations, unlike M-FOS.
We show that CHAOS discovers a ZD-extortion-like strategy in the finitely-iterated prisoner’s
dilemma (a more challenging setting than the infinitely-iterated PD where the environment is
non-differentiable and where policies cannot be represented compactly). Moreover, we show that
CHAOS matches or outperforms GS and M-FOS in iterated matrix games. CHAOS also matches
state-of-the-art shaping against memory-based agents in the Coin Game, a grid-based environment
where deep neural networks represent policies.
To summarise our contributions

           • We introduce CHAOS, a shaping method capturing both learning context and history, suit-
             able for high-dimensional games.
           • We formalise the concept of history and context for shaping and analyse their respective
             roles empirically.
           • We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on a set of iterated matrix games.
           • We identify a fundamental problem in the widely-used Coin Game.

2       R ELATED W ORK
Opponent Shaping Many methods exist that explicitly account for their opponent’s learning. Just
like CHAOS, these approaches recognise that the actions of any one agent influence their co-players
policy and seek to use this mechanism to their advantage (Foerster et al., 2018; Letcher et al., 2019a;
Kim et al., 2021a; Willi et al., 2022). However, in contrast to CHAOS, these approaches require
privileged information to shape their opponents. These models are also myopic since anticipating
many steps is intractable. Balaguer et al. (2022) and Lu et al. (2022) solve the issues above by
framing opponent shaping as a meta reinforcement learning problem, which CHAOS inherits and
builds upon. The specific differences to M-FOS and GS will be the subject of Section 4.
Opponent Modelling Similarly to our work, opponent modelling tries to disentangle some aspects
of other agents’ policies from the environment (Mealing & Shapiro, 2017; Raileanu et al., 2018;
Tacchetti et al., 2018). In contrast to our work, these approaches do not consider agents as learners.
Furthermore, they do not observe agents at different stages of learning and thus, whilst modelling
as non-stationary, do not observe learning dynamics (Synnaeve & Bessière, 2011). Finally, CHAOS
does not explicitly model any aspect of the opponent.
Multi-Agent Meta-Learning Multi-agent meta-learning approaches have also shown success in
mixed-games with other learners (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021b; Wu et al., 2021).
Similar to CHAOS, they take inspiration from meta reinforcement learning - their approach is to
learn the optimal initial parameterisation for the shaper akin to Model-Agnostic Meta Learning
(Finn et al., 2017). In contrast, CHAOS uses an approach similar to RL2 (Duan et al., 2016), which
trains an RNN-based agent to implement efficient learning for its next task. Furthermore, CHAOS
is optimised using evolution strategies (Salimans et al., 2017), allowing it to consider much longer
time horizons than policy-gradient metods (Schulman et al., 2017).
    1
        “Other” breaks with the line of seminal work on opponent shaping, but highlights the general-sum aspect


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Example meta-learning interaction. CHAOS θ (blue) resets its hidden state h at the begin-
ning of a trial, updates its hidden state after each environment interaction, then updates its parameters
at the end of a trial. The opponent ϕ (orange) resets its parameters at the beginning of a trial, then
updates its parameters at the end of each episode. Optionally, if the opponent uses memory, its
hidden state h is reset at the beginning of a trial and updated after each environment interaction.
3 BACKGROUND
Partially Observable Stochastic Game (POSG) A POSG is given by the tuple M =
⟨N , A, O, S, T , I, R, γ⟩, where A, O, and S denote the action, observation, and state space, respec-
tively. These parameters can be distinct at every time step and also incorporated into the transition
function T : S × A → ∆S, where A ≡ An is the joint action of all agents. Each agent draws
individual observations according to the observation function I : S × N → O and obtains a reward
according to their reward function R : S × A × N → R where N = {1, . . . , n}. POSGs can
represent general-sum games. The single player case, N = {1}, of POSGs are Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs).
Evolution Strategies (ES) CHAOS uses Evolution Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017, ES) to optimise
the meta-agent. ES is a model-free optimisation method. Let F : Rd → R be some function we
want to optimise over. Instead of optimising the objective directly, ES blurs F (x) with Gaussian
noise
                                        Eϵ∼N (0,Id ) [F (x + σϵ)] ,
where σ is a hyper-parameter controlling how much Gaussian noise is added. This allows using the
following simple gradient estimator:
                                                                    hϵ           i
                     ∇x Eϵ∼N (0,Id ) [F (x + σϵ)] = Eϵ∼N (0,Id )       F (x + σϵ) ,
                                                                     σ
allowing the optimization of non-differentiable functions using gradient descent methods. ES by-
passes the credit assignment problem by directly optimizing in the parameter space of the model
instead of the policy space and is thus suitable for long-time horizon problems (Salimans et al.,
2017).
RL2 CHAOS takes an RL2 -like approach to meta-learning. RL2 is a single-agent meta-
reinforcement learning method where the meta-agent is parameterised by a recurrent neural network
(ϕ, h), where ϕ are the network parameters and h the hidden state. RL2 samples MDPs from a
distribution ρP : P → R+ and interacts with each MDP sequentially over a trial, consisting of a
number of episodes E. Importantly, the RL2 agent retains its hidden state h across all episodes in
a trial and resets only when it faces a new trial, i.e. a new MDP is sampled. The objective is to
maximise the expected total discounted reward over a trial t instead of a single episode
                                           " L                  #
                                            X
                                                   l
                                       Eϕt       γ r (sl , al )
                                               l=0

where L = K ∗ E and K is the episode length. The RL2 agent is thus encouraged to use all the
information captured in its hidden state h. RL2 agents have been shown to scale to high-dimensional
problem settings (Duan et al., 2016).


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Converged Reward (row, column) for agents against Naive Learners on the Iterated Prison-
ers Dilemma (IPD), Iterated Matching Pennies (IMP) and Coin Game, reported across 5 seeds with
standard deviations. Reward is averaged per (step/episode) for (Matrix/Coin) game respectively.

                        IPD                           IMP                        Coin Game
    CHAOS    -0.13 ± 0.02, -2.84 ± 0.05     0.86 ± 0.02, -0.86 ± 0.02      6.51 ± 0.46, 2.71 ± 0.11
    M-FOS    -0.60 ± 0.14, -2.34 ± 0.14     0.83 ± 0.09, -0.83 ± 0.09      2.67 ± 0.52, 3.94 ± 0.15
    GS       -0.97 ± 0.03, -1.26 ± 0.10     -0.01 ± 0.01, 0.01 ± 0.01      6.72 ± 0.72, 2.39 ± 0.10
    NL       -2.00 ± 0.00, -2.00 ± 0.00     0.00 ± 0.00, 0.00 ± 0.00       0.47 ± 0.83, 0.26 ± 0.30


                (a)                               (b)                               (c)

Figure 2: Evaluation results in the finite IPD over a single trial composed of 100 inner episodes over
20 seeds, where (a) shows the reward, (b) CHAOS’ conditional probability of cooperation, and (c)
state visitation.
Good Shepherd GS formalises shaping as a meta-learning problem over a sequence of trials of
length T . Each trial contains E episodes. In each trial, GS shapes a new co-player in a POSG M,
where (ϕi , ϕ−i ) correspond to GS’ and the co-players’ parameters, respectively. During a trial t,
GS uses a fixed policy ϕti . At the end of each inner episode, the co-players update their parameters
                                      e
                                            PK k t e
with respect to the episodic return J−i  = k=0 r−i    (ϕi , ϕ−i ), where K is the length of an episode.
For example, if the co-players were Naive Learners, the update looks as follows: GS optimises the
                  PE
meta-return J¯ = e Jie (summed over all episodes) at the end of a trial using Evolution Strategies
(Salimans et al., 2017). The policy is parameterised by a feed-forward network, thus lacking both
history and context. Therefore, GS cannot adapt to changing learning dynamics of the co-player,
which is detrimental, as we show in Section 6.
Model-Free Opponent Shaping M-FOS frames opponent shaping as a meta reinforcement task.
More specifically, the meta-task is formulated as a POMDP ⟨S, A, Ω, O, P, R, γ̄⟩ over an under-
lying general-sum game, represented by a POSG M. In the POMDP,           the meta-state S spans the
policies of every player in the underlying POSG: s̄e = ϕie−1 , ϕ−i e−1
                                                                         ∈ S. The meta-action space
A consists of the policy parameterisation of the underlying inner agent playing the game for the
meta-agent. At each meta-episode, conditioned on both agent’s policies, M-FOS outputs parameters
of the next inner-agents (similar to a HyperNetwork (Ha et al., 2017)), i.e., āe = ϕei ∼ πθ (· | ōe ),
where θ is the parameters of the M-FOS agent.  The meta-reward is the return of the inner agent
                                 PK k e e
over one inner episode, r̄e =       k=0 ri ϕi , ϕ−i . This Hypernetwork-like approach is M-FOS’
main shortcoming - it is difficult to scale to complex inner-agent policy parameterisations. To scale
to complex inner-agent policy parameterisations that are used in the Coin Game environment, they
use a hierarchical architecture in which the meta-agent instead outputs a conditioning vector for the
inner agent that contains context information (Lu et al., 2022). M-FOS is optimised using Evolution
Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017) for the iterated matrix games and uses PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
for the Coin Game environment.


4    M ETHOD

We assume a set of POSGs M and a distribution we can sample from ρM . We also assume a set
of co-player initialisations ϕ0i and a corresponding distribution ρϕ , as shaping acknowledges other
learners within the environment, in contrast to RL2 . Just like in GS, we define a inner episode to
be a finite sequence of interactions within a fixed POSG M = ⟨N , A, O, S, T , I, R, γ⟩ and fixed
initial learner, and a trial to be a sequence of inner episodes.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1 illustrates the interaction between
agents and the environment. First, the shap-            Algorithm 1: CHAOS update algorithm.
ing agent’s parameters ϕi and hidden state hi           Given a distribution of game functions M ∼
are initialised. At the start of a trial, co-players    ρM , returns Ji , J−i , policies πϕi , πϕ−i and
ϕ−i ∼ ρϕ and a new game (POSG) ρM are                   their respective initial hidden states hi , h−i
sampled. During an episode of length K, upon            and a distribution of initial co-players ρϕ , this
receiving a state, agents take their respective ac-     algorithm updates a shaper policy ϕi over T
tions, aki ∼ πϕi (· | oki , hti ). At each time step    trials consisting of E episodes.
in the episode, the internal state of the shaping       Require: ϕi , ρϕ , ρM , E, T
agent is updated: hk+1       = f (oki , hki ). On re-     1: for t = 0 to T do
                       i
ceiving actions, the POSG returns rewards rik ,           2:    Initialise trial reward J¯ = 0
                                                          3:    Initialise shaper hidden state hi = 0
new observations ok+1i     and a done flag d, indi-       4:    Sample co-players ϕ−i ∼ ρϕ
cating if an episode has ended.                           5:    for e = 0 to E do
When an inner episode terminates, the co-                 6:       Sample game M ∼ ρM
player takes a gradient update maximising to-             7:       Initialise co-players’ h−i = 0
                      e
tal episode return, J−i
                            PK k t e
                         = k=0 r−i     (ϕi , ϕ−i ).       8:       Ji , J−i , h′i , h′−i = M(ϕi , ϕ−i , hi , h−i )
                                                          9:       Update co-players’
The updated co-player ϕe+1 −i   and  the shaper’s
                                                                   ϕ−i ← ϕ−i + ∇ϕ−i J−i
hidden state hKi are  passed to the next episode.       10:        hi ← h′i
This process is repeated over E episodes in a           11:        J¯ ← J¯ + Ji
trial. When a trial terminates, the shaper’s pol-       12:     end for
icy is updated, maximising total trial reward,          13:     Update ϕi with respect to J¯
       PE
J¯ = e Jie , via ES. This leads to the follow-          14: end for
ing objective,
             max Eρ(ϕ),ρ(M) J¯ .

               ϕi

We use Evolution Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017) to maximise the expected fitness across a pop-
ulation. At the start of each generation, a population of CHAOS agents of size M and N Naive
Learners (NL) are initialised. During a generation, the population plays against copies of the Naive
Learner in parallel for a series of E inner episodes. At the end of an inner episode, each copy of
the Naive Learner performs a gradient update. At the end of the trial, CHAOS performs a gradient
update in the direction of the maximum expected fitness, and the next generation begins.
Difference to M-FOS and GS CHAOS can be understood as a simpler version of M-FOS in which
the meta-agent and underlying agent are collapsed into a single agent. To contrast CHAOS to M-
FOS in more detail, we differentiate between the method definition and the actual architecture.
In the method definition of M-FOS, there are two action spaces: the meta-action space Ā and the
underlying action space A. In CHAOS, the only action space is that of the underlying game, mean-
ing there is only one agent in CHAOS, whereas there are two agents in M-FOS. Consequently,
CHAOS can be understood as a special case of M-FOS.  To make this explicit, let us define his-
tory as trajectory of an episode e, τe = o0e , a0e , re0 , ..., reK , and context as a trajectory of a trial t,
τ̄t = (τ0 , ..., τE ). Thus we can express the policies of CHAOS, M-FOS and GS as the following:

                                   CHAOS: a ∼ πϕ (· | s, τ̄t , τe )
                                   M-FOS: a ∼ πϕ∼πθ (·|τ̄t ) (· | s, τe )                                       (1)
                                   GS:    a ∼ πϕ (· | s, τe )

Thus it becomes apparent that 1) M-FOS’ use of an outer agent is redundant and 2) that GS is unable
to condition upon the context.
Secondly, CHAOS’ architecture is different from the architectures proposed in M-FOS. M-FOS pro-
poses two significantly different architectures (Lu et al., 2022). For matrix games, where a table can
represent the policy, the meta-agent is a feedforward neural network whose output is the exact policy
of the underlying agent. In this case, the meta-agent is trained using Evolutionary Strategies. For the
Coin Game, in which a simple table cannot represent policies, M-FOS proposes an architecture akin
to Hierarchical RL. Both the meta-agent and the underlying agent are recurrent neural networks.
The underlying agent resets their hidden state after each episode, whereas the meta-agent does not.
In this architecture, the meta-agent does not output the full parameterisation of the underlying agent


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


but instead outputs a conditioning variable, which the underlying agent uses as input. M-FOS relies
on the assumption that outputting a conditioning variable is equivalent to outputting a policy pa-
rameterisation. The conditioning variable is fixed during an episode. In contrast, CHAOS only uses
one recurrent neural network that does not reset its hidden state after an episode. Both M-FOS and
CHAOS can capture context and history; however, CHAOS only needs one agent to do so.
Next, we compare CHAOS to GS. Originally, GS does not use a recurrent agent, and there is no
discussion about notions of history or context. Thus GS cannot capture history or context. Even
though it is not discussed, the framework is extensible to a recurrent meta-agent. However, that
meta-agent only captures history as the hidden state is reset after each episode. By not capturing
context, GS fails to shape in zero-sum games, such as the Matching Pennies, which we show in our
experiments.



5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E NVIRONMENTS

Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma is a well-known and widely studied general-sum game illustrating
that two rational agents may not cooperate even if it is globally optimal. The players choose to either
cooperate (C) or defect (D) and receive a payoff according to Table 2a. In the iterated prisoner’s
dilemma (IPD), the agents repeatedly play the prisoner’s dilemma and can observe the previous
decisions.
Past research has used the infinitely IPD in their experiments (Foerster et al., 2018; Letcher et al.,
2019b; Willi et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Balaguer et al., 2022). In the infinite version, players submit
a policy represented by five parameters, where each parameter is the probability of cooperation after
each state given a one-step history (CC, CD, DC, DD, start). Press & Dyson (2012) showed that
having access to the last state is sufficient for acting optimally. The infinite version is a differentiable
game Balduzzi et al. (2018) as the exact value function can be calculated directly from the policies,
thus accessing exact gradients is possible and optimization tractable. In our work, we consider the
finitely IPD (f-IPD), and we do not take advantage of exact value functions, resulting in a version
of the game that is more similar to current reinforcement learning environments. In the f-IPD, the
agents do not submit a full strategy but take an individual action (either C or D) at each timestep.
Over repeated interactions, IPD produces a spectrum of interesting behaviours. In particular, two
cases are of interest in this work: 1) Cooperation, and 2) Zero-Determinant (ZD) Extortion strategies.
In Cooperation, agents are shaped sufficiently to CC and choose not defect, even though this would
increase short-term rewards. In ZD-Extortion (Press & Dyson, 2012), co-players cooperate while
allowing the shaper to enforce a linear relationship between their own payoff and that of the co-
player, thus inducing behaviours that are more favourable than mutual cooperation.
Iterated Matching Pennies (IMP) is an iterated matrix game like the IPD. The players choose either
heads (H) or tails (T), and receive a payoff according to the choices of both players. In contrast to
the IPD, which is a general-sum game, IMP is a zero-sum game. The only equilibrium strategy for
each one-memory agent is to play a random policy, resulting in an expected joint payoff of (0,0). It
is only with intra-episode memory that a shaper can observe a co-player’s policy and begin shaping.

Coin Game is a multi-agent, wrap-around grid-world environment that simulates social dilemmas
(like the IPD) with high-dimensional states and multi-step actions (Lerer & Peysakhovich, 2017).
Two players – blue and orange – move around a grid and pick up blue and orange coloured coins.
When a player picks up a coin of its own colour, the player receives a reward of +1. When a player
picks up a coin of the co-player’s colour, the player also receives a reward of +1 and the co-player
receives a reward of −2. If a coin gets picked up, a new coin of the same colour appears in a random
location on the grid. If both agents reach a coin simultaneously, then both agents pick up that coin
(the coin is duplicated). The episodes are of fixed length. When both players pick up coins without
regard to colour, the expected reward is 0. In contrast to the IPD, the Coin Game requires learning
from high-dimensional states, a task that current shaping methods struggle to learn.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a)                               (b)                             (c)

Figure 3: Evaluation results over a single trial (with novel co-player) composed of 100 inner episodes
over 20 seeds for the Iterated Matching Pennies. (a) Average Reward (per step) (b) CHAOS’ proba-
bility of cooperation conditioned on state and (c) state visitation.

5.2   BASELINE C OMPARISONS

We compare our method against three baselines: a Naive Learner, M-FOS and GS. A Naive Learner
(NL) does not account for the learning of the co-player. It updates at the end of each inner-episode
with learning rate α:

                                  ϕt+1
                                   i   = ϕti + α∇ϕti Ri (ϕti , ϕt−i )                              (2)

In the IPD, our NL is parameterised as a tabular policy trained using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).
In the Coin Game, the NL is parameterised by a recurrent neural network trained using PPO. The
specific implementation details are provided in Appendix D.
For M-FOS and GS, we optimise both methods using Evolution Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017),
in line with the original implementations (Lu et al., 2022; Balaguer et al., 2022). For M-FOS, we
use the hierarchical architecture used in its Coin Game results since we are using neural networks
for these environments instead of simple tabular policies. The implementation details for M-FOS
and GS are provided in Appendix D and Appendix D
In every game, CHAOS is parameterised as a recurrent neural network and
is trained using Evolution Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017). We used the
Jax library (Bradbury et al., 2018) with the Haiku framework (Hennigan
et al., 2020) to implement our neural networks. For the Evolution strate-
gies, we relied on the Evosax library (Lange, 2022). Our experiments were
performed on NVIDIA A40 and V100 GPUs. Addditional implementation
details and hyperparameters for each game are provided in Appendix D.
Furthermore, the whole codebase will be released upon acceptance.


5.3   A BLATIONS
                                                                            Figure 4: Illustration
                                                                            of a special state of
To evaluate the importance of context and history we apply the following
                                                                            the Coin Game where
ablations.
                                                                            memory-less agents
The Hardstop Challenge during a trial, after k episodes the co-player can infer conventions.
no longer takes learner updates. In the situation where the co-player no If both agents are on
longer updates, optimal behaviour would be to exploit this fixed policy the same square, we
(effectively stop shaping). We choose k = 2 to be less than the number can infer that an agent
of episodes required for a shaper to reach to ZD- Extortion-like policies. has broke convention.
This challenge tests if shapers’ can 1) identify the sudden change in a co-
player’s learning dynamics 2) react and deploy a more suitable exploitative policy. We evaluate
CHAOS against GS, to compare context and context-less shaping methods.
The Only-History Challenge we reset the hidden state of CHAOS between episodes, removing
its ability to use context to shape (CHAOS reset memory). In this challenge, shapers must infer
co-player’s current policy by only using the history. We evaluate the shaper within the IMP environ-
ment, over different episode lengths, to limit the relative strength of history.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a)                      (b)                      (c)                       (d)

Figure 5: Evaluation results over a single trial (with novel-coplayer) compromising over 5 seeds for
the Coin Game. (a) Reward, (b) the Shaper’s frequency of picking up its own colour coin, (c) state
visitation, and (d) the number of coins picked up per episode.

6   R ESULTS

In this section we report and compare the results between CHAOS and our baselines on our en-
vironments. We find that CHAOS shapes achieves state-of-the-art results in the IPD. On the IMP
game, CHAOS achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming M-FOS, GS and other baselines.
Next we demonstrate that CHAOS is scalable, as it achieves comparable shaping in the Coin Game.
Finally through a series of ablations we demonstrate the importance of context and history for ef-
fective shaping. Similar to Meta-RL test protocol, for the evaluation we evaluate the performance of
shapers against a novel POSG M and co-player initialisation ϕ−i .
Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma In the IPD, we inspect the converged reward for each shaping algo-
rithm against a PPO agent. Here, CHAOS shapes its co-player more aggressively than the base-
lines (see Table 1), achieving an average return of -0.13 per episode. All shaping baselines reach
ZD-extortion-like policy. CHAOS switches policies during a co-player’s learning, switching from
cooperation to exploitation (see Figure ??). In Figure 2c, we display the state visitation over one
trial. It shows that a fully trained CHAOS agent pursues a tit-for-tat like-strategy to encourage co-
operation within the first 5 episodes before pursing an excessively exploitative policy. At this point,
the co-player is shaped, as is it unable to move to another equilibrium.
Iterated Matching Pennies In the IMP, CHAOS exploits its opponent to achieve a score of
(0.80, −0.80) (see Table 1). As expected, GS cannot shape the opponent, achieving a score close to
the Nash Equilibrium. Without having any context, it is not possible to shape the opponent because
the opponent can also switch to a random strategy to at least achieve a score of 0. Thus dynamic-
shaping, is required to find exploitative strategies. We find that M-FOS another dynamic shaping
method is able to find exploitation too.
Coin Game CHAOS outperforms M-FOS in Table 1, providing evidence that CHAOS is scalable
to more complex policies. CHAOS demonstrate shaping, as indicated by the payoffs of the shaper
vs the co-player. To verify that CHAOS has shaped (as opposed to simply obstructed the co-players
learning) we also inspect player’s ability to pick up coins see Figure 5d).
Cooperation in the Coin Game means that players only pick up coins of their colour. Thus evaluating
% of cooperating actions is useful. We adapt our analysis from the IPD to the Coin Game. We
extend the four states from the IPD (CC, CD, DC, DD) to also include the start convention S (before
a player picks up a coin). At the start of an episode, the state is SS as neither player has committed
cooperative or defective behaviour. The state remains SS until a player picks up a coin and breaks
one of the other 7 states. For example, observing a low probability of cooperating when a shaper
has been exploited (CD), demonstrates that shapers punish co-players who break cooperation.
Figure 5b demonstrates how CHAOS uses context to effectively shape its co-players. Shapers have
two axes on which to evaluate their co-players, 1) how competent they are and 2) how cooperative
they are. We measure competency as how many coins a player can pick up. If a co-player is
not competent yet (say at the beginning of its training), we would expect a shaper to exploit this
behaviour. In Figure 5e, the difference between cooperating in SC and SS highlights how CHAOS
uses context to evaluate exploitability of its co-player. In SS, when both agents have not picked
up coins, CHAOS probes for exploitability by not cooperating, whereas in SC, where the co-player
has already demonstrated it is competent, CHAOS follows convention. Figure 5c demonstrates how
CHAOS exploits its co-player. We expect efficient shapers to spend the majority of their time either


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  (a)                             (b)                            (c)

Figure 6: The Only-History Challenge: Training curves in the IMP with episode length = 2 for (a)
CHAOS and (b) CHAOS without context. Note that in short time-spans, history can not be used
context can enable shaping. Additionally (c) CHAOS without context in IMP with episode length =
100 shows with sufficient timespan, history can be used to shape.
cooperating (CC) or exploiting their co-players can exploit co-players (DC), here we see these two
are the most likely states observed during training (50% and 20% respectively).
We found GS produces comparable results to
CHAOS. At first this is surprising, since GS
is a feedforward network and does not have
access to the history. Therefore, in principle
it should not be able to retaliate against a de-
fecting agents since it has no memory of their
past actions. However, close investigation of
the problem setting shows that due to the spe-
cific environment dynamics, the current state is
often indicative of past actions. For example,
when the two agents are on the same square, Figure 7: The Hardstop Challenge: Average re-
in all likelihood one of the agents defected (see ward over a single trial for CHAOS (left) and GS
Figure 4). Similarly, if the agents are currently (right) against a naive learner in the IPD.
standing a on a coin of a given colour, this coin was picked up on the last time step. This illustrates
that Coin Game allows for simple shaping strategies that do not require context or history, limiting
its utility as a benchmark for investigating these aspects.
Ablations CHAOS outperforms GS on the hardstop challenge. CHAOS demonstrates dynamic
shaping by switching strategies at t = 2 episodes, when the hardstop is triggered (see Fig. ??). In
contrast, GS’s policy is fixed throughout a trial and thus can not exploit the hardstop.
In the Only History challenge, when playing the IMP with a small number of inner-episodes (E =
2), we expect shapers without history to be unable to identify co-players current learning and thus be
unable to shape. We find that CHAOS is capable of this, whilst CHAOS( without history) is unable
to shape agents 6. Interestingly, we also found that with a longer inner-episode length (E = 100),
CHAOS is able to use context to shape its co-player 6c. This show that both context and history are
required over different environments to encode co-players learning.

7   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce CHAOS, a shaping method capturing both learning context and history,
suitable for high-dimensional games. We formalise the concept of history and context for shaping
and analyse their respective roles empirically. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on a set
of iterated matrix games. We identify a fundamental problem in the widely-used Coin Game.
When multiple agents interact in a shared environment, the actions of each any one agent influ-
ence the rewards and environment faced by others, and through their learning ultimately affect their
behaviour. Shaping, i.e. constructing agents that can effectively leverage this interconnection, has
emerged as a sub-field in Mult-agent Reinforcement learning and has received considerable attention
in recent years. CHAOS substantially expands the current capabilities of shaping agents by allowing
them to react to changes to the co-players’ learning dynamics as well as to predictable patterns in
their within-episode behaviour, thus resulting in significantly more effective shaping.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   E THICS S TATEMENT
Shaping can be for good and bad. Empirically, shaping has lead AIs to find more prosocial solutions.
However, one can imagine scenarios where shaping can be used with a negative impact on society.
Investigating shaping is important to prevent misuse of the paradigm. We are at the beginning
of fundamental research in shaping and better understanding the necessary components to achieve
shaping will help us to better control shaping agents. Opponent Shaping is still early in an early
phase of development and practical implications are limited so immediate negative societal infuence
is unlikely.

R EFERENCES
Maruan Al-Shedivat, Trapit Bansal, Yura Burda, Ilya Sutskever, Igor Mordatch, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Continuous adaptation via meta-learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. In In-
 ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 2
Robert Axelrod and William D Hamilton. The evolution of cooperation. science, 211(4489):1390–
  1396, 1981. 1
Jan Balaguer, Raphael Koster, Christopher Summerfield, and Andrea Tacchetti. The good shepherd:
  An oracle agent for mechanism design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10135, 2022. 1, 2, 6, 7
David Balduzzi, Sébastien Racanière, James Martens, Jakob N. Foerster, Karl Tuyls, and Thore
  Graepel. The mechanics of n-player differentiable games. In Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  363–372, 2018. 6
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax. 7
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl$ˆ2$:
  Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779,
  2016. 2, 3
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1126–1135, 2017. 2
Jakob Foerster, Richard Y Chen, Maruan Al-Shedivat, Shimon Whiteson, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor
  Mordatch. Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th International
  Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 122–130, 2018. 1, 2, 6
Jakob Foerster, Francis Song, Edward Hughes, Neil Burch, Iain Dunning, Shimon Whiteson,
  Matthew Botvinick, and Michael Bowling. Bayesian action decoder for deep multi-agent re-
  inforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1942–1951. PMLR,
  2019. 1
David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In 5th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2017. 1, 4
Marc Harper, Vincent Knight, Martin Jones, Georgios Koutsovoulos, Nikoleta E. Glynatsi, and
 Owen Campbell. Reinforcement learning produces dominant strategies for the iterated prisoner’s
 dilemma. PLOS ONE, 12(12):e0188046, 2017. 1
Tom Hennigan, Trevor Cai, Tamara Norman, and Igor Babuschkin. Haiku: Sonnet for JAX, 2020.
  URL http://github.com/deepmind/dm-haiku. 7
Dong-Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Matthew Riemer, Chuangchuang Sun, Marwa Abdulhai, Golnaz Habibi,
  Sebastian Lopez-Cot, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan P. How. A policy gradient algorithm for
  learning to learn in multiagent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5541–5550, 2021a. 2


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dong Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Matthew D Riemer, Chuangchuang Sun, Marwa Abdulhai, Golnaz Habibi,
  Sebastian Lopez-Cot, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan How. A policy gradient algorithm for learning
  to learn in multiagent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5541–5550. PMLR, 2021b. 2
Robert Tjarko Lange. evosax: Jax-based evolution strategies, 2022. URL http://github.
  com/RobertTLange/evosax. 7
Adam Lerer and Alexander Peysakhovich. Maintaining cooperation in complex social dilemmas
  using deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1707.01068, 2017. 6
Alistair Letcher, David Balduzzi, Sébastien Racanière, James Martens, Jakob N. Foerster, Karl
  Tuyls, and Thore Graepel. Differentiable game mechanics. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20:84:1–84:40,
  2019a. 2
Alistair Letcher, Jakob N. Foerster, David Balduzzi, Tim Rocktäschel, and Shimon Whiteson. Stable
  opponent shaping in differentiable games. In 7th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2019b. 1, 6
Christopher Lu, Timon Willi, Christian A Schroeder De Witt, and Jakob Foerster. Model-free op-
  ponent shaping. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 14398–14411. PMLR,
  2022. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 13
Richard Mealing and Jonathan L. Shapiro. Opponent modeling by expectation-maximization and
  sequence prediction in simplified poker. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games, 9(1):11–24,
  2017. 2
William H. Press and Freeman J. Dyson. Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma contains strategies that dom-
 inate any evolutionary opponent. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(26):
 10409–10413, 2012. ISSN 0027-8424. 6
Roberta Raileanu, Emily Denton, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Modeling others using oneself in
  multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4257–
  4266. PMLR, 2018. 2
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.
  1
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alterna-
  tive to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 2, 4, 7
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nat., 529(7587):484–489, 2016. 1
Gabriel Synnaeve and Pierre Bessière. A bayesian model for opening prediction in RTS games
  with application to starcraft. In IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games, pp.
  281–288, 2011. 2
Andrea Tacchetti, H Francis Song, Pedro AM Mediano, Vinicius Zambaldi, Neil C Rabinowitz,
  Thore Graepel, Matthew Botvinick, and Peter W Battaglia. Relational forward models for multi-
  agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11044, 2018. 2
Timon Willi, Alistair Letcher, Johannes Treutlein, and Jakob N. Foerster. COLA: consistent learning
  with opponent-learning awareness. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 23804–23831, 2022. 1, 2, 6
Zhe Wu, Kai Li, Enmin Zhao, Hang Xu, Meng Zhang, Haobo Fu, Bo An, and Junliang Xing. L2E:
  learning to exploit your opponent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09381, 2021. 2


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     M ATRIX G AME D ETAILS

Here we present details of training of shaping agents in Iterated Matrix Games.

A.1    PAYOFF M ATRICES

                                        Table 2: Payoff Matrices

                     C         D                                      H          T
            C     (-1,-1)   (0, -3)                            H    (1,-1)    (-1, 1)
            D     (-3, 0)   (-2, -2)                           T    (-1, 1)    (1, 1)
      (a) Iterated Prisoners Dilemma (IPD)               (b) Iterated Matching Pennies (IMP)


A.2    T RAINING D ETAILS

We present training curves for both IPD and IMP below.


                (a)                               (b)                                   (c)


                 (d)                               (e)                                   (f)

Figure 8: Training results in the finite IPD over 5 seeds for CHAOS. Here we display the (a) fitness,
(b) conditional probability of cooperation, and (c) state visitation. Training results in the IMP over
5 seeds for CHAOS. (d) Fitness (e) Empirical probability of Cooperative action conditioned by state
and (f) state visitation.


B     C OIN G AME D ETAILS

B.1   E XPERIMENTAL P ROTOCOL

We define an experimental protocol for producing the correct conditions for shaping
Experimental Protocol We verify that an agent can learn against three competent opponents. The
first agent is Good Greedy, picking up coins indiscriminately but prioritizing its own colour coin if it
is equidistant from two coins; the second agent is Evil Greedy, picking up coins indiscriminately but
prioritizing its opponent’s coin if it is equidistant from two coins; the third agent is the current agent
pre-trained to competency via self-play. After verifying that an agent learns competency against
these three opponents, we set the parameters of the trial to reflect the time and scale required for the
agent to become competent against a competent opponent.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a)                      (b)                       (c)                       (d)

Figure 9: Illustration of (a) a state observed by both agents in the non-egocentric Coin Game and
(b)-(c) the same state observed by the blue and orange agent, respectively, in the egocentric Coin
Game. (d) Illustration of a special state where memory-less agents can infer conventions.


Sanity We verify that PPO RNN can learn against competent opponents in the Coin Game in Figure
10. PPO RNN learns to pick up the same number of coins as a pre-trained PPO RNN, Good Greedy,
and Evil Greedy. These hyperparameters are the same ones used during meta-learning.
Coin Game Adjustments
In the Coin Game, agents struggle to learn (via reinforcement learning) when trained against a pre-
trained opponent. On inspection of trajectories, we found that competent agents removed a sufficient
amount of coins to restrict reinforcement learners ability to capture signal from the game.
To address this, we show that adjusting the observations such that an agent receives to an egocentric
viewpoint (i.e. an agent always observes that it is in the centre of the grid) leads to competency
against a competent opponent. In this case, we measured competency as an agent’s ability to pick
up coins. Competent agents were those who picked up a similar number of coins to those trained
against a stationary agent. Throughout the rest of the paper, we refer to the original version of Coin
Game as non-egocentric Coin Game and the modified observation version as egocentric Coin Game.
In addition, we deviate from the original 5 by 5 version of Coin Game to a 3 by 3 version, following
the setting used in (Lu et al., 2022).


                 (a)                             (b)                              (c)

Figure 10: Results of the experimental protocol verifying that PPO RNN learns to play the egocentric
Coin Game against (a) pre-trained PPO RNN (b) Good Greedy (c) Evil Greedy. Notice that the agent
learns to pick up roughly the same number of coins per episode as its competent opponents.


B.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

B.3   G ENERALIZATION IN PRE - TRAINED AGENTS

C     A BLATION S TUDIES

We also include additional state visitation for the hardstop challenge. This helps validate that
CHAOS reacts to agents becoming exploitable after a hardstop has occurred.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a)                      (b)                      (c)                       (d)

Figure 11: Training results of CHAOS vs. PPO RNN in the egocentric Coin Game. (a) Fitness, (b)
the shaper’s frequency of picking up its own colour coin depending on existing convention, (c) the
number of coins picked up per episode, (d) both agent’s frequency of picking up its own colour coin
over a full episode.


                 (a)                            (b)                              (c)

Figure 12: Results of training versus a CHAOS agent pre-trained against (a) Tabular, (b) PPO RNN,
and (c) PPO. Notice that the CHAOS agent pre-trained against Tabular outperforms the CHAOS
agent pre-trained against PPO RNN. We hypothesize that CHAOS finds “true” shaping against the
Tabular agent but a sub-optimal shaping policy against PPO RNN, due to its complexity. Table ??
shows that CHAOS outperforms PPO RNN (7.08, −7.36) by a wider margin than against Tabular
(6.67, −6.51), indicating that CHAOS finds a shaping policy that performs well against PPO RNN,
but that this shaping policy does not generalize to other agents as robustly as the shaping policy
learned against Tabular.


Figure 13: State visitation for the Hardstop Challenge with shapers (a) CHAOS and (b) GS. Here
we see CHAOS responds to co-players frozen stationary policy by moving into either DD (the best
response to a defective agent) or DC (the best response to a fully cooperative agent), whilst GS is
unable to adjust its approach after the co-player stop learning, continuing to plays the sub-optimal
shaping strategy)


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    H YPER - PARAMETERS


                          Hyperparameter                     Value
                          Number of Actor Hidden Layers      1
                          Number of Critic Hidden Layers     1
                          Torso GRU Size                     [25]
                          Length of Meta-Episode             100
                          Length of Inner Episode            100
                          Number of Generations              5000
                          Batch Size                         100
                          Population Size                    1000
                          OpenES sigma init                  0.04
                          OpenES sigma decay                 0.999
                          OpenES sigma limit                 0.01
                          OpenES init min                    0.0
                          OpenES init max                    0.0
                          OpenES clip min                    -1e10
                          OpenES clip max                    1e10
                          OpenES lrate init                  0.01
                          OpenES lrate decay                 0.9999
                          OpenES lrate limit                 0.001
                          OpenES beta 1                      0.99
                          OpenES beta 2                      0.999
                          OpenES eps                         1e-8

             Table 3: Hyperparameters for CHAOS in Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma


                           Hyperparameter                  Value
                           Number of Minibatches           4
                           Number of Epochs                2
                           Gamma                           0.96
                           GAE Lambda                      0.95
                           PPP clipping epsilon            0.2
                           Value Coefficient               0.5
                           Clip Value                      True
                           Max Gradient Norm               0.5
                           Entropy Coefficient Start       0.02
                           Entropy Coefficient Horizon     2000000
                           Entropy Coefficient End         0.001
                           Learning rate                   1
                           ADAM epsilon                    1e-5

           Table 4: Hyperparameters for Tabular-PPO in Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma


                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Hyperparameter                    Value
                          Number of Actor Hidden Layers     2
                          Number of Critic Hidden Layers    2
                          Network Hidden Size               [16, 16]
                          Length of Meta-Episode            100
                          Length of Inner Episode           100
                          Number of Generations             5000
                          Batch Size                        100
                          Population Size                   1000
                          OpenES sigma init                 0.04
                          OpenES sigma decay                0.999
                          OpenES sigma limit                0.01
                          OpenES init min                   0.0
                          OpenES init max                   0.0
                          OpenES clip min                   -1e10
                          OpenES clip max                   1e10
                          OpenES lrate init                 0.01
                          OpenES lrate decay                0.9999
                          OpenES lrate limit                0.001
                          OpenES beta 1                     0.99
                          OpenES beta 2                     0.999
                          OpenES eps                        1e-8

                Table 5: Hyperparameters for GS in Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma


                          Hyperparameter                    Value
                          Number of Actor Hidden Layers     1
                          Number of Critic Hidden Layers    1
                          Actor GRU Hidden Size             16
                          Critic GRU Hidden Size            16
                          Meta Agent Gru Hidden Size        16
                          Hidden Layer Size                 16
                          Length of Meta-Episode            100
                          Length of Inner Episode           100
                          Number of Generations             5000
                          Batch Size                        100
                          Population Size                   1000
                          OpenES sigma init                 0.04
                          OpenES sigma decay                0.999
                          OpenES sigma limit                0.01
                          OpenES init min                   0.0
                          OpenES init max                   0.0
                          OpenES clip min                   -1e10
                          OpenES clip max                   1e10
                          OpenES lrate init                 0.01
                          OpenES lrate decay                0.9999
                          OpenES lrate limit                0.001
                          OpenES beta 1                     0.99
                          OpenES beta 2                     0.999
                          OpenES eps                        1e-8

              Table 6: Hyperparameters for MFOS in Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Hyperparameter                     Value
                          Number of Actor Hidden Layers      1
                          Number of Critic Hidden Layers     1
                          Torso Gru Size                     [16]
                          Length of Meta-Episode             600
                          Length of Inner Episode            16
                          Number of Generations              3000
                          Batch Size                         100
                          Population Size                    4000
                          OpenES sigma init                  0.04
                          OpenES sigma decay                 0.999
                          OpenES sigma limit                 0.01
                          OpenES init min                    0.0
                          OpenES init max                    0.0
                          OpenES clip min                    -1e10
                          OpenES clip max                    1e10
                          OpenES lrate init                  0.01
                          OpenES lrate decay                 0.9999
                          OpenES lrate limit                 0.001
                          OpenES beta 1                      0.99
                          OpenES beta 2                      0.999
                          OpenES eps                         1e-8

               Table 7: Hyperparameters for EARL in Iterated Matching Pennies


                           Hyperparameter                  Value
                           Number of Minibatches           8
                           Number of Epochs                2
                           Gamma                           0.96
                           GAE Lambda                      0.95
                           PPO clipping epsilon            0.2
                           Value Coefficient               0.5
                           Clip Value                      True
                           Max Gradient Norm               0.5
                           Anneal Entropy                  False
                           Entropy Coefficient Start       0.02
                           Entropy Coefficient Horizon     2000000
                           Entropy Coefficient End         0.001
                           LR Scheduling                   False
                           Learning Rate                   0.005
                           ADAM Epsilon                    1e-5
                           With CNN                        False

           Table 8: Hyperparameters for PPO Memory and Tabular in the Coin Game


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Hyperparameter                   Value
                          Number of Actor Hidden Layers    1
                          Number of Critic Hidden Layers   1
                          Hidden Size                      [16]
                          Length of Meta-Episode           600
                          Length of Inner Episode          16
                          Number of Generations            3000
                          Batch Size                       100
                          Population Size                  4000
                          OpenES sigma init                0.04
                          OpenES sigma decay               0.999
                          OpenES sigma limit               0.01
                          OpenES init min                  0.0
                          OpenES init max                  0.0
                          OpenES clip min                  -1e10
                          OpenES clip max                  1e10
                          OpenES lrate init                0.01
                          OpenES lrate decay               0.9999
                          OpenES lrate limit               0.001
                          OpenES beta 1                    0.99
                          OpenES beta 2                    0.999
                          OpenES eps                       1e-8

                        Table 9: Hyperparameters for GS in Coin Game


                          Hyperparameter                   Value
                          Number of Actor Hidden Layers    1
                          Number of Critic Hidden Layers   1
                          Actor GRU Hidden Size            16
                          Critic GRU Hidden Size           16
                          Meta Agent Gru Hidden Size       16
                          Hidden Layer Size                16
                          Length of Meta-Episode           100
                          Length of Inner Episode          100
                          Number of Generations            5000
                          Batch Size                       100
                          Population Size                  1000
                          OpenES sigma init                0.04
                          OpenES sigma decay               0.999
                          OpenES sigma limit               0.01
                          OpenES init min                  0.0
                          OpenES init max                  0.0
                          OpenES clip min                  -1e10
                          OpenES clip max                  1e10
                          OpenES lrate init                0.01
                          OpenES lrate decay               0.9999
                          OpenES lrate limit               0.001
                          OpenES beta 1                    0.99
                          OpenES beta 2                    0.999
                          OpenES eps                       1e-8

                     Table 10: Hyperparameters for MFOS in Coin Game


                                             18
