Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DATA DRIFT CORRECTION VIA TIME - VARYING IMPOR -
TANCE WEIGHT ESTIMATOR

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

          Real-world deployment of machine learning models is challenging when data
          evolves over time. And data does evolve over time. While no model can work
          when data evolves in an arbitrary fashion, if there is some pattern to these changes,
          we might be able to design methods to address it. This paper addresses situations
          when data evolves gradually. We introduce a novel time-varying importance
          weight estimator that can detect gradual shifts in the distribution of data. Such
          an importance weight estimator allows the training method to selectively sample
          past data—not just similar data from the past like a standard importance weight
          estimator would but also data that evolved in a similar fashion in the past. Our
          time-varying importance weight is quite general. We demonstrate different ways
          of implementing it that exploit some known structure in the evolution of data. We
          demonstrate and evaluate this approach on a variety of problems ranging from
          supervised learning tasks (multiple image classification datasets) where the data
          undergoes a sequence of gradual shifts of our design to reinforcement learning
          tasks (robotic manipulation and continuous control) where data undergoes a shift
          organically as the policy or the task changes.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Real-world machine learning performance often drops during deployment when test data no longer
stem from the same distribution from which previous training data were sampled. Thus many tools
have been developed to address data distribution shift1 (Heckman, 1979; Shimodaira, 2000; Huang
et al., 2006; Bickel et al., 2007; Sugiyama et al., 2007b; 2008; Gretton et al., 2008), often using an
estimate of the Radon-Nikodym (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983) derivative between the two distributions
(also known as a propensity score or importance weight) to re-weight the training data so that its
weighted distribution better matches the test data (Agarwal et al., 2011; Wen et al., 2014; Reddi
et al., 2015b; Chen et al., 2016; Fakoor et al., 2020b;a; Tibshirani et al., 2019). These methods mostly
consider offline settings with one training and one test dataset.
In many applications, data for supervised learning is continuously collected from a constantly evolv-
ing distribution (e.g. due to a pandemic (Callaway, 2020)) such that the single train/test paradigm
no longer applies. Settings in which the data distribution drifts gradually over time (rather than
experiencing abrupt changes) are particularly ubiquitous (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012). Assuming ob-
servations are not statistically dependent over time (as in time-series), how to best train models in
such streaming/online learning settings remains a key question (Lu et al., 2018). Some basic options
include: fitting/updating the model to only the recent data (which is statistically suboptimal if the
distribution has not significantly shifted) or fitting the model to all previous observations (which
leads to biased estimates if shift has occurred). Here we consider a less crude approach in which past
data are weighted during training with continuous-valued weights that vary over time. Our proposed
estimator of these weights generalizes standard two-sample propensity scores, allowing the training
process to selectively emphasize past data collected at time t based on the distributional similarity
between the present and time t.
   1
     Covariate, label, and concept shifts are all referred to as distribution shift in the paper to simplify things
wherever it is clear from the context.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We evaluate our proposed method in supervised and reinforcement learning settings involving a
sequence of gradually changing tasks with slow repeating patterns. In such settings, the model not
only must continuously adapt to changes in the environment/task but also learn how to select past data
which may have become more relevant for the current task. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that our method can effectively detect shift in data and statistically account for such changes during
learning and inference time.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Given its importance in real-world applications, the problem of how to learn from shifting distributions
has been widely studied. Much past work has focused on a single shift between training/test data (Lu
et al., 2021; Wang & Deng, 2018; Fakoor et al., 2020b) as well as restricted forms of shift involving
changes in only the features (Sugiyama et al., 2007a; Reddi et al., 2015a), labels (Lipton et al., 2018;
Garg et al., 2020; Alexandari et al., 2020), or in the underlying relationship between the two (Zhang
et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2018). Past approaches to handle distributions evolving over time have been
considered in the literature on: concept drift Gomes et al. (2019); Souza et al. (2020), reinforcement
learning (shift between the target policy and behavior policy) Schulman et al. (2015); Wang et al.
(2016); Fakoor et al. (2020a), (meta) online learning Shalev-Shwartz (2012); Finn et al. (2019);
Harrison et al. (2020); Wu et al. (2021), and task-free continual/incremental learning Aljundi et al.
(2019); He et al. (2019), but to our knowledge, existing methods for these settings do not employ
time-varying data weights like we propose here. Time-varying data weights have been considered in
survival analysis which models longitudinal observations subject to censoring Lu (2005); Cox (1972),
but our weights here are implemented differently (via deep learned estimates) and utilized for general
supervised learning and reinforcement learning with drift.

3     A PPROACH
Consider a standard learning problem where training data are drawn from a probability distribution
p(x) and test data have a different probability distribution q(x). Our goal is to build a model that can
predict equally well on the training and test data distributions. We can do so by observing that
                        Z
                            dp(x)                          h dq(x)     i             h          i
      Ex∼q(x) [ℓ(x)] =             dq (x)ℓ(x) = Ex∼p(x)            ℓ(x) = Ex∼p(x) β(x) ℓ(x)           (1)
                            dp(x)                            dp(x)
                                                                                         dq(x)
where ℓ(x) is any function, say the loss of our model. The propensity score β(x) = dp(x)       is the
importance ratio; this can also be seen as the Radon-Nikodym derivative (Resnick, 2013) of the two
distributions. The propensity score measures the likelihood that a sample x came from distribution p
against it coming from a distribution q. We will call β(x) the “standard propensity score”.
Since densities q(x) and p(x) are often unknown, a binary classifier (Agarwal et al., 2011) needs to
be used to estimate β(x) by utilizing samples drawn from p and q. In particular, we want to create a
                          N
data set, D = {(xi , zi )}i=1 for the binary classifier such that zi = 1 if xi ∼ p and zi = −1 if xi ∼ q.
We want our training data to have z = 1 in half of the training examples (with x ∼ p) and z = −1
(with x ∼ q) in the other half. We fit the binary classifier by solving the following:
                                         N
                                       1 X
                           minimize        log 1 + exp(−zi gθ (xi ))                                 (2)
                               θ       N
                                          (xi ,zi )

where gθ can be either a linear or non-linear model parameterized by θ.

3.1   T IME - VARYING IMPORTANCE WEIGHT ESTIMATOR

Let us now consider time-varying probability distribution pt (x) with t = 1, . . . , T . We will assume
                                             m
that we have recorded tuples D = {(xi , ti )}i=1 with each xi ∼ pti (x). Our goal is to build a model
that can predict well on data from pT (x) using the historical data D, say we seek to minimize
                                         Ex∼pT +dt (x) [ℓ(x)] .                                      (3)


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Observe that we seek to build a model not for data from pT but instead from pT +dt where we will
think of dt as small step in the future. This problem is challenging because we do not have data
from pT +dt .
                           PN
Let us define p(t) = N −1 i=1 δ{t=ti } which is simply the empirical distribution of the time instants
at which we received our samples; here δ is the Dirac-delta distribution. We can now define the
marginal on the data as
                                              Z T
                                      p(x) =      dt p(t) pt (x).
                                                 0
Inspired by the above expression, we will liken pt (x) ≡ p(x | t).

Assumption 1 (Data evolves gradually). If data evolves arbitrarily, then it is difficult to expect a
model learned from past data to be able to predict accurately on future data. But observe that
                                                       Z
             Ex∼pT +dt (x) [ℓ(x)] = Ex∼pT (x) [ℓ(x)] + dx (pT +dt (x) − pT (x)) ℓ(x)
                                                                                                  (4)
                                  ≤ Ex∼pT (x) [ℓ(x)] + 2TV(pT +dt (x), pT (x)),

where TV(pT +dt (x), pT (x)) = 12 dx |pT +dt (x) − pT (x)| is the total variational divergence be-
                                     R
tween the probability distributions at time T and T + dt, and the integrand ℓ(x) is upper bounded
by 1 in magnitude (without loss of generality, say after normalizing it). We therefore assume that
the changes in our time-varying probability distribution pT (x) are upper bounded by a constant
(uniformly over time t); this can allow us to build a model for pT +dt using data from {pt }t≤T .

Validating and formalizing Assumption 1 This assumption is a natural one in many settings and
we can check it in practice using a two-sample test to estimate the total variation TV(pT +dt , pT ) (Gret-
ton et al., 2012). We do so for some of our tasks in §4 (see Fig. 2).We can also formalize this
assumption mathematically as follows. The transition function Pt of a Markov process Xt satisfies
                                                Z t
                                   E [φ(Xt )] =      φ(y)Pt (Xs , dy).
                                                     0

for any measurable function φ. The distribution of the random variable Xt corresponding to this
Markov process is exactly our ptR. We can define the semi-group of this transition function as the
conditional expectation Kt φ = dy φ(y)Pt (x, dy) for any test function φ. Such a semi-group
satisfies properties that are familiar from Markov chains in finite state-spaces, e.g., Kt+s = Kt Ks .
The infinitesimal generator of the semi-group Kt is defined as Aφ = limt→0 (φ − Kt φ)/t. This
generator completely defines the local evolution of a Markov process (Feller, 2008)
                                              pt = e−tA p0                                             (5)
where etA is the matrix exponential of the generator A. If all eigenvalues of A are positive, then the
Markov process has a steady state distribution, i.e., the distribution of our data pt stops evolving (this
could happen at very large times and the time-scale depends upon the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of
A). On the other hand, if the magnitude of the eigenvalues of A is upper bounded by a small constant,
then the stochastic process evolves gradually. Note it is not necessary for the stochastic process to
have a steady state distribution for our time-varying importance weight to be meaningful. Our method
is expected to be effective so long as the process evolves gradually, which most processes do.

Remark 2 (Evaluating the model learned from data {pt (x)}t≤T upon test data from pT +dt (x)).
We are interested in making predictions on future data, i.e., data from pT +dt . For all our experiments,
we will therefore evaluate on test data from “one time-step in the future”. The learner does not have
access to any training data from pT +dt in our experiments. This is reasonable if the data evolves
gradually. Note our setting is different from typical implementations of online meta-learning (Finn
et al., 2019; Harrison et al., 2020) and continual learning (Hadsell et al., 2020; Caccia et al., 2020).

In the sequel, motivated by Assumption 1, we will build a time-dependent propensity score for pT
instead of pT +dt . Using a similar calculation as that of (1) (see Appendix A for a derivation), we can


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


write our objective as
                         Ex∼pT (x) [ℓ(x)] = Et∼p(t) Ex∼pt (x) [ω(x, T, t) ℓ(x)] ,                        (6)
where
                                                         dpT
                                          ω(x, T, t) =       (x)                                         (7)
                                                         dpt
is a time-varying importance weight estimator.
Remark 3 (Is the time-varying importance weight equivalent to standard propensity score on
(x, t)?). One may be inclined to consider whether the development above remains meaningful if
we define a new random variable z ≡ (x, t) with a corresponding distribution p(z) ≡ pt (x)p(t).
However, doing so is not useful for estimating Ex∼pT (x) [ℓ(x)] because our objective (6) involves
conditioning on a particular time T .

We again need to estimate this score using samples from our dataset D. To do so, we will consider
two models for pt (x).

Method 1: Modeling pt (x) using an exponential family.             We model the distribution of x and t as
                                     pt (x) = p0 (x) exp (gθ (x, t)) .                                   (8)
for some continuous function gθ (x, t) parameterized by weights θ. This gives
                                 ω(x, T, t) = exp (gθ (x, T ) − gθ (x, t))                               (9)
Now observe that the left-hand side can be calculated using the same objective that we had in (2)
to estimate gθ (x, t). To train the binary classifier, we need to create a triplet (xi , t′ , t) for each of
samples in the dataset with label 1 if t′ equals the time corresponding to xi , i.e., if ti = t′ and label
−1 if t equals the time corresponding to xi , i.e. ti = t. These steps are detailed in Algorithm 1.

Method 2: Modeling deviations from the marginal Observe that in the above method p0 (x) is
essentially undefined. We can exploit this “gauge” to choose p0 (x) differently. We can model pt (x)
as deviations from the marginal on x:
                                      pt (x) = p(x) exp (gθ (x, t)) .                                   (10)
This again gives ω(x, T, t) = exp (gθ (x, T ) − gθ (x, t)). For each of the N samples in the dataset,
we create a datum (xi , ti ) with label 1 and another datum (xi , tj ) for j ̸= i with label -1. The logistic
regression in (2) is now fitted for the classifier gθ (x, t) on this dataset.
The difference between the two methods is subtle. In Method 1, the classifier gθ (x, t) is fitted on
tuples (x, t′ , t) while in Method 2, the dataset only consists of tuples (x, t). In the former case, we
think of the fitted model gθ (x, t) as an estimate of log(p(x, t)/p(x, 0)) while in the latter case we
think of the fitted model as the estimate of log(p(x, t)/p(x)). In both cases, we can use this function
gθ (x, t) to calculate our time-varying importance weight. Because of this, we expect the two methods
to perform similarly, as our experiments will also show.

3.2     L EARNING MODELS USING DATA THAT EVOLVES ACROSS TIME

We next discuss a learning theoretic perspective on how we should learn models when the underlying
data evolves with time. For the purposes of this section, suppose we have m input-output pairs
                 m
Dt = {(xi , yi )}i=1 that are independent and identically distributed from pt (x, y) for t = 1, . . . , T
(note that these are data from each time instant, there can be correlations across time). We seek to
learn hypotheses h = (ht )t=1,...,T ∈ H T using these samples that can generalize on new samples
from distributions (pt )t=1,...,T respectively. We have denoted the joint hypothesis space as H T . A
typical uniform convergence bound on the population risk of one ht suggests that if
                                     m = O ϵ−2 (VCH − log δ) ,



                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


then et (ht ) ≤ êt (ht ) + ϵ where et (ht ) the population risk of ht on pt and êt (ht ) is its average
empirical risk on the m samples from Dt (Vapnik, 1998). Here VC is the VC-dimension of H ∋ ht .
Consider the setting when we want hypotheses that have a small population risk et (h) =
    PT                                                                               PT
T −1 t=1 et (ht ). To achieve this, we may minimize the empirical risk êt (h) = T −1 t=1 êt (ht ).
Baxter (2000) shows that if
                              m = O ϵ−2 VCH (T ) − T −1 log δ

                                                                                              (11)

then we have et (h) ≤ êt (h) + ϵ for any h. The quantity VCH (T ) is a generalized VC-dimension
that characterizes the number of distinct predictions made by the T different hypotheses; it depends
upon the stochastic process underlying our individual distributions pt . Larger the time T , smaller the
VCH (T ). Whether we should use the m samples from pT to train one hypothesis, or use all the mT
samples to achieve a small average population risk across all the tasks, depends upon how related the
tasks are. If our goal is only the latter, then we can train on data from all the tasks because
                                   VCH (T ) ≤ VCH , for all T ≥ 1.
This is fundamentally because all the tasks are together used by the learner to learn an inductive bias,
and effectively a smaller hypothesis space to fit the hypotheses h from. Such a procedure is effective
if tasks are related to each other and there are a number of theoretical and empirical procedures to
estimate such relatedness; see Baxter (2000); Gao & Chaudhari (2021); Achille et al. (2019) among
others. This result is often used as the motivation for training on multiple tasks; it motivates one of
our baselines (Everything). The procedure that only builds the hypothesis using data from pT is our
second baseline (Recent).
Our goal is however not to obtain a small population risk on all tasks, it is instead to obtain a small
risk on pT +dt —our proxy for it being the latest task pT . Even if the average risk on all tasks of the
hypotheses trained above is small, the risk on a particular task pT can be large. Ben-David & Schuller
(2003) studies this phenomena. They show that if we can find a hypothesis h ◦ ft such that h ◦ ft
can predict accurately on pt for all t, then this effectively reduces the size of the hypothesis space
h ∈ H T and thereby entails a smaller sample complexity in (11) at the added cost of searching for
the best hypothesis ft ∈ F for each task pt (which requires additional samples that scale linearly with
VCF ). The sample complexity of such a two-stage search can be better than training on all tasks, or
training on pT in isolation, under certain cases, e.g., if VCH ≥ log |F | for a finite hypothesis space
F (Ben-David & Schuller, 2003).
While the procedure that combines such hypotheses to get h ◦ ft in the above theory is difficult
to implement in practice, this argument motivates our third baseline (Finetune) which first fits a
hypothesis on all past tasks (pt )t≤T and then adapts it further using data from pT .

4     E XPERIMENTS
We provide a broad empirical comparison of our proposed method in both continuous supervised
and reinforcement learning settings. We first evaluate our method on synthetic data sets with time-
varying shifts. Next, we create continuous supervised image classification tasks utilizing CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and CLEAR (Lin et al., 2021) datasets. Finally, we evaluate our method
on ROBEL D’Claw (Yang et al., 2021) simulated robotic environments and MuJoCo (Todorov et al.,
2012) simulator. See also Appendices C and D for a description of our settings and more results.

4.1   C ONTINUOUS S UPERVISED L EARNING

The goal in these experiments is to build a model that can predict well on data from t + 1 using only
historical data from {p0 , . . . , pt } (see also Remark 2). Note we train all different models, including
all baselines, completely from scratch per time step; we do not update the model continually because
we focus on understanding the performance of the time-varying importance weight only. Moreover,
our method automatically detects shifts in the distribution of data without knowing them as a priori.
In the following, we first explain the baseline models, then the data sets and simulated shift setups.
Finally, we discuss the results of these experiments.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1.1   BASELINE METHODS

We compare our approach to the following baseline methods:
1. Everything: To obtain model used at time t, we train on pooled data from all past times
{ps (x) : s ≤ t}, including the most recent data from pt (x). More precisely, this involves minimizing
the objective
                                                      t
                                   t      1 X                     X
                                  ℓ (ϕ) =                                  ℓ(ϕ; xi ).                    (12)
                                          N s=1
                                                             {xi :ti =s}

where the loss of the predictions of a model parameterized by weights ϕ is ℓ(ϕ; xi ) and we have
defined ℓt (ϕ) as the cumulative loss of all tasks up to time t.
2. Recent trains only on the most recent data, i.e., data from pt (x). This involves optimizing
                               1     X                                  X
                      ℓt (ϕ) = ′            ℓ(ϕ; xi ), where N ′ =            1.                         (13)
                              N
                                       {xi :ti =t}                                     {xi :ti =t}


3. Fine-tune: first trains on all data from the past using the objective
                                                          t
                                                     1 X               X
                             ϕt− = arg min                                          ℓ(ϕ; xi )
                                           ϕ         N s=1
                                                                  {xi :ti =s,s<t}

and then finetunes this model using data from pt . We can write this problem as
                                     1     X
                          ℓt+ (ϕ) = ′             ℓ(ϕ; xi ) + Ω(ϕ − ϕt− ),                               (14)
                                     N
                                               {xi :ti =t}

                                                                                                     2
where Ω(ϕ − ϕt− ) is a penalty that keeps ϕ close to ϕt− , e.g., Ω(ϕ − ϕt− ) = ∥ϕ − ϕt− ∥2 . Sometimes
this approach is called “standard online learning” (Finn et al., 2019) and it resembles (but is not the
same as) Follow-The-Leader (FTL) (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012). We call it “Finetune” make the objective
explicit to avoid any confusion due its subtle differences with FTL. In practice, we implement
finetuning without the penalty Ω by initializing the weights of the model to ϕt− in (14).

Remark 4 (Properties of the different baselines). Recall that our goal is to build a model that
predicts on data from pt+1 (x). It is important to observe that Everything minimizes the objective
over all the past data; for data that evolves over time, doing so may be detrimental to performance at
time t. If we think using a bias-variance tradeoff, the variance of the predictions of Everything is
expected to be smaller than the variance of predictions made by Recent, although the former is likely
to have a larger bias. For example, if the data shifts rapidly, then we should expect Everything to
have a large bias and potentially a worse accuracy than that of Recent. But if the amplitude of the
variations in the data is small (and drift patterns repeat) then Everything is likely to benefit from
the reduced variance and perform better than Recent. Fine-tune strikes a balance between the two
methods and although the finetuning procedure is not always easy to implement optimally, e.g., the
finetuning hyper-parameters can be different for different times. As our results illustrate neither of
these approaches show consistent trend in the experiments and highly depend on a given scenario
which can be problematic in practice, e.g. sometimes Everything performs better than both but other
times Fine-tune is better (compare their performance in Fig. 1).

Remark 5 (How does the objective change when we have supervised learning or reinforcement
learning?). We have written Eqs. (12) to (14) using the loss ℓ(ϕ; xi ) only for the sake of clarity. In
general, the loss depends upon both the inputs xi and their corresponding ground-truth labels yi for
classification problems. For problems in reinforcement learning, we can think of our data xi as entire
trajectories from the system and thereby the loss ℓ(ϕ; xi ) as the standard 1-step temporal difference
(TD) error which depends on the weights that parameterize the value function.


                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We incorporate our time-varying importance weight into (12) as follows:
                                           t
                              t      1 X          X
                             ℓ (ϕ) =                         ω(xi , t, ti ) ℓ(ϕ; xi ).                (15)
                                     N s=1
                                               {xi :ti =s}


Note that the only difference between our method and Everything is introduction of ω into (12) and
all other details (e.g. network architecture, etc.) are exactly the same. ω can be trained based on our
algorithm explained in §3.1.

4.1.2   D RIFTING G AUSSIAN DATA

In this experiment, we design continuous classification tasks using a periodic shift where samples
are generated from a Gaussian distribution with time-varying means (µt ) and standard deviation of
1. In particular, we create a data set, Dt = {(xti , yit )}N                                t
                                                           i=1 , at each time step t where xi ∼ N (µt , 1),
µt = µt−1 + d/10, µ0 = 0.5, and label 1 (yi = 1) is assigned if xi > µt otherwise yit = 0. We
                                                 t                          t

change direction of shift every 50 time steps (i.e., set d ← −d) and use N = 2000 in our experiments.
We run this experiments for 160 time steps. Fig. 1a displays that our method performs much better
than Everything and similarly to others. We note that both Recent and Fine-tune are like oracle for
this experiment as test time data from pt+1 (x) are more similar to the recent data than other historical
data. This experiment makes a clear case for our method as it shows that our method allows the
training to selectively utilize data similar to the current time and importantly data that evolved in a
similar fashion in the past.

4.1.3   I MAGE C LASSIFICATION WITH E VOLVING L ABELS

We adopt the setting of Wu et al. (2021) to design experiments for classification under continuous
label shift with images from CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and CLEAR (Lin et al., 2021).
CIFAR-10. We split the original CIFAR-10 training data into 90% (train) and 10% (validation), and
use original test split as is. Following Wu et al. (2021), we pre-train Resent-18 (He et al., 2016)
using training data for 100 epochs. In subsequent continuous label shift experiments, we utilize the
pre-trained model and only fine-tune last convolution block and classification layer. We average all
results over 3 random splits.
CLEAR. This data set consists of 10 classes where each class has 3000 samples. CLEAR is curated
over a large public data set only including data spanning from years 2004 to 2014. We utilize
unsupervised pre-trained features provided by Lin et al. (2021) and only use a linear layer classifier
As Lin et al. (2021) stated, the linear model using pre-trained features is far more effective than
training from scratch for this data set (For more, see Lin et al. (2021)). We average all results over 3
random train-validation-test splits, of relative size 60% (train), 10% (validation), and 30% (test).
Continuous label shifts. We create a sequence of classification tasks where the label distribution
changes at each time according to a predefined label distribution in slow repeating patterns (see
Appendix C.1 for details). In particular, we train a model at time t from scratch using all training
data seen so far and evaluate the model on test data drawn from label distribution of time t + 1. In
this setting, training data keeps growing while test data stays the same size. This is a challenging
problem as label shift occurs at each time step hence it is critical for a method to learn how to only
utilize data which are relevant for the current time step and task. Note we only use test data in the
evaluation time and never use it to train a model.

Results. We report results comparing our method against the baselines across different data
sets and shifts in Fig. 1. These results clearly illustrate that our method performs better than
others as our method obtains higher classification accuracy across all benchmarks. Importantly,
our method shows consistent performances across various shifts and benchmarks whereas other
methods do not. For instance, Everything fares poorly in Gaussian experiment than others
but it works better than Fine-tune and Recent on continuous CIFAR-10 benchmark. We also
shows in Fig. 2 that our method produces high quality estimates under shifted distribution.

                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            (a) Gaussian                                    (b) CIFAR-10a


                           (c) CIFAR-10b                                      (d) CLEAR

Figure 1: Average test accuracy (higher is better) across 3 runs for continuous supervised learning
benchmarks comparing our method with others. The x-axes indicate different test time steps t and the y-axes
display the classification accuracy on test data from time t. CIFAR-10a and CIFAR-10b refer two different
shifts for this benchmark (see Appendix C.1 for details). All models in these experiments are trained completely
from scratch per time step (i.e. every point in these plots is a different model) using exact same architecture and
hyper-parameters. A sudden drop in a plot is an indication that the shift direction has changed. We see that our
method is the only approach that consistently works across different settings and shifts.


Figure 3: Comparison of the average undiscounted return (higher is better) of our method (orange) against
baseline algorithms on ROBEL D’Claw and Half-Cheetah WindVel environments. In all environments, our
method performs better than other methods in terms of sample complexity.



4.2 R EINFORCEMENT
LEARNING WITH CHANGING TASKS

We use two different environments for exper-
iments in this section. For all experiments in
this section, we report the undiscounted return
averaged across 10 different random seeds.
                                                         Figure 2: Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) of
ROBEL D’Claw. This is a robotic simulated                true distributions (pt , pold ) and (pt , p̂old ) where p̂old is
manipulation environment containing 10 differ-           constructed from past data weighted by our method.
ent valve rotation tasks and the goal is to turn the     Each (blue) point in this plot shows distance between
valve below 180 degrees in each task. All tasks          data from pt (x) and all data from pold := {pti (x) }ti <t .
                                                         Estimates for p̂old are based on 200 images sampled
have the same state and action spaces, and same
                                                         at each time step from a drifting version of CIFAR-
episode length but each rotates a valve with a           10. As the underlying distributions evolve, their MMD
different shape. We build a random sequence of           distance grows. To illustrate that our method produces
these tasks switching from one to another (after         high quality estimates, we also show distance between
an episode finishes) in repeating patterns. We           data from pt and all data from {pti (x)}ti <t which are
utilize SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as our base-         weighted by our ω. The small gap between blue and
line. In order to incorporate our approach into          orange plots shows that our method produces accurate
                                                         estimates.

                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            (a)                                              (b)

Figure 4: Comparing our method against standard propensity on continuous CIFAR-10 benchmark.
Fig 4a shows average test accuracy and Fig 4b shows propensity scores for both methods across time during
test time. These results distinctly show our time-varying importance weight estimator weighs data in the same
fashion as they evolve and this can explain why our method performs better than standard propensity score
where it can not identify when data evolves.


SAC, we only change Q-value update with ω as follows:
  1   X                                                                          2
              ω(s, a, T, t) Qψ (s, a) − r − γQψ̂ (s′ , a′ ) + α log πϕ (a′ |s′ )     , a′ ∼ πϕ (·|s′ ) (16)
 |B|      ′
      (s,a,t,s )


where α is entropy coefficient, T is the current episode, and (s, a) denote state and action, respectively.

Half-Cheetah WindVel. We closely follow the setup of Xie et al. (2020) to create Half-Cheetah
WindVel environment where direction and magnitude of wind forces on an agent keep changing but
slowly and gradually. This is a difficult problem as an agent needs to learn a non-stationary sequence
of tasks (i.e. whenever direction and magnitude of wind changes, it constitutes as a new task). Since
task information is not directly available to the agent, we utilize the recent method of Caccia et al.
(2022) and Fakoor et al. (2020b) to learn and infer task related information using context variable
(called SAC + Context here). Similar to (16), we only change Q-update to add our method.

Results. We can see in Fig. 3 that our method offers consistent improvements over the baseline
method and can observe its effectiveness in correcting shifts across time. Note that the only difference
between our method and baseline methods is the introduction of ω term in the Q-update and all other
details are exactly the same. See also Fig. 6 and 7 in appendix for additional experiments.

5    C OMPARING STANDARD PROPENSITY WITH OUR TIME - VARYING METHOD
Now we compare our method with standard propensity scoring discussed in §3. Fig. 4 shows results
of this experiment on CIFAR-10 benchmark. This result provides an empirical verification that our
method works better than standard propensity method and gives us some insights why it performs
better. Particularly, we can see in Fig. 4 that our method fairly detects shifts across different time
steps, whereas standard propensity scoring largely ignores shifts across different time steps.

6    C ONCLUSION
Here we propose a simple yet effective time-varying importance weight estimator to account for
gradual shifts in data distributions. One practical property of our drift estimator is that it is not specific
to a particular class of problems and can be utilized in all kinds of settings from supervised learning
to reinforcement learning with a combination of existing approaches. Importantly, our method
automatically detects shift in data without knowing them as a priori. Comprehensive experiments
on continuous supervised learning and reinforcement learning show the effectiveness of our method.
The broader impact of this work will potentially be to make machine learning methods more robust
in the presence of continuous distribution shift, which is inevitable in the real world. Note that while
we referred to t as time throughout this paper, our methodology is also applicable to settings where
data-generating shifts occur gradually over space or any other continuous-valued index.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   E THICS S TATEMENT

All datasets and benchmarks used in this work are publicly available. All code and documentation
developed as a part of this project will made public. We do not declare any conflicts of interest with
respect to the findings discussed in this work.

R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille, Michael Lam, Rahul Tewari, Avinash Ravichandran, Subhransu Maji, Charless C
  Fowlkes, Stefano Soatto, and Pietro Perona. Task2vec: Task embedding for meta-learning. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6430–6439, 2019.
Deepak Agarwal, Lihong Li, and Alexander Smola. Linear-time estimators for propensity scores. In
  Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  93–100, 2011.
Amr Alexandari, Anshul Kundaje, and Avanti Shrikumar. Maximum likelihood with bias-corrected
 calibration is hard-to-beat at label shift adaptation. In Proceedings of the 37th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 222–232. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Rahaf Aljundi, Klaas Kelchtermans, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Task-free continual learning. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11254–11263,
  2019.
Jonathan Baxter. A Model of Inductive Bias Learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:
  149–198, March 2000.
Shai Ben-David and Reba Schuller. Exploiting task relatedness for learning multiple tasks. In
  Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, 2003.
Steffen Bickel, Michael Brückner, and Tobias Scheffer. Discriminative learning for differing training
  and test distributions. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML ’07, pp. 81–88. Association for Computing Machinery, 2007. ISBN 9781595937933.
Massimo Caccia, Pau Rodriguez, Oleksiy Ostapenko, Fabrice Normandin, Min Lin, Lucas Page-
 Caccia, Issam Hadj Laradji, Irina Rish, Alexandre Lacoste, David Vázquez, and Laurent Charlin.
 Online fast adaptation and knowledge accumulation (osaka): a new approach to continual learning.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 16532–16545. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2020.
Massimo Caccia, Jonas Mueller, Taesup Kim, Laurent Charlin, and Rasool Fakoor. Task-agnostic
 continual reinforcement learning: In praise of a simple baseline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14495,
 2022.
Ewen Callaway. The coronavirus is mutating — does it matter?, September 2020. URL https:
 //www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-02544-6.
Xiangli Chen, Mathew Monfort, Anqi Liu, and Brian D. Ziebart. Robust covariate shift regression.
  In AISTATS, 2016.
D. R. Cox. Regression models and life-tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
  (Methodological), 34(2):187–220, 1972. ISSN 00359246.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, and Alexander J. Smola. P3o: Policy-on policy-off policy opti-
  mization. In Proceedings of The 35th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference, volume
  115, pp. 1017–1027, 2020a.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, Stefano Soatto, and Alexander J. Smola. Meta-q-learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Willliam Feller. An introduction to probability theory and its applications, vol 2. John Wiley & Sons,
 2008.

Chelsea Finn, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Online meta-learning. In
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 1920–1930,
  2019.

Yansong Gao and Pratik Chaudhari. An information-geometric distance on the space of tasks. In
  ICML, 2021.

Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary C. Lipton. A unified view of label
  shift estimation. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NIPS’20, 2020. ISBN 9781713829546.

Heitor Murilo Gomes, Jesse Read, Albert Bifet, Jean Paul Barddal, and João Gama. Machine learning
  for streaming data: state of the art, challenges, and opportunities. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
  Newsletter, 21(2):6–22, 2019.

Arthur Gretton, Alex Smola, Jiayuan Huang, Marcel Schmittfull, Karsten Borgwardt, and Bern-
  hard Schölkopf. Covariate Shift by Kernel Mean Matching. The MIT Press, 12 2008. ISBN
  9780262170055.

Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A
  kernel two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870, 2018.

Raia Hadsell, Dushyant Rao, Andrei Rusu, and Razvan Pascanu. Embracing change: Continual
  learning in deep neural networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24:1028–1040, 12 2020. doi:
  10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.004.

James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Marco Pavone. Continuous meta-learning
  without tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 17571–
  17581. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.

Xu He, Jakub Sygnowski, Alexandre Galashov, Andrei A Rusu, Yee Whye Teh, and Razvan Pascanu.
  Task agnostic continual learning via meta learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05201, 2019.

James J. Heckman. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1):153–161,
  1979. ISSN 00129682, 14680262.

Jiayuan Huang, Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alex Smola. Correcting
   sample selection bias by unlabeled data. In B. Schölkopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman (eds.), Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 19. MIT Press, 2006.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Zhiqiu Lin, Jia Shi, Deepak Pathak, and Deva Ramanan. The clear benchmark: Continual learning on
  real-world imagery. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track, 2021.

Zachary C. Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alex Smola. Detecting and correcting for label shift with
  black box predictors, 2018.

Bo Lu. Propensity score matching with time-dependent covariates. Biometrics, 61(3):721–728, 2005.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jie Lu, Anjin Liu, Fan Dong, Feng Gu, Joao Gama, and Guangquan Zhang. Learning under concept
   drift: A review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31(12):2346–2363,
   2018.

Nan Lu, Tianyi Zhang, Tongtong Fang, Takeshi Teshima, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking
  importance weighting for transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10157, 2021.

Sashank Reddi, Barnabas Poczos, and Alex Smola. Doubly robust covariate shift correction. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29, 2015a.

Sashank J. Reddi, Barnabás Póczos, and Alexander J. Smola. Doubly robust covariate shift correction.
  In AAAI, 2015b.

Sidney I Resnick. A probability path. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

Paul R. Rosenbaum and Donald B. Rubin. The central role of the propensity score in observational
  studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1):41–55, 04 1983. ISSN 0006-3444.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37, pp. 1889–1897,
  2015.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Online Learning and Online Convex Optimization. 2012.

Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000. ISSN
  0378-3758.

Vinicius Souza, Denis M dos Reis, Andre G Maletzke, and Gustavo EAPA Batista. Challenges in
  benchmarking stream learning algorithms with real-world data. Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, 34(6):1805–1858, 2020.

Masashi Sugiyama, Matthias Krauledat, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Covariate shift adaptation by
 importance weighted cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(5), 2007a.

Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul Buenau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct importance estimation with model selection and its application to covariate shift adaptation.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 20, 2007b.

Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul Von Bunau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct importance estimation for covariate shift adaptation. 2008.

Ryan J Tibshirani, Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel Candes, and Aaditya Ramdas. Conformal
  prediction under covariate shift. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.

Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.

Vladimir N. Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley-Interscience, 1998.

Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomputing, 312:
 135–153, 2018.

Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and
  Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. arXiv:1611.01224, 2016.

Junfeng Wen, Chun-Nam Yu, and Russell Greiner. Robust learning under uncertain test distributions:
  Relating covariate shift to model misspecification. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 631–639, 2014.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ruihan Wu, Chuan Guo, Yi Su, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Online adaptation to label distribution
  shift. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11340–11351, 2021.
Annie Xie, James Harrison, and Chelsea Finn. Deep reinforcement learning amidst lifelong non-
  stationarity, 2020.
Fan Yang, Chao Yang, Huaping Liu, and Fuchun Sun. Evaluations of the gap between supervised
  and reinforcement lifelong learning on robotic manipulation tasks. In 5th Annual Conference on
  Robot Learning, 2021.
Kun Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Krikamol Muandet, and Zhikun Wang. Domain adaptation under
  target and conditional shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 819–827, 2013.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ERIVATIONS

Using a similar calculation as that of (1), we can write our time-varying importance estimator
objective as follows
           h      i           h     i Z                      Z Z
                                                                                  dp(x|t)
 Ex∼pT (x) ℓ(x) = Ex∼p(x|T ) ℓ(x) = dp(x|T ) ℓ(x) =                dp(t) dp(x|T )         ℓ(x) (17)
                                          t                    t x                dp(x|t)
                                        Z Z
                                                              dp(x|T )
                                      =       dp(t) dp(x|t)            ℓ(x)
                                                              dp(x|t)
                                        Zt x Z
                                                              dp(x|T )
                                      = dp(t) dp(x|t)                  ℓ(x)
                                          t       x           dp(x|t)
                                                          h dp(x|T )      i
                                      = Et∼p(t) Ex∼p(x|t)            ℓ(x)
                                                             dp(x|t)
                                                          h dp (x)      i
                                                              T
                                      = Et∼p(t) Ex∼pt (x)           ℓ(x)
                                                            dpt (x)
                                                          h               i
                                      = Et∼p(t) Ex∼pt (x) ω(x, T, t)ℓ(x)                       (18)


B     A LGORITHM D ETAILS

Algorithm 1 describes the detailed implementation steps of our time-varying importance weight
estimator. We use the exact same steps for both reinforcement learning and continuous supervised
learning experiments. The main difference between these cases is using of (x, y, t) as inputs for
supervised learning tasks whereas (s, a, t) are used as inputs in the reinforcement learning exper-
iments. Note although gθ can be parameterized differently considering its given task (e.g. image
classification tasks require gθ to be a convolutional deep network; however, continuous control tasks
in reinforcement learning experiments need fully connected networks), its implementation details
remain the same.
In order to implement Method 2 described in §3, we only need to change line 8 of Algorithm 1 as
follow (all other details remain the same):
                                            X
                             ∇θ J ← ∇θ        log 1 + e−z(gθ (x,t2 ))                      (19)
                                             (x,t2 ,z)∈B


For all the experiments in this paper, we utilize 19 in Algorithm 1 implementation. Fig. 5 compares
these methods using the continuous supervised learning benchmarks and shows that both method
performs similarly.

Algorithm 1 Train Time-varying Importance Weight Estimator
 1: Input: D = {xj , tj }N
                         j=1
 2: Input M : Number of epochs
 3: Initialize Do = ∅
 4: for j=1...M do
 5:    Do ← GenerateData(D)
 6:    repeat
 7:       Sample mini-batch B = {(x,
                                     t2 , t1 , z)} ∼ Do
                                       log 1 + e−z(gθ (x,t2 )−gθ (x,t1 ))
                          P
 8:      ∇θ J ← ∇θ
                     (x,t2 ,t1 ,z)∈B
 9:      θ ← θ − α∇θ J
10:   until convergence
11: end for


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     (a) CIFAR-10a                                         (b) CIFAR-10b


                                                 (c) CLEAR

Figure 5: Comparing our Method 1 (see (8)) and Method 2 (see (10)) on continuous CIFAR-10 and CLEAR
benchmarks. These results shows average test accuracy across time during test time. Both methods use exactly
the same setting and the only difference between them is utilizing Method 1 or Method 2 for time-varying
importance weight estimator. These results show that both methods perform similarly, although Method 1 has a
slight edge over Method 2.


Algorithm 2 GenerateData
 1: Input: D = {xj , tj }Nj=1
 2: T = [1, .., T ]
 3: Initialize Do = ∅
 4: for j=1...N do
 5:    tr is chosen uniformly at random from T such that tj ̸= tr
 6:    if random() >= 0.5 then
 7:       z=1
 8:       Do ← Do ∪ {(xj , tj , tr , z)}
 9:    else
10:       z = −1
11:       Do ← Do ∪ {(xj , tr , tj , z)}
12:    end if
13: end for
14: Return Do


C    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

Implementation Details. Table 3, 2, and Table 1 show hyper-parameters, computing infrastructure,
and libraries used for the experiments in this paper. We did minimal random hyper-parameters
search for the experiments in this paper and we mostly follow standard and available settings for the
experiments whenever it is applicable. We will open source the code of this paper upon publication.


                                                    15
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Computing Infrastructure
                                 Machine Type    AWS EC2 - g3.16xlarge
                                 CUDA Version              11.0
                                 NVIDIA-Driver          450.142.00
                                 GPU Family             Tesla M60
                                 CPU Family        Intel Xeon 2.30GHz
                                            Library Version
                                 Python                    3.8.5
                                 Numpy                    1.22.0
                                 Pytorch                  1.10.0

                           Table 1: Software libraries and machines used in this paper.


    C.1   C ONTINUOUS L ABEL S HIFT SETTINGS

    To simulate the continuous label shift process for image classification experiments in this paper,
    we follow the setting of Wu et al. (2021) but adopt their settings to more challenging scenarios. In
    particular, we simulate label shifts for all classes (i.e. 10 classes here) as opposed to two classes in
    their setting:


                                                                  t i    t
                           ∀i ∈ [1, C] ∀t ∈ [1, T ], vt = (1 −     )q + ( )qti+1 ,                     (20)
                                                                  T t    H

    where T is the number of shift steps per a label pair i and i + 1, t ∈ [1, T ], C denotes the number
    of classes (C = 10 in our experiments), qti ∈ RC is vector of class probabilities, and vt ∈ RT ×C .
    For CIFAR-10 experiments, we use T = 9 (called CIFAR-10a), T = 6 (CIFAR-10b), and T = 30
    (CIFAR-10c). We also use T = 30 for CLEAR experiment. Sample python implementation of (20)
    is shown in Listing 1.
1 import numpy as np
2 def create_shift(T, q1, q2):
3     lamb = 1.0 / (T-1)
4     return np.concatenate([np.expand_dims(q1 * (1 - lamb * t) + q2 * lamb
       * t, axis=0)for t in range(T)], axis=0)
                            Listing 1: Python code of (20) for given two classes


    D     M ORE RESULTS

    Number of seeds. We repeat some of supervised learning experiments of CIFAR-10 benchmark
    using 8 different random seeds (we increase the number of seeds from 3 to 8) and report results in
    Fig. 9. As these new experiments show, results are consistent across 3 and 8 seeds. We also like to
    emphasize that all our reinfrocement leatning experiments are done for 10 seeds which is standard
    for MuJoCo environments.

    Method 1 vs Method 2. We compare performance of our Method 1 (8) and Method 2 (10) on
    continuous CIFAR-10 and CLEAR benchmarks. We can see in Fig. 5 that both methods perform
    similarly, although Method 1 has a slight edge over Method 2. Note we use Method 2 for all the
    experiments in the paper.

    No Shift. Here, we analyze how our method performs when there is no shift in data and see whether
    or not it performs as good as Everything? To answer this question, we run new experiments on the
    CIFAR-10 benchmark without shift. We build continuous classification tasks from this dataset where
    we used past data to predict future data points. This is the same setting as other supervised learning
    experiments in the paper except we do not apply any shift to the data. Results of this experiment are
    shown in Fig. 10. As this experiment shows, our method and Everything perform similarly when


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Comparison of the average undiscounted return (higher is better) of our method (orange)
against baseline algorithm on ROBEL D’Claw. In this environment, our method performs better than standard
SAC in terms of both sample complexity and stability (compare shaded area of our method with SAC, larger
means less stable). We can see that our method has much more stable performance than SAC. Note the only
difference between this experiment and the one in Fig. 3 is that here we only move to next task after repeating
each task for 215 time steps whereas each task repeats only for 2 time in the experiment of Fig. 3. Our method
works better in both settings and this result again verifies the effectiveness of our method in practice.


Figure 7: Comparison of the average undiscounted return (higher is better) of our method with context
(orange) against baseline algorithm with context on ROBEL D’Claw. In this environment, our method
performs better than SAC + Context in terms of both sample complexity and stability (compare shaded area of
our method with SAC + Context, larger means less stable). Note that the only difference between our method
and baseline method is the introduction of ω term in the Q-update and all other details are exactly the same.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Hyper-parameters for Algorithm 1                                               value
  Learning rate                                                                  1e-4
  Number of Updates (M)                                                            4
  Batch Size                                                                      512
  gθ                                                            4-FC layers with ReLU and BatchNorm
  Hyper-parameters of SAC                                                        value
  Random Seeds                                                               {0, 1, .., 9}
  Batch Size                                                                      256
  Number of Q Functions                                                            2
  Number of hidden layers (Q)                                                  2 layers
  Number of hidden layers (π)                                                  2 layers
  Number of hidden units per layer                                                256
  Nonlinearity                                                                  ReLU
  Discount factor (γ)                                                            0.99
  Target network (ψ ′ ) update rate (τ )                                        0.005
  Actor learning rate                                                            3e-4
  Critic learning rate                                                           3e-4
  Optimizer                                                                     Adam
  Replay Buffer size                                                              1e6
  Burn-in period                                                                  1e4
  ω clip                                                                           1
  HalfCheetah-Wind’s number of episodes to evaluate                               50
  Robel’s number of episodes to evaluate                                           5

Table 2: Hyper-parameters used for all reinforcement learning experiments. All results reported in our paper are
averages over repeated runs initialized with each of the random seeds listed above and run for the listed number
of episodes.

        Hyper-parameters for Algorithm 1                                    value
        Learning rate                                                       1e-4
        Number of Updates (M)                                                200
        Batch Size                                                           512
        gθ for CIFAR-10                                       5-Conv layers and 1 linear layer
        gθ for CLEAR                                       3-FC layers with ReLU and BatchNorm
        Hyper-parameters of CIFAR-10/CLEAR                                  value
        Random Seeds                                                      {0, 1, 2}
        CIFAR-10 Network                                                 Resnet-18
        CLEAR Network                                                   Linear layer
        Samples per time step                                                200
        Learning rate                                                       9e-4
        Batch Size                                                           128
        Optimizer                                                          Adam
        ω clip                                                                1
        Number of training epochs per time step                CIFAR-10 (20), CLEAR (25)

Table 3: Hyper-parameters used for all continuous supervised learning experiments for both CIFAR-10 and
CLEAR tasks. All continuous supervised learning results reported in our paper are averages over three random
seeds.


there is no shift in the data. This experiment provides further evidence about the applicability of our
method and shows that our method works regardless of presence of shifts in the data and it has no
negative effect on the performance.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           (a)                                                        (b)

Figure 8: Average test accuracy (higher is better) across 3 runs for continuous supervised learning on
CIFAR-10c (see Appendix C.1 for details) benchmark comparing our method with others. The x-axes
indicate different test time steps. The y-axis on the left displays the classification accuracy on test data and the
one on the right shows our time-varying importance weight scores. Note all models in these experiments are
trained completely from scratch per time step (i.e. every point in this plot is a different model) using exact same
architectures and hyper-parameters. A sudden drop in a plot is an indication that the shift direction has changed.
We see that our method is the only method showing consistent behavior across different benchmarks and shifts,
and importantly performs the best overall.


                  (a) CIFAR-10a (3 seeds)                                    (b) CIFAR-10b (3 seeds)


                  (c) CIFAR-10a (8 seeds)                                    (d) CIFAR-10b (8 seeds)

Figure 9: Comparison of average test accuracy (higher is better) of running with 3 seeds against 8 seeds
on continuous supervised learning benchmarks. The x-axes indicate different test time steps t and the y-axes
display the classification accuracy on test data from time t. CIFAR-10a and CIFAR-10b refer two different shifts
for this benchmark (see Appendix C.1 for details). We see that results are consistent across 3 seeds and 8 seeds.


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      (a)

Figure 10: Average test accuracy (higher is better) across 3 runs for continuous supervised learning on
CIFAR-10 benchmark without label shift . The x-axis indicates different test time steps and the y-axis displays
the classification accuracy on test data. We see that our method and Everything perform similarly. This is an
important observation showing our method does not negatively affect the performance when there is no shift.


                                                      20
