Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D UAL D IFFUSION I MPLICIT B RIDGES FOR
I MAGE - TO -I MAGE T RANSLATION
 Xuan Su1       Jiaming Song2     Chenlin Meng1  Stefano Ermon1,3
 1                       2           3
  Stanford University      NVIDIA      CZ Biohub
  {suxuan,chenlin,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu,jiamings@nvidia.com



                                             A BSTRACT

         Common image-to-image translation methods rely on joint training over data from
         both source and target domains. The training process requires concurrent access to
         both datasets, which hinders data separation and privacy protection; and existing
         models cannot be easily adapted for translation of new domain pairs. We present
         Dual Diffusion Implicit Bridges (DDIBs), an image translation method based on
         diffusion models, that circumvents training on domain pairs. Image translation with
         DDIBs relies on two diffusion models trained independently on each domain, and is
         a two-step process: DDIBs first obtain latent encodings for source images with the
         source diffusion model, and then decode such encodings using the target model to
         construct target images. Both steps are defined via ordinary differential equations
         (ODEs), thus the process is cycle consistent only up to discretization errors of
         the ODE solvers. Theoretically, we interpret DDIBs as concatenation of source
         to latent, and latent to target Schrödinger Bridges, a form of entropy-regularized
         optimal transport, to explain the efficacy of the method. Experimentally, we apply
         DDIBs on synthetic and high-resolution image datasets, to demonstrate their utility
         in a wide variety of translation tasks and their inherent optimal transport properties.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Transferring images from one domain to another while preserving the content representation is an
important problem in computer vision, with wide applications that span style transfer (Xu et al., 2021;
Sinha et al., 2021) and semantic segmentation (Li et al., 2020). In tasks such as style transfer, it is
usually difficult to obtain paired images of realistic scenes and their artistic renditions. Consequently,
unpaired translation methods are particularly relevant, since only the datasets, and not the one-to-
one correspondence between image translation pairs, are required. Common methods on unpaired
translation are based on generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al. (2014); Zhu
et al. (2017)) or normalizing flows (Grover et al., 2020). Training such models typically involves
minimizing an adversarial loss between a specific pair of source and target datasets.
While capable of producing high-quality images, these methods suffer from a severe drawback in
their adaptability to alternative domains. Concretely, a translation model on a source-target pair is
trained specifically for this domain pair. Provided a different pair, existing, bespoke models cannot be
easily adapted for translation. If we were to do pairwise translation among a set of domains, the total
number of models needed is quadratic in the number of domains – an unacceptable computational cost
in practice. One alternative is to find a shared domain that connects to each source / target domains as
in StarGANs (Choi et al., 2018). However, the shared domain needs to be carefully chosen a priori;
if the shared domain contains less information than the target domain (e.g. sketches v.s. photos), then
it creates an unwanted information bottleneck between the source and target domains.
An additional disadvantage of existing models resides in their lack of privacy protection of the
datasets: training a translation model requires access to both datasets simultaneously. Such setting
may be inconvenient or impossible, when data providers are reluctant about giving away their data; or
for certain privacy-sensitive applications such as medical imaging. For example, quotidian hospital
usage may require translation of patients’ X-ray and MRI images taken from machines in other
hospitals. Most existing methods will fail in such scenarios, as joint training requires aggregating
confidential imaging data across hospitals, which may violate patients’ privacy.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Dual Diffusion Implicit Bridges: DDIBs leverage two ODEs for image translation. Given
a source image x(s) , the source ODE runs in the forward direction to convert it to the latent x(l) , while
the target, reverse ODE then constructs the target image x(t) . (Top) Illustration of the DDIBs idea
between two one-dimensional distributions. (Bottom) DDIBs from a tiger to a cat using a pretrained
conditional diffusion model.

In this paper, we seek to mitigate both problems of existing image translation methods. We present
Dual Diffusion Implicit Bridges (DDIBs), an image-to-image translation method inspired by recent
advances in diffusion models (Song et al., 2020a;b), that decouples paired training, and empowers
the domain-specific diffusion models to stay applicable in other pairs wherever the domain appears
again as the source or the target. Since the training process now concentrates on one dataset at a time,
DDIBs can also be applied in federated settings, and not assume access to both datasets during model
training. As a result, owners of domain data can effectively preserve their data privacy.
Specifically, DDIBs are developed based on the method known as denoising diffusion implicit
models (DDIMs, Song et al. (2020a)). DDIMs invent a particular parameterization of the diffusion
process, that creates a smooth, deterministic and reversible mapping between images and their latent
representations. This mapping is captured using the solution to a so-called probability flow (PF)
ordinary differential equation (ODE) that forms the cornerstone of DDIBs. Translation with DDIBs
on a source-target pair requires two different PF ODEs: the source PF ODE converts input images to
the latent space; while the target ODE then synthesizes images in the target domain.
Crucially, trained diffusion models are specific to the individual domains, and rely on no domain
pairing information. Effectively, DDIBs make it possible to save a trained model of a certain domain
for future use, when it arises as the source or target in a new pair. Pairwise translation with DDIBs
requires only a linear number of diffusion models (which can be further reduced with conditional
models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021)), and training does not require scanning both datasets concurrently.
Theoretically, we analyze the DDIBs translation process to highlight two important theoretical
properties. First, the probability flow ODEs in DDIBs, in essence, comprise the solution of a special
Schrödinger Bridge Problem (SBP) with linear or degenerate drift (Chen et al., 2021a), between the
data and the latent distributions. This justification of DDIBs from an optimal transport viewpoint
that alternative translation methods lack serves as a theoretical advantage of our method, as DDIBs
are the most OT-efficient translation procedure while alternate methods may not be. Second, DDIBs
guarantee exact cycle consistency: translating an image to and back from the target space reinstates
the original image, only up to discretization errors introduced in the ODE solvers.
Experimentally, we first present synthetic experiments on two-dimensional datasets to demonstrate
DDIBs’ cycle-consistency property. We then evaluate our method on a variety of image modalities,
with qualitative and quantitative results: we validate its usage in example-guided color transfer, paired
image translation, and conditional ImageNet translation. These results establish DDIBs as a scalable,
theoretically rigorous addition to the family of unpaired image translation methods.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   S CORE - BASED G ENERATIVE M ODELS (SGM S )
While our actual implementation utilizes DDIMs, we first briefly introduce the broader family of
models known as score-based generative models. Two representative models of this family are
score matching with Langevin dynamics (SMLD) (Song & Ermon, 2019) and denoising diffusion


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho et al., 2020). Both methods are contained within the framework
of Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) proposed in Song et al. (2020b).

Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) Representation Song et al. (2020b); Anderson (1982)
use a forward and a corresponding backward SDE to describe general diffusion and the reversed,
generative processes:
                  dx = f (x, t) dt + g(t) dw ,       dx = [f − g 2 ∇x log pt (x)] dt + g(t) dw                   (1)
where w is the standard Wiener process, f (x, t) is the vector-valued drift coefficient, g(t) is the scalar
diffusion coefficient, and ∇x log pt (x) is the score function of the noise perturbed data distribution (as
defined by the forward SDE with initial condition p0 (x) being the data distribution). At the endpoints
t = {0, 1}, the forward Eq. (1) admits the data distribution p0 and the easy-to-sample prior p1 as the
boundary distributions. Within this framework, the SMLD method       pcan be described using a Variance-
Exploding (VE) SDE with increasing noise scales σ(t): dx = d[σ 2 (t)] / dt dw. p          In comparison,
DDPMs are endowed with a Variance-Preserving (VP) SDE: dx = −[β(t)/2]x dt + β(t) dw with
β(t) being another noise sequence. Notably, the VP SDE can be reparameterized into an equivalent
VE SDE (Song et al., 2020a).

Probability Flow ODE Any diffusion process can be represented by a deterministic ODE that
carries the same marginal densities as the diffusion process throughout its trajectory. This ODE is
termed the probability flow (PF) ODE (Song et al., 2020b). PF ODEs enable uniquely identifiable
encodings (Song et al., 2020b) of data, and are central to DDIBs as we solve these ODEs for forward
and reverse conversion between data and their latents. For the forward SDE introduced in Eq. (1), the
equivalent PF ODE holds the following form:

                                                1
                             dx = f (x, t) − g(t)2 ∇x log pt (x) dt                               (2)
                                                2
which follows immediately from the SDEs given the score function. In practice, we use θ-
parameterized score networks st,θ ≈ ∇x log pt (x) to approximate the score function. Training
such networks relies on a variational lower bound, described in Ho et al. (2020) and in Appendix B.
We may then employ numerical ODE solvers to solve the above ODE and construct x at different
times. Empirically, it has been demonstrated that SGMs have relatively low discretization errors when
reconstructing x at t = 0 via ODE solvers (Song et al., 2020a). For conciseness, we use vθ = dx / dt
to denote the θ-parameterized velocity field (as defined from Eq. (2), where we replace ∇x log pt (x)
with st,θ ), and use the symbol ODESolve to denote the mapping from x(t0 ) to x(t1 ):
                                                                 Z t1
                      ODESolve(x(t0 ); vθ , t0 , t1 ) = x(t0 ) +      vθ (t, x(t)) dt ,            (3)
                                                                         t0

which allows us to abstract away the exact model (be it a score-based or a diffusion model), or
the integrator used. In our experiments, we implement the ODE solver in DDIMs (Song et al.,
2020a) (Appendix B); while we acknowledge other available ODE solvers that are usable within our
framework, such as the DPM-solver (Lu et al., 2022), the Exponential Integrator (Zhang & Chen,
2022), and the second-order Heun solver (Karras et al., 2022).

2.2      S CHR ÖDINGER B RIDGE P ROBLEM (SBP)

Our analysis shows that DDIBs are Schrödinger Bridges (Chen et al., 2016; Léonard, 2013) between
distributions. Let Ω = C([0, 1]; Rn ) be the path space of Rn -valued continuous functions over the
time interval [0, 1]; and D(p0 , p1 ) be the set of distributions over Ω , with marginals p0 , p1 at time
t = 0, t = 1, respectively. Given a prior reference measure W 1 , the well-known Schrödinger Bridge
Problem (SBP) seeks the most probable evolution across time t between the marginals p0 and p1 :
Problem 1 (Schrödinger Bridge Problem). With prescribed distributions p0 , p1 and a reference
measure W as the prior, the SBP finds a distribution from D(p0 , p1 ) that minimizes its KL-divergence
to W : PSBP := arg min{DKL (P ∥W ) | P ∈ D(p0 , p1 )}.
   1
       In our application, the reference measure is set to the measure of Eq. (1), as per Chen et al. (2021a).


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 High-level Pseudo-code for DDIBs
                                                                              (s)                (t)
    Input: data sample from source domain x(s) ∼ ps (x), source model vθ , target model vθ .
    Output: x(t) , the result in the target domain.
                               (s)
    x(l) = ODESolve(x(s) ; vθ , 0, 1) // obtain latent code from source domain data
                               (t)
    x(t) = ODESolve(x(l) ; vθ , 1, 0) // obtain target domain data from latent code
    return x(t)


The minimizer, PSBP , is dubbed the Schrödinger Bridge between p0 and p1 over prior W . The SBP
has connections to the Monge-Kantorovich (MK) optimal transport problem (Chen et al., 2021b).
While the basic MK problem seeks the cost-minimizing plan to transport masses between distributions,
the SBP incorporates an additional entropy term (for details, see Page 61 of Peyré et al. (2019)) .

Relationship Between SBPs and SGMs Chen et al. (2021a) establishes connections between
SGMs and SBPs. In summary, SGMs are implicit optimal transport models, corresponding to SBPs
with linear or degenerate drifts. General SBPs additionally accept fully nonlinear diffusion. To
formalize this observation, the authors first establish similar forward and backward SDEs for SBPs:
       dx = [f + g 2 ∇x log Φt (x)] dt + g(t) dw ,       dx = [f − g 2 ∇x log Φ̂t (x)] dt + g(t) dw    (4)

where Φ, Φ̂ are the Schrödinger factors that satisfy density factorization: pt (x) = Φt (x)Φ̂t (x). The
vector-valued quantities zt = g(t)∇x log Φt (x), ẑt = g(t)∇x log Φ̂t (x) fully characterize dynamics
of the SBP, thus can be considered as the forward, backward “policies”, analogous to policy-based
methods described in Schulman et al. (2015); Pereira et al. (2019). To draw a link between SBPs and
SGMs, the data log-likelihood objective for SBPs is computed and shown to be equal to that of SGMs
with special choices of zt , ẑt (derivation details in Chen et al. (2021a)). Importantly, likelihood
equality occurs with the following policies:
                                   (zt , ẑt ) = (0, g(t) ∇x log pt (x))                               (5)
When the marginal p1 at time t = 1 is equal to the prior distribution, it is known that such (zt , ẑt )
are achieved. Since in SGMs, the end marginal p1 is indeed the standard Gaussian prior, their
log-likelihood is equivalent to that of SBPs. This suggests that SGMs are a special case of SBPs with
degenerate forward policy zt and a multiple of the score function as its backward ẑt .

Probability Flow ODE In a similar vein to the SGM SDEs, a deterministic PF ODE can be derived
for SBPs with identical marginal densities across t ∈ [0, 1]. The following PF ODE specifies the
probability flow of the optimal processes of the SBP defined in Eq. (4) (Chen et al., 2021a):

                                                      1
                            dx = f (x, t) + g(t) z − g(t)(z + ẑ) dt                          (6)
                                                      2
where z depends on x. We shall show that the PF ODEs for SGMs and SBPs are equivalent. Thus,
flowing through the PF ODEs in DDIBs is equivalent to flowing through special Schrödinger Bridges,
with one of the marginals being Gaussian.

3     D UAL D IFFUSION I MPLICIT B RIDGES
DDIBs leverage the connections between SGMs and SBPs to perform image-to-image translation,
with two diffusion models trained separately on the two domains. DDIBs contain two steps, described
in Alg. 1 and illustrated in Fig. 1. At the core of the algorithm is the ODE solver ODESolve from
                                                                         (s)
Eq. (3). Given a source model represented as a vector field, i.e., vθ defined from Eq. (2), DDIBs
first apply ODESolve in the source domain to obtain the encoding x(s) of the image at the end time
t = 1; we refer to this as the latent code (associated with the diffusion model for the domain). Then,
the source latent code is fed as the initial condition (target latent code at t = 1) to ODESolve with the
               (t)
target model vθ to obtain the target image x(t) . As discussed earlier, we implement ODESolve with
DDIMs (Song et al., 2020a), which are known to have reasonably small discretization errors. While


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


recent developments in higher order ODE solvers (Zhang & Chen, 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Karras et al.,
2022) that generalize DDIMs can also be used here, we leave this investigation to future work.
Despite the simplicity of the method, DDIBs have several advantages over prior methods, which we
discuss below.

Exact Cycle Consistency A desirable feature of image translation algorithms is the cycle consis-
tency property: transforming a data point from the source domain to the target domain, and then
back to source, will recover the original data point in the source domain. The following proposition
validates the cycle consistency of DDIBs.
Proposition 3.1 (DDIBs Enforce Exact Cycle Consistency). Given a sample from source domain
                                 (s)                       (t)
x(s) , a source diffusion model vθ , and a target model vθ , define:
                                                  (s)                                                 (t)
                x(l) = ODESolve(x(s) ; vθ , 0, 1);                  x(t) = ODESolve(x(l) ; vθ , 1, 0);              (7)
                    ′(l)                  (t)      (t)                  ′(s)                  ′(l)      (s)
                x          = ODESolve(x         ; vθ , 0, 1);       x          = ODESolve(x          ; vθ , 1, 0)   (8)
                                                    (s)         ′(s)
Assume zero discretization error. Then, x                 =x           .

As PF ODEs are used, the cycle consistency property is guaranteed. In practice, even with discretiza-
tion error, DDIBs incur almost negligible cycle inconsistency (Section 4.1). In contrast, GAN-based
methods are not guaranteed the cycle consistency property by default, and have to incorporate
additional training terms to optimize for cycle consistency over two domains.

Data Privacy in Both Domains In the DDIBs translation process, only the source and target
diffusion models are required, whose training processes do not depend on knowledge of the domain
pair a priori. In fact, this process can even be performed in a privacy sensitive manner (graphic
illustration in Appendix A). Let Alice and Bob be the data owners of the source and target domains,
respectively. Suppose Alice intends to translate images to the target domain. However, Alice does not
want to share the data with Bob (and vice versa, Bob does not want to release their data either). Then,
Alice can simply train a diffusion model with the source data, encode the data to the latent space,
transmit the latent codes to Bob, and next ask Bob to run their trained diffusion model and send the
results back. In this procedure, only the latent code and the target results are transmitted between the
two data vendors, and both parties have naturally ensured that their data are not directly revealed.

DDIBs are Two Concatenated Schrödinger Bridges DDIBs link the source data distribution to
the latent space, and then to the target distribution. What is the nature of such connections between
distributions? We offer an answer from an optimal transport perspective: these connections are special
Schrödinger Bridges between distributions. This, in turn, explicates the name of our method: dual
diffusion implicit bridges are based on denoising diffusion implicit models (Song et al., 2020a), and
consist of two separate Schrödinger Bridges that connect the data and latent distributions. Specifically,
as considered earlier, when conditions about the policies zt , ẑt in Eq. (5) and the density p1 (x) being
a Gaussian prior are met, the data likelihoods (at t = 0) for SGMs and SBPs are identical. Indeed,
these conditions are fulfilled in SGMs and particularly in DDIMs. This verifies SGMs as special
linear or degenerate SBPs. Forward and reverse solving the PF ODE for SGMs, as done in DDIBs, is
equivalent to flowing through the optimal processes of particular SBPs:
Proposition 3.2 (PF ODE Equivalence2 ). Eq. (2) is equivalent to Eq. (6) with forward, backward
policies (zt , ẑt ) = (0, g∇x log pt (x)) as attained in SGMs and particularly in DDIMs.

Thus, DDIBs are intrinsically entropy-regularized optimal transport: they are Schrödinger Bridges
between the source and the latent, and between the latent and the target distributions. The translation
process can then be recognized as traversing through two concatenated Schrödinger Bridges, one
forward and one reversed. The mapping is unique and minimizes a (regularized) optimal transport
objective, which probably elucidates the superior performance of DDIBs. In contrast, if we train the
source and target models separately with normalizing flow models that are not inborn with such a
connection, there are many viable invertible mappings, and the resulting image translation algorithm
may not necessarily have good performance. This is probably the reason why AlignFlow (Grover
et al., 2020) still has to incorporate an adversarial loss even when cycle-consistency is guaranteed.
   2
       Proof in Appendix D.


                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Cycle consistency of DDIBs. Experiment legend, PR PS, means that we translate from


                                                                          ⟳
PR to PS and then back. The numbers are the averaged L2 distances between the original points and
their coordinates after cycle translation. Data points are standardized to have unit variance.

                       PR       PS   PS       CS   CR       PR   CR       CS   M       CB


                            ⟳


                                          ⟳


                                                        ⟳


                                                                      ⟳



                                                                                   ⟳
                        0.0143       0.0065        0.0106        0.0078        0.0122



4       E XPERIMENTS

We present a series of experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of DDIBs. First, we describe
synthetic experiments on two-dimensional datasets, to corroborate DDIBs’ cycle-consistent and
optimal transport properties. Next, we validate DDIBs on a variety of image translation tasks,
including color transfer, paired translation, and conditional ImageNet translation. 34

4.1      2D S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

We first perform domain translation on synthetic datasets drawn from complex two-dimensional
distributions, with various shapes and configurations, in Fig. 2a. In total, we consider six 2D datasets:
Moons (M); Checkerboards (CB); Concentric Rings (CR); Concentric Squares (CS); Parallel Rings
(PR); and Parallel Squares (PS). The datasets are all normalized to have zero mean, and identity
covariance. We assign colors to points based on the point identities (i.e., if a point in the source domain
is red, its corresponding point in the target domain is also colored red). Clearly, the transformation
is smooth between columns. For example, on the top-right corner, red points in the CR dataset are
mapped to similar coordinates, both in the latent and in the target dimensions.


(a) Smooth translation of synthetic datasets. (Left) The (b) Cycle consistency: After translating the Moons
source datasets: CR and CS. (Middle) DDIBs’ latent dataset to Checkerboards and then back to Moons,
code representation. (Right) Results of translation to DDIBs restore almost the exact same points as the orig-
the target domains.                                      inal ones.

                        Figure 2: Smoothness and cycle consistency of DDIBs.

Cycle Consistency Fig. 2b illustrates the cycle consistency property guaranteed by DDIBs. It
concerns 2D datasets: Moons, and Checkerboards. Starting from the Moons dataset, DDIBs first
obtain the latent codes and construct the Checkerboards points. Next, DDIBs do translations in the
reverse direction, transforming the points back to the latent and the Moons space. After this round
trip, points are approximately mapped to their original positions. A similar, smooth color topology
is observed in this experiment. Table 1 reports quantitative evaluation results on cycle-consistent
translation among multiple datasets. As the datasets are normalized to unit standard deviation, the
reported values are negligibly small and endorse the cycle consistent property of DDIBs.

    3
        Project: https://suxuann.github.io/ddib/
    4
        Code: https://github.com/suxuann/ddib/


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Mean Squared Error (MSE) comparing color transfer results of DDIBs with common OT
methods on two images. Each number represents the MSE between DDIBs and the corresponding
OT method. MSE is computed pixel-wise after normalizing images to [−1, 1].

                     I MAGE        EMD       S INKHORN      L INEAR    G AUSSIAN
                     TARGET 1     0.0337      0.0281         0.0352      0.0370
                     TARGET 2     0.0293      0.0326         0.0500      0.0751

Table 3: MSE comparing DDIBs and baselines on paired test sets. MSE is computed pixel-wise after
normalizing images to [−1, 1].

      DATASET      M ODEL       A→B        B→A          DATASET       M ODEL      A→B       B→A
                C YCLE GAN      0.7129     0.3286                 C YCLE GAN       0.0245   0.0953
      FACADES   A LIGN F LOW    0.5801     0.2512        M APS    A LIGN F LOW     0.0209   0.0897
                   DDIB S       0.5312     0.3946                    DDIB S        0.0194   0.1302

4.2    E XAMPLE -G UIDED C OLOR T RANSFER

DDIBs can be used on an interesting application: example-guided color transfer. This refers to the
task of modifying the colors of an input image, conditioned on the color palette of a reference image.
To use DDIBs for color transfer, we train one diffusion model per image, on its normalized RGB space.
During translation, DDIBs obtain encodings of the original colors, and apply the diffusion model of
the reference image to attain the desired color palette. Fig. 3 visualizes our color experiments.

Comparison to Alternative OT Methods As DDIBs are related to regularized OT, we compare
the pixel-wise MSEs between color-transferred images generated by DDIBs, and images produced
by alternate methods, in Table 2. We include four OT methods for comparison: Earth Mover’s
Distance; Sinkhorn distance (Cuturi, 2013); linear and Gaussian mapping estimation (Perrot et al.,
2016). Results of DDIBs are very close to those of OT methods. Appendix E.2 details full color
translation results.


Figure 3: Example-Guided Color Transfer: Given the first image as the reference image, DDIBs
modify the colors of two input images to similarly follow a snowy winter color palette.

4.3    Q UANTITATIVE T RANSLATION E VALUATION

Quantitatively, we demonstrate that DDIBs deliver competitive results on paired domain tests. Such
numerical evaluation is despite that DDIBs are formulated with a weaker setting: diffusion models
are trained independently, on separate datasets. In comparison, methods such as CycleGAN and
AlignFlow assume access to both datasets during training and jointly optimize for the translation loss.

Paired Domain Translation As in similar works, we evaluate DDIBs on benchmark paired datasets
(Zhu et al., 2017): Facades and Maps. Both are image segmentation tasks. In the pairs of datasets,
one dataset contains real photos taken via a camera or a satellite; while the other comprises the
corresponding segmentation images. These datasets provide one-to-one image alignment, which
allows quantitative evaluation through a distance metric such as mean-squared error (MSE) between
generated samples and the corresponding ground truth. To facilitate the workings of DDIBs, we
additionally employ a color conversion heuristic motivated by optimal transport on image colors
(Appendix E.1). Table 3 reports the evaluation results. Surprisingly, DDIBs are able to produce
segmentation images that surpass alternative methods in MSE terms; while reverse translations also
achieve decent performance.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.4   C LASS -C ONDITIONAL I MAGE N ET T RANSLATION

In this experiment, we apply DDIBs to translation among ImageNet classes. To this end, we leverage
the pretrained diffusion models from Dhariwal & Nichol (2021). The authors optimized performance
of diffusion models, and end up with a “UNet” (Ho et al., 2020) architecture with particular width,
attention and residual configurations. The models are learned on 1, 000 ImageNet classes, each with
around 1, 000 training images, and at a variety of resolutions. Our experiments use the model with
resolution 256 × 256. Moreover, these models incorporate a technique known as classifier guidance
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), that leverage classifier gradients to steer the sampling process towards
arbitrary class labels during image generation. The learned models combined with classifier guidance
can be effectively considered as 1, 000 different models. Fig. 4a exhibits select translation samples,
where the source images are from ImageNet validation sets. DDIBs are able to create faithful target
images that maintain much of the original content such as animal poses, complexions and emotions,
while accounting for differences in animal species.

Multi-Domain Translation Given conditional models on the individual domains, DDIBs can be
applied to translate between arbitrary pairs of source-target domains, while requiring no additional
fine-tuning or adaptation. Fig. 4b displays results of translating a common image of a roaring lion
(with class label 291), to various other ImageNet classes. Interestingly, some animals roar, while
others stick their tongues out. DDIBs successfully internalize characteristics of distinct animal
species, and produce closest animal postures in OT distances to the original shouting lion.


                                                                            290: Jaguar


                                                           248: Husky                      220: Sussex Spaniel


                                                                             291: Lion


                                                           292: Tiger                       294: Brown Bear


                                                                            273: Dingo


(a) Conditional ImageNet Translation: Selected trans- (b) Multi-domain translation: Given the center,
lation samples from various ImageNet classes such as 7: source image from class label 291, DDIBs translate
Cock, 94: Hummingbird, 162: Beagle, and 282: Tiger it to other animal species, entirely using only a pre-
Cat.                                                    trained conditional diffusion model.


                           Figure 4: Translation among ImageNet classes.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5    R ELATED W ORKS

Score-based Diffusion Models Originating in thermodynamics (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015),
diffusion models reverse the dynamics of a noising process to create data samples. The reversal
process is understood to implicitly compute scores of the data density at various noise scales, which
reveals connections to score-based methods (Song & Ermon, 2019; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Meng
et al., 2021b). Diffusion models are applicable to multiple modalities: 3D shapes (Zhou et al.,
2021), point cloud (Luo & Hu, 2021), discrete domains (Meng et al., 2022) and function spaces
(Lim et al., 2023). They excel in tasks ranging from image editing and composition (Meng et al.,
2021a), density estimation (Kingma et al., 2021), to image restoration (Kawar et al., 2022). Seminal
works are denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs, Ho et al. (2020)), which parameterized
the ELBO objective with Gaussians and, for the first time, synthesized high-quality images with
diffusion models; ILVR (Choi et al., 2021), which invented a novel conditional method to direct
DDPM generation towards reference images; and denoising diffusion implicit models (DDIMs, Song
et al. (2020a)), which accelerated DDPM inference via non-Markovian processes. DDIMs can be
treated as a first-order numerical solver of a probabilistic ODE, which we use heavily in DDIBs.


Diffusion Models for Image Translation While GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2017;
Zhao et al., 2020) have been widely adopted in image translation tasks, recent works increasingly
leverage diffusion models. For instance, Palette (Saharia et al., 2021) applies a conditional diffusion
model to colorization, inpainting, and restoration. DiffuseIT (Kwon & Ye, 2022) utilizes disentangled
style and content representation, to perform text- and image-guided style transfer. Lastly, UNIT-
DDPM (Sasaki et al., 2021) proposes a novel coupling between domain pairs and trains joint DDPMs
for translation. Unlike their joint training, DDIBs apply separate, pretrained diffusion models and
leverage geometry of the shared space for translation.


Optimal Transport for Translation and Generative Modeling As it pursues cost-optimal plans
to connect image distributions, OT naturally finds applications in image translation. For example,
Korotin et al. (2022) capitalizes on the approximation powers of neural networks to compute OT plans
between image distributions and perform unpaired translation. By contrast, the entropy-regularized
OT variant, Schrödinger Bridges (Section 2), are also commonly used to derive generative models.
For instance, De Bortoli et al. (2021) and Vargas et al. (2021) concurrently proposed new numerical
procedures that approximate the Iterative Proportional Fitting scheme, to solve SBPs for image
generation. Wang et al. (2021) presents a new generative method via entropic interpolation with
an SBP. Chen et al. (2021a) discovers equivalence between the likelihood objectives of SBP and
score-based models, which lays the theoretical foundations behind DDIBs. Their sequel (Liu et al.,
2023) then directly learns the Schrödinger Bridges between image distributions, for applications
in image-to-image tasks such as restoration. While DDIBs were not initially designed to mimic
Schrödinger Bridges, our analysis reveals their true characterization as solutions to degenerate SBPs.


6    C ONCLUSIONS

We present Dual Diffusion Implicit Bridges (DDIBs), a new, simplistic image translation method
that stems from latest progresses in score-based diffusion models, and is theoretically grounded
as Schrödinger Bridges in the image space. DDIBs solve two key problems. First, DDIBs avoid
optimization on a coupled loss specific to the given domain pair only. Second, DDIBs better safeguard
dataset privacy as they no longer require presence of both datasets during training. Powerful pretrained
diffusion models are then integrated into our DDIBs framework, to perform a comprehensive series
of experiments that prove DDIBs’ practical values in domain translation. Our method is limited in its
application to color transfer, as one model is required for each image, which demands significant
compute for mass experiments. Rooted in optimal transport, DDIBs translation mimics the mass-
moving process which may be problematic at times (Appendix C). Future work may remedy these
issues, or extend DDIBs to applications with different dimensions in the source and target domains.
As flowing through the concatenated ODEs is time-consuming, improving the translation speed is
also a promising direction.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Lingxiao Li and Chris Cundy for insightful discussions about the optimal transport
properties of DDIBs. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and
feedback. This research was supported by NSF (#1651565), ARO (W911NF-21-1-0125), ONR
(N00014-23-1-2159), CZ Biohub, and Stanford HAI.

R EFERENCES
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their
  Applications, 12(3):313–326, 1982.
Tianrong Chen, Guan-Horng Liu, and Evangelos A Theodorou. Likelihood training of schr\” odinger
  bridge using forward-backward sdes theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11291, 2021a.
Yongxin Chen, Tryphon T Georgiou, and Michele Pavon. On the relation between optimal transport
  and schrödinger bridges: A stochastic control viewpoint. Journal of Optimization Theory and
  Applications, 169(2):671–691, 2016.
Yongxin Chen, Tryphon T Georgiou, and Michele Pavon. Stochastic control liaisons: Richard
  sinkhorn meets gaspard monge on a schrodinger bridge. SIAM Review, 63(2):249–313, 2021b.
Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Condi-
  tioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02938,
  2021.
Yunjey Choi, Minje Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul Choo. Star-
  gan: Unified generative adversarial networks for multi-domain image-to-image translation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8789–8797,
  2018.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 26:2292–2300, 2013.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schr\” odinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01357,
  2021.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.05233, 2021.
Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  106(496):1602–1614, 2011.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Aditya Grover, Christopher Chute, Rui Shu, Zhangjie Cao, and Stefano Ermon. Alignflow: Cycle
  consistent learning from multiple domains via normalizing flows. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4028–4035, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.11239, 2020.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00364, 2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Michael Elad, Stefano Ermon, and Jiaming Song. Denoising diffusion restoration
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11793, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.00630, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexander Korotin, Daniil Selikhanovych, and Evgeny Burnaev. Neural optimal transport. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.12220, 2022.

Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion-based image translation using disentangled style and
  content representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15264, 2022.

Christian Léonard. A survey of the schr\” odinger problem and some of its connections with optimal
  transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0215, 2013.

Rui Li, Wenming Cao, Qianfen Jiao, Si Wu, and Hau-San Wong. Simplified unsupervised image
  translation for semantic segmentation adaptation. Pattern Recognition, 105:107343, 2020.

Jae Hyun Lim, Nikola B Kovachki, Ricardo Baptista, Christopher Beckham, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli,
  Jean Kossaifi, Vikram Voleti, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Jan Kautz, et al. Score-based diffusion
  models in function space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07400, 2023.

Guan-Horng Liu, Arash Vahdat, De-An Huang, Evangelos A Theodorou, Weili Nie, and Anima
 Anandkumar. Iˆ2 sb: Image-to-image schr\” odinger bridge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05872,
  2023.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A
  fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00927, 2022.

Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud generation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2837–2845, 2021.

Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01073, 2021a.

Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Wenzhe Li, and Stefano Ermon. Estimating high order gradients of
  the data distribution by denoising. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  25359–25369, 2021b.

Chenlin Meng, Kristy Choi, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Concrete score matching: Generalized
  score matching for discrete data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00802, 2022.

Alex Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.09672, 2021.

Marcus Pereira, Ziyi Wang, Ioannis Exarchos, and Evangelos A Theodorou. Neural network
 architectures for stochastic control using the nonlinear feynman-kac lemma. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1902.03986, 2019.

Michaël Perrot, Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, and Amaury Habrard. Mapping estimation for
 discrete optimal transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29:4197–4205,
 2016.

Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris A Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David J
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.05826, 2021.

Hiroshi Sasaki, Chris G Willcocks, and Toby P Breckon. Unit-ddpm: Unpaired image translation
  with denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05358, 2021.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Abhishek Sinha, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. D2c: Diffusion-decoding models
  for few-shot conditional generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 12533–12548, 2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05600, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Charles M Stein. Estimation of the mean of a multivariate normal distribution. The annals of Statistics,
  pp. 1135–1151, 1981.
Francisco Vargas, Pierre Thodoroff, Austen Lamacraft, and Neil Lawrence. Solving schrödinger
  bridges via maximum likelihood. Entropy, 23(9):1134, 2021.
Gefei Wang, Yuling Jiao, Qian Xu, Yang Wang, and Can Yang. Deep generative learning via
  schr\”{o} dinger bridge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10410, 2021.
Wenju Xu, Chengjiang Long, Ruisheng Wang, and Guanghui Wang. Drb-gan: A dynamic res-
 block generative adversarial network for artistic style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6383–6392, 2021.
Qinsheng Zhang and Yongxin Chen. Fast sampling of diffusion models with exponential integrator.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13902, 2022.
Yihao Zhao, Ruihai Wu, and Hao Dong. Unpaired image-to-image translation using adversarial
  consistency loss. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 800–815. Springer, 2020.
Linqi Zhou, Yilun Du, and Jiajun Wu. 3d shape generation and completion through point-voxel
  diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  5826–5835, 2021.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232, 2017.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    I LLUSTRATION : P RIVACY-S ENSITIVE T RANSLATION
                                                        Alice is the owner of the source (tiger) do-
                                                        main, and Bob is the owner of the target (cat)
                                                        domain. Alice intends to translate tiger im-
                                                        ages to cat images, but in a privacy-sensitive
                                                        manner without releasing the source dataset.
                                                        Bob does not wish to make the cat dataset
                                                        public, either.
                                                        Fig. 5 illustrates the process of privacy-
                                                        sensitive domain translation. The process
                                                        contains the following steps, with indexes in
                                                        the figure.

                                                              1. Alice intends to translate tiger im-
                                                                 ages to cat images.
                                                              2. Alice trains a diffusion model with
                                                                 the source tiger images.
                                                              3. Alice uses the pretrained, tiger diffu-
                                                                 sion model to convert a source tiger
                                                                 image to its latent code.
                                                              4. Alice sends the latent code to Bob.
                                                              5. Bob similarly trains a diffusion
                                                                 model on the cat domain.
                      Figure 5                                6. Bob uses the pretrained, cat
                                                                 diffusion model to convert the re-
                                                                 ceived latent code to a cat image.
                                                              7. Bob then sends the translated image
                                                                 back to Alice.

                                                         Clearly, during the translation process, only
the latent code and the translated cat image are transmitted via the public channel, while both source
and target datasets are private to the two parties. This is a significant advantage of DDIBs over
alternate methods, as we enable strong privacy protection of the datasets.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     D ETAILS OF SGM T RAINING AND DDIM ODE S OLVER
B.1   T RAINING S CORE N ETWORKS

While the description in Section 2 is based on continuous SDEs, actual implementations of diffusion
models often sample discrete time steps. Given samples from a data distribution q(x0 ), diffusion
models attempt to learn a model distribution pθ (x0 ) that approximates q(x0 ), and is easy to sample
from. Specifically, diffusion probabilistic models are latent variable models of the form
                        Z                                                T
                                                                            (t)
                                                                        Y
            pθ (x0 ) = pθ (x0:T ) dx1:T , where pθ (x0:T ) = pθ (xT )      pθ (xt−1 |xt )
                                                                             t=1

where x1 , · · · , xT are latent variables in the same sample space as x0 . The parameters θ are trained
to approximate the data distribution q(x0 ), by maximizing a variational lower bound:
          max Eq(x0 ) [log pθ (x0 )] ≤ max Eq(x0 ,x1 ,··· ,xT ) [log pθ (x0:T ) − log q(x1:T |x0 )]
            θ                             θ

where q(x1:T |x0 ) is some inference distribution over the latent variables. It is known that when the
conditional distributions are modeled as Gaussians with trainable mean functions and fixed variances,
the above objective can be simplified to:
                          T
                                                                   √

                                                      (t) √
                         X                                                             2
              L(ϵθ ) :=      Ex0 ∼q(x0 ),ϵt ∼N (0,I) ϵθ ( αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵt ) − ϵt
                                                                                            2
                         t=1

                                              (t)
The resulting noise prediction functions ϵθ , are equivalent to the score networks st,θ mentioned in
Section 2 due to Tweedie’s formula (Stein, 1981; Efron, 2011). For details, we refer the reader to Ho
et al. (2020); Song et al. (2020a).

B.2   DDIM ODE S OLVER
                                           (t)
With a trained noise prediction model ϵθ (x), the DDIM iterate between adjacent variables xt−∆t
and xt , considered in Song et al. (2020a), assumes the following form:
                                            s                r        !
                      xt−∆t         xt         1 − αt−∆t       1 − αt    (t)
                     √        =√ +                        −             ϵθ (xt )
                       αt−∆t         αt          αt−∆t           αt

In our experiments, we implement the above equation between adjacent diffusion steps. The equation
is deterministic, and can be considered as a Euler method over the following ODE:

                                             (t)     x̄(t)
                                  dx̄(t) = ϵθ      √          dσ(t)                            (9)
                                                     σ2 + 1
where we adopt the reparameterization:
                                     s
                                              1 − α(t)              x(t)
                                σ(t) =                 ,   x̄(t) = p
                                                α(t)                 α(t)
                                                               (t)
Importantly, the ODE in Eq. (9) with the optimal model ϵθ (x), has an equivalent probability flow
ODE corresponding to the “Variance-Exploding” SDE in Song et al. (2020b).


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    L IMITATIONS OF O PTIMAL T RANSPORT-BASED T RANSLATION
DDIBs contain deterministic bridges between distributions, and are a form of entropy-regularized
optimal transport. The learned diffusion models can be effectively considered as a digest or summary
of the datasets. While doing translation, they attempt to create images in the target domain, that
are closest in optimal transport distances to the source images. Such OT-based process is both an
advantage and a limitation of our method.
In ImageNet translation, when the source and target datasets are similar, DDIBs are generally able
to identify correct animal postures. For example, we have shouting lions and tigers, because these
animals have similar behaviors that are observed in the datasets and then internalized by DDIBs.
However, in datasets that are less similar (e.g. birds and dogs), DDIBs sometimes fail to produce
translation results that retain the postures precisely. We encountered significantly less such cases in
AFHQ translation, since the dataset is more standardized and homogeneous.
Fig. 6 illustrates the optimal transport mappings among images as well as some failure cases. Clearly,
the translation processes flowing from left to right minimize the Euclidean transportation distances
between images. Some of these translated samples may be classified “failure cases” in actual user
studies. Such are considered both a feature and a limitation of DDIBs.


Figure 6: Optimal transport translation processes in DDIBs. (Leftmost) Source images. (Rightmost)
Translated images.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.2
Proof. The proof proceeds by substituting the values of (zt , ẑt ) = (0, g(t)∇x log pt (x)) into Eq. (6),

                                                       1
                           dx = f (x, t) + g(t) z − g(t)(z + ẑ) dt                                 (10)
                                                       2

                                             1
                              = f (x, t) − g(t)2 ∇x log pt (x) dt                                   (11)
                                             2
This is exactly Eq. (2).


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
E.1   O PTIMAL T RANSPORT IN PAIRED DATASETS

Color Conversion In Fig. 7, a simple examination of the original and segmentation images reveals
significant differences in color configurations. In the Maps dataset, while the real, satellite images are
composed of dark colors, the segmentation images are light-toned. The same observation applies
to other datasets. The shark contrasts in colors intuitively present a large transportation cost, that
probably hinders the progress of DDIBs, as we have demonstrated its relationship to OT in Section 3.
To facilitate the workings of DDIBs, we follow a heuristic to transform the colors of the segmentation
images. Specifically, on a small subset of the train dataset, we run an OT algorithm to compute a
color correspondence that minimizes the color differences in terms of Sinkhorn distances between
the real and segmentation images. The segmentation (target) datasets undergo this color conversion
before they are fed into a diffusion model for training. During evaluation, when we compute MSEs,
the images are converted to the original color space.

Privacy Protection Color conversion requires considering both datasets jointly to compute a
color mapping, and seems to betray the original purpose of DDIBs on protection of dataset privacy.
We comment that the amount of leaked information is minimal: for example, to compute a color
correspondence for the Maps dataset, we sampled only around 1000 pixels from the two datasets, to
summarize the color composition information. DDIBs still conserve privacy at large.


Figure 7: Color Conversion. In the paired translation tasks, we are given the real and segmentation
images. Before training the diffusion models, we first transform the segmentation images to a color
palette that is closer to the real images. While evaluating MSEs, we convert the images back to the
original colors.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2   E XAMPLE -G UIDED C OLOR T RANSFER

We present additional qualitative comparison between DDIBs and common OT methods, in Fig. 8.


                    Figure 8: Full color transfer results on example images.


                                               18
