Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B ETTER WITH L ESS : DATA -ACTIVE P RE - TRAINING OF
G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Recently, pre-training on graph neural networks (GNNs) has become an active re-
         search area and is used to learn transferable knowledge for downstream tasks with
         unlabeled data. The success of graph pre-training models is often attributed to the
         massive amount of input data. In this paper, however, we identify the curse of big
         data phenomenon in graph pre-training: more training samples and graph datasets
         do not necessarily lead to better performance. Motivated by this observation, we
         propose a better-with-less framework for graph pre-training: few, but carefully
         chosen data are fed into a GNN model to enhance pre-training. This novel pre-
         training pipeline is called the data-active graph pre-training (APT) framework,
         and is composed of a graph selector and a pre-training model. The graph se-
         lector chooses the most representative and instructive data points based on the
         inherent properties of graphs as well as the predictive uncertainty. The proposed
         predictive uncertainty, as feedback from the pre-training model, measures the con-
         fidence level of the model to the data. When fed with the chosen data, on the other
         hand, the pre-training model grasps an initial understanding of the new, unseen
         data, and at the same time attempts to remember the knowledge learnt from the
         previous data. Therefore, the integration and interaction between these two com-
         ponents form a unified framework, in which graph pre-training is performed in a
         progressive way. Experiment results show that the proposed APT framework is
         able to obtain an efficient pre-training model with fewer training data and better
         downstream performance.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Pre-training Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) shows the potential to be an attractive and competitive
strategy for learning graph representations without costly labels. However, its transferability is guar-
anteed only if the pre-training datasets come from the same or similar domain as the downstream Hu
et al. (2019; 2020b); You et al. (2020a;b); Hu et al. (2020c); Li et al. (2021); Lu et al. (2021); Sun
et al. (2021). When we have no knowledge of the downstream, an encouraging yet largely unex-
plored research direction is pre-training GNNs on cross-domain data Qiu et al. (2020); Hafidi et al.
(2020). Taking the graphs from multiple domains as the input, graph pre-training is able to learn the
transferable structural patterns in graphs (when some semantic meanings are present), or to obtain
the capability of discriminating these patterns.
With diverse and various cross-domain data, the success of a graph pre-training model is often at-
tributed to the massive amount of unlabeled training data, a well-established fact for pre-training in
computer vision Girshick et al. (2014); Donahue et al. (2014); He et al. (2020) and natural language
processing Mikolov et al. (2013); Devlin et al. (2019). In view of this, contemporary research al-
most has no controversy on the following issue: Is a massive amount of input data really necessary,
or even beneficial, for pre-training GNNs? However, two simple experiments regarding the num-
ber of training samples and graph datasets seem to doubt the positive answer to this question. The
first observation is that scaling pre-training samples does not result in a one-model-fits-all increase
in downstream performance (see the first row of Figure 1). Second, we observe that adding input
graphs (while fixing sample size) does not improve and sometimes even deteriorates the general-
ization of the pre-trained model (see the second row in Figure 1). Furthermore, even if the number
of input graphs (the horizontal coordinate) is fixed, the performance of the model pre-trained on
different combinations of inputs varies dramatically; see the standard deviation in blue. As the first
contribution, we identify the curse of big data phenomenon in graph pre-training: more training
samples and graph datasets do not necessarily lead to better downstream performance.


                                                   1
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           brazil                                 wisconsin                        msrc-21                                  imdb-binary model config.
                                                                                                                                                5 layers


micro F1


                                                                                                           micro F1
                                                                        micro F1
                                       micro F1
                                                                                                                                                4 layers
                                                                                                                                                3 layers
                                                                                                                                               convex hull fit


                    # of samples                       # of samples                      # of samples                 # of samples

           brazil                                 wisconsin                        msrc-21                                  imdb-binary


                                       micro F1
micro F1


                                                                        micro F1


                                                                                                           micro F1
                         std : 3.1                   std :1.5                       std : 1.4                           std :1.4

                                     (all)                            (all)                              (all)                         (all)
                    # of graphs                        # of graphs                        # of graphs                 # of graphs
                              (a) Node classification                                            (b) Graph classification
 Figure 1: Top row: The effect of scaling up sample size (log scale) on the downstream performance based on a
 group of GCCs Qiu et al. (2020) under different configurations (the graphs used for pre-training are kept as all
 eleven pre-training data in Table 3, and the samples are taken from the backbone pre-training model according
 to its sampling strategy). The results for different downstream graphs (and tasks) are presented in separate
 figures. To better show the changing trend, we fit a curve to the best performing models (i.e., the convex hull
 fit as Abnar et al. (2022) does). Bottom row: The effect of scaling up the number of graph datasets on the
 downstream performance based on GCC. For a fixed horizontal coordinate, we run 5 trials. For each trial, we
 randomly choose a combination of input graphs. The shaded area indicates the standard deviation over the 5
 trials. See Appendix D for more observations on other graph pre-training models and detailed settings.

 Therefore, instead of training on massive data, it is more appealing to choose wisely some samples
 and graphs for pre-training. However, without the knowledge of downstream tasks, the difficulty is
 how to design new criteria for selecting input data to the pre-training model. To fill this gap, we
 propose a novel graph selector that is able to provide the most instructive data for the model. The
 criteria in the graph selector include predictive uncertainty and graph properties. Predictive uncer-
 tainty is introduced to measure the level of confidence (or certainty) in the data. On the other hand,
 some graphs are more informative and representative than others, due to their inherent structure. To
 this end, some fundamental properties of graphs also help in the selection process.
 Given the selected input data, we take full advantage of the predictive uncertainty as a proxy for
 measuring the model capability during the training phase. Instead of swallowing data as a whole,
 the pre-training model is encouraged to learn from the data in a progressive way. After learning
 a certain amount of training data, the predictive uncertainty gives feedback on what kind of data
 the model has least knowledge of. Then the pre-training model is able to reinforce itself on highly
 uncertain data in next training iterations.
 Putting together, we propose a data-active graph pre-training (APT) framework, which integrates
 the graph selector and the pre-training model into a unified framework. The two components in the
 framework actively cooperate with each other. The graph selector recognizes the most instructive
 data for the model. Equipped with this intelligent selector, the pre-training model is well-trained and
 in turn provides better guidance for the graph selector.
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In §2 we review the existing works about basic
 graph pre-training framework commonly used for training cross-domain graph data. Then in §3
 we describe in detail the proposed data-active graph pre-training (APT) paradigm. §4 contains
 numerical experiments, which demonstrate the superiority of APT in different downstream tasks,
 especially when the test and training graphs come from different domains. Lastly, we also include
 the applicable scope of our pre-trained model.
  2         BASIC G RAPH P RE - TRAINING F RAMEWORK
 This section reviews the basic framework of cross-domain graph pre-training commonly used in
 related literature. The backbone of our graph pre-training model also follows this framework, and
 uses GCC Qiu et al. (2020) as an instantiation. In principle, GCC can be substituted by any encoder
 suitable for training cross-domain graphs.
 We start with a natural question: What does cross-domain graph pre-training actually learn? Pre-
 vious studies argue that the semantic meaning associated with structural patterns is transferable.
 For example, both in citation networks and social networks, the closed triangle structure ( ) is
 interpreted as a stable relationship, while the open triangle ( ) indicates an unstable relationship.


                                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


When data comes from other domains like molecular networks, the semantic meaning can be quite
different. Nevertheless, we argue that the distinction between different structural patterns is still
transferable. Taking the same example, the closed and open triangles might yield different inter-
pretations in molecular networks (unstable vs. stable in terms of chemical property) from those in
social networks (stable vs. unstable in terms of social relationship), but the distinction between these
two structures remains the same because they indicate opposite (or contrastive) semantic meanings.
Therefore, the cross-domain pre-training either learns representative structural patterns (when se-
mantic meanings are present), or more importantly, obtains the capability of distinguishing these
patterns. This observation in graph pre-training is not only very different from that in other areas
(e.g., computer vision and natural language processing), but may also explain why graph pre-training
is effective, especially when some downstream information is absent.
With the hope to learn the transferable structural patterns or the ability to distinguish them, the cross-
domain graph pre-training model is fed with a collection of input graphs (possibly from different
domains), and the learnt model, denoted by fθ (or simply f if the parameter θ is clear from context),
maps a node to a low-dimensional representation. Unaware of the specific downstream task as well
as task-specific labels, one should design a self-supervised task for the pre-training model. Such
self-supervised information for a node is usually hidden in its neighborhood pattern, and thus the
structure of its ego network is often used as the transferable pattern. Naturally, subgraph instances
sampled from the same ego network Γi are considered similar while those sampled from different
ego networks are rendered dissimilar. Therefore, the pre-training model attempts to capture the sim-
ilarities (and dissimilarities) between subgraph instances, and such a self-supervised task is called
the subgraph instance discrimination task. More specifically, given a subgraph instance ζi from
an ego network Γi centered at node vi as well as its representation xi = f (ζi ), the model f aims
to encourage higher similarity between xi and the representation of another subgraph instance ζi+
sampled from the same ego network. This can be done by minimizing, e.g., the InfoNCE loss Oord
et al. (2018):                                          ⊤    +

                                                 exp xi f (ζi )/τ
                       Li = − log              +
                                                                                 ,                     (1)
                                    exp x⊤                     exp x⊤     ′
                                                         P
                                         i f (ζi )/τ +              i f (ζi )/τ
                                                         ζi′ ∈Ω−
                                                               i

where Ω−
       i is a collection of subgraph instances sampled from different ego networks Γj (j ̸= i),
and τ is a temperature hyper-parameter. Here the inner product is used as a similarity measure
between two instances. One common strategy to sample these subgraph instances is via random
walks on graphs, as used in GCC Qiu et al. (2020), but other sampling methods as well as loss
functions are also valid.
3    DATA -ACTIVE G RAPH P RE - TRAINING
In this section we present the proposed APT framework for cross-domain graph pre-training, and the
overall pipeline is illustrated in Figure 2. The APT framework consists of two major components, a
graph selector and a graph pre-training model. The technical core is the interaction between these
two components: The graph selector feeds suitable data for pre-training, and the graph pre-training
model learns from the carefully chosen data. The feedback of the pre-training model in turn helps
select the needed data tailored to the model.
The rest of this section is organized as follows. We describe the graph selector in § 3.1 and the graph
pre-training model in § 3.2. The overall pre-training and fine-tuning strategy is presented in § 3.3.
3.1 G RAPH SELECTOR
In view of the curse of big data phenomenon, it is more appealing to carefully choose data well suited
for graph pre-training rather than training on a massive amount of data. Conventionally, the criterion
of suitable data, or the contribution of a data point to the model, is defined based on the output
predictions on downstream tasks Goodfellow et al. (2016). In graph pre-training where downstream
information is absent, new selection criteria or guidelines are needed to provide effective instructions
for the model. Here we introduce two kinds of selection criteria, originated from different points of
view, to help select suitable data for pre-training. The predictive uncertainty measures the model’s
understanding of certain data, and thus helps select the least certain data points for the current model.
In addition to the measure of model’s ability, some inherent properties of graphs can also be used to
assess the level of representativeness or informativeness of a given graph.
Predictive uncertainty. The notion of predictive uncertainty can be explained via an illustrative
example, as shown in part (a) of the graph selector component in Figure 2. Consider a query sub-


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 graph pre-training model                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           graph selector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         @                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        provided to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dim2
                                <latexit sha1_base64="nKog68C95ytFaqOen/Vj5mu31lM=">AAACCnicbZDLSsNAFIYnXmu9RV26GS2Cq5JUQd0V3LisYC/QhDKZTtqhk0mYORFK6NqNr+LGhSJufQJ3vo2TNqC2/jDw8Z9zZub8QSK4Bsf5spaWV1bX1ksb5c2t7Z1de2+/peNUUdaksYhVJyCaCS5ZEzgI1kkUI1EgWDsYXef19j1TmsfyDsYJ8yMykDzklICxevaRFypCMy8hCjgRePKDHgwZkEnPrjhVZyq8CG4BFVSo0bM/vX5M04hJoIJo3XWdBPwsv5UKNil7qWYJoSMyYF2DkkRM+9l0lQk+MU4fh7EyRwKeur8nMhJpPY4C0xkRGOr5Wm7+V+umEF76GZdJCkzS2UNhKjDEOM8F97liFMTYAKGKm79iOiQmGzDplU0I7vzKi9CqVd2zau32vFK/KuIooUN0jE6Riy5QHd2gBmoiih7QE3pBr9aj9Wy9We+z1iWrmDlAf2R9fAMUf5sc</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         @✓                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        predictive                                               decision
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  uncertainty                                               boundary


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       query instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      regularization                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +                                        ? with most
                       old                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             for old data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -                                                                  uncertainty
                      data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - - ?


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Combined for graph
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dim1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                + / - similar/dissimilar instance of ?
            …


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    selector
                        w
                      ne ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (a) Predictive uncertainty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          loss for
                        da                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               new data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   network entropy


         input data           graph model                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   forwardprop

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         @                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         average degree

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  @
                                <latexit sha1_base64="nKog68C95ytFaqOen/Vj5mu31lM=">AAACCnicbZDLSsNAFIYnXmu9RV26GS2Cq5JUQd0V3LisYC/QhDKZTtqhk0mYORFK6NqNr+LGhSJufQJ3vo2TNqC2/jDw8Z9zZub8QSK4Bsf5spaWV1bX1ksb5c2t7Z1de2+/peNUUdaksYhVJyCaCS5ZEzgI1kkUI1EgWDsYXef19j1TmsfyDsYJ8yMykDzklICxevaRFypCMy8hCjgRePKDHgwZkEnPrjhVZyq8CG4BFVSo0bM/vX5M04hJoIJo3XWdBPwsv5UKNil7qWYJoSMyYF2DkkRM+9l0lQk+MU4fh7EyRwKeur8nMhJpPY4C0xkRGOr5Wm7+V+umEF76GZdJCkzS2UNhKjDEOM8F97liFMTYAKGKm79iOiQmGzDplU0I7vzKi9CqVd2zau32vFK/KuIooUN0jE6Riy5QHd2gBmoiih7QE3pBr9aj9Wy9We+z1iWrmDlAf2R9fAMUf5sc</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         @✓                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       @✓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       backprop                                                                    degree variance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           í

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="RsMEzc+g1+yzCRXelJDsSQbwe54=">AAACCnicbZDLSsNAFIYn9VbrLerSzWgRXJWkCrosuHFZwV6gCWUynbRDJ5MwcyKU0LUbX8WNC0Xc+gTufBsnbUBt/WHg4z/nzMz5g0RwDY7zZZVWVtfWN8qbla3tnd09e/+greNUUdaisYhVNyCaCS5ZCzgI1k0UI1EgWCcYX+f1zj1TmsfyDiYJ8yMylDzklICx+vaxFypCMy8hCjgRePqDHowYkGnfrjo1Zya8DG4BVVSo2bc/vUFM04hJoIJo3XOdBPwsv5UKNq14qWYJoWMyZD2DkkRM+9lslSk+Nc4Ah7EyRwKeub8nMhJpPYkC0xkRGOnFWm7+V+ulEF75GZdJCkzS+UNhKjDEOM8FD7hiFMTEAKGKm79iOiImGzDpVUwI7uLKy9Cu19zzWv32otpwizjK6AidoDPkokvUQDeoiVqIogf0hF7Qq/VoPVtv1vu8tWQVM4foj6yPbxIXmxQ=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           í


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   scale-free exponent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           í



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   other properties
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               micro F1 on
                                added to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            select                                                                                                               Pearson


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w d242

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rn n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            bm ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            br ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ddazil

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          co nsi8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pu co



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         isc d
          pre-training                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   correlation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    í

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           í

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  í


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1.0 0.0 1.0
              data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The graph and samples                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Graph properties
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              friendly to pre-training

Figure 2: Overview of the proposed data-active graph pre-training paradigm. The graph selector provides the
graph and samples suitable for pre-training, while the graph pre-training model learns from the incoming data
in a progressive way and in turn better guides the selection process. In the graph selector component, Part (a)
provides an illustrating example on the predictive uncertainty, and Part (b) plots the Pearson correlation between
the properties of the input graph and the performance of the pre-trained model (using this graph) on different
unseen test datasets (see Appendix E for other properties that exhibit little/correlation with performance).



graph instance ζi (denote by ? in Figure 2) from the ego network Γi in a graph G. If the pre-training
model cannot tell its similar instance ζi+ (denoted by + ) from its dissimilar instance ζi− ∈ Ω−   i (de-
noted by   ), we say that the current model is uncertain about the query instance ζi . Therefore, the
contrastive loss function in Eq. (1) comes in handy as a natural measure for the predictive uncer-
tainty of the instance ζi : ϕuncertain (ζi ) = Li . Accordingly, the predictive uncertainty of a graph G
                                                                                     PM
(i.e., the graph-level predictive uncertainty) is defined as ϕuncertain (G) = (1/M ) i=1 Li , where M
is the number of subgraph instances queried in this graph.
The proposed selection process is different from strategies used in curriculum learning Bengio et al.
(2009). Predictive uncertainty encourages the model to learn more difficult (uncertain) graphs and
samples in the first place, while in curriculum learning, the easiest samples are fed first. The choice
of difficult-first order is intuitive in our case; see also Appendix G for empirical evidence.
Graph properties. As we see above, the predictive uncertainty measures the model’s ability to
distinguish (or identify) a given graph (or subgraph instance). However, predictive uncertainty is
sometimes misleading, especially when the chosen graph (or subgraph) happens to be an outlier of
the entire data collection. Hence learning solely from the most uncertain data might not improve
the overall performance, or even worse, lead to overfitting. The inherent properties of the graph
turn out to be equivalently important as a selection criterion for graph pre-training. Intuitively, it
is preferable to choose those graphs that are good by themselves, those with a better structure, or
those containing more information. So here we introduce five inherent properties of graphs (i.e.,
network entropy, density, average degree, degree variance and scale-free exponent) to help select
better data points for pre-training. All these properties exhibit a strong correlation with downstream
performance, which is empirically verified and presented in part (b) of the graph selector component
in Figure 2. The choice of these properties also has an intuitive explanation, and here we discuss the
intuition behind the network entropy as an example.
The use of network entropy is inspired from the sampling methods used in most cross-domain graph
pre-training models (see e.g., Qiu et al. (2020); Hafidi et al. (2020)): Random walks started at a node
are employed to construct a subgraph instance as the model input. Random walks can also be used
to compute the amount of information contained in a graph. Especially, the amount of information
contained in the move from node vi to node vj is − log Pij Cover & Thomas (1999), where P is
the transition matrix. Thus the network entropy of a connected graph G = (V, E) can be defined as
the expected information of individual transitions over the random walk process Burda et al. (2009):

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                   informativeness
                                                                                   Informativeness
                                  X                                                less       more
   ϕentropy = ⟨− log P ⟩P = −           πi Pij log Pij ,   (2)
                                   ij


                                                                 network entropy
where π is the stationary distribution of a random
walk and ⟨·⟩P denotes the expectation of a random
variable according to P . Network entropy (2) is
in general difficult to calculate, but for a connected
                                                                                                                           common structural properties
unweighted graph, Pij = 1/di , π = (1/2|E|)d                                                                                 average degree
(where di is the degree of node vi ∈ V and d =                                                                                density
                                                                                                                              degree variance
(d1 , d2 , . . .) is the degree vector). Then the network                                                                     negative scale-free exponent
entropy (2) reduces to
                                                                                          normalized value of structural properties
                              N                                             (i.e., average degree, density, degree variance or negative scale-free exponent)
                          1 X
             ϕentropy =          di log di ,               (3)
                        2|E| i=1                                  Figure 3: The illustrative graphs (from bottom left
                                                                  to top right) with increasing network entropy and
where N = |V | is the total number of nodes in G. the other four graph properties.
In this case, the network entropy of a graph depends
solely on its degree distribution, and is straightforward to compute.
Although the definition of network entropy originates from random walks on graphs, it is still useful
in graph pre-training even when the sampling of subgraph instances does not depend on random
walks. Here we provide another intuitive explanation of network entropy from the coding theory.
Network entropy can be viewed as the entropy rate of a random walk, and it is known that the en-
tropy rate is the expected number of bits per symbol required to describe a stochastic process Cover
& Thomas (1999). Similarly, the network entropy can be interpreted as the expected number of
“words” needed to describe the graph. Thus intuitively, the larger the network entropy is, the more
information the graph contains.
As a final remark on network entropy, the connectivity assumption does not limit the usefulness of
Eq. (3) in our case. For disconnected input graphs, we can simply compute the network entropy of
the largest connected component, since for most real-world networks, the largest connected com-
ponent contains most of the information Easley & Kleinberg (2010). Alternatively, we can also
take some of the largest connected components from the graph and treat them separately as several
connected graphs.
Furthermore, the other four graph properties, i.e., density, average degree, degree variance and scale-
free exponent, are closely related to the network entropy. Figure 3 presents a clear correlation be-
tween the network entropy and the other four graph properties, as well as provides some illustrative
graphs. (These example graphs are generated by the configuration model proposed in Newman
(2003), and Appendix E contains more results of real-world networks.) Intuitively, graphs with
higher network entropy contain a larger amount of information, and so are graphs with larger density,
higher average degree, higher degree variance, or a smaller scale-free exponent. The connections
between all five graph properties can also be theoretically justified and the motivations of choosing
these properties can be found in Appendix A. The detailed empirical justification of these properties
and the pre-training performance in included in Appendix E.
Time-adaptive selection strategy. The proposed predictive uncertainty and the five graph proper-
ties together act as a powerful indicator of a graph’s goodness. Thus the selection of graph can be
formulated as the following optimization problem:
        maximize J (G) = (1 − γt )ϕ̂uncertain + γt MEAN(ϕ̂entropy , ϕ̂density , ϕ̂avg deg , ϕ̂deg var , -ϕ̂α ),                                        (4)

where the optimization variable is the graph G to be selected, ϕ̂uncertain , ϕ̂entropy , ϕ̂density , ϕ̂avg deg ,
ϕ̂deg var and ϕ̂α are the z-score normalized value of graph-level predictive uncertainty, network en-
tropy, density, average degree, degree variance and scale-free exponent of graph G respectively,
γt ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter to trade off the predictive uncertainty and the graph properties, and t is the
iteration counter. Note that the pre-training model learns nothing at the beginning, so we initialize
γ0 = 0. The balance between the predictive uncertainty and the inherent graph properties ensures
that the selected graph is a good supplement to the current pre-training model as well as an effective
representative for the entire data distribution.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We shall also note that, at the beginning of the pre-training, the outputs of the model are not accurate
enough to guide data selection, so the parameter γt should be set smaller so that the graph properties
play a leading role. As the training phase proceeds, the graph selector gradually pays more attention
to the feedback ϕuncertain from the model via a larger value of γt . Therefore, the parameter γt is
called the time-adaptive parameter, and is set to be a random variable depending on time t. In this
work, we take γt from a Beta distribution γt ∼ Beta(1, βt ), where βt decreases over time (training
iterations).
Finally, after a graph is selected, we can further choose subgraph instances with high predictive
uncertainty for training, rather than feed the model with random subgraph samples.
Connections and differences with hard example mining. Hard example mining learns from the
examples that contribute the most to model training, which has been widely applied in computer
vision, natural language processing and recommender system Simo-Serra et al. (2014); Loshchilov
& Hutter (2015); Shrivastava et al. (2016); Krishnan et al. (2020). Our usage of predictive un-
certainty for choosing graphs is conceptually similar to hard example mining. However, existing
approaches for hard sample mining can not be directly applied to our setting with the following two
requirements. (1) The chosen instances should follow a joint distribution that reflects the topologi-
cal structures of real-world graphs. This is met by our use of graph-level predictive uncertainty and
graph properties. (2) The chosen set of graphs should include informative and sufficiently diverse
instances. This goal is achieved by the data-active graph pre-training framework, which enables
the interaction between the graph selector and pre-training model. Another line of works in active
learning introduce the measure of uncertainty by querying the labels of samples that current model is
least certain w.r.t classification prediction Cai et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2021a); Yang et al. (2015);
Zhu et al. (2008), which cannot be adapted in pre-training with unlabeled data.
3.2   G RAPH PRE - TRAINING MODEL
The graph pre-training model takes the input graphs and samples one by one and enhances itself in
a progressive manner. However, such a sequential training process does not guarantee the model
to remember all the contributions of previous input data. As shown in the orange curve in Fig-
ure 4, the previously learnt graph exhibits a larger predictive uncertainty as the training phase
proceeds. The empirical result indicates that the knowledge or information contained in previ-
ous input data will be forgotten or covered by newly incoming data. This phenomenon, called
catastrophic forgetting Kirkpatrick et al. (2017), was first noticed in continual learning and is also
identified here. Intuitively, when the training data is taken in a one-by-one manner, the learnt
parameters will cater to the newly incoming data compared with the old, previous data points.
One remedy for this issue is adding a proximal term to the ob-
                                                                        predictive uncertainty


jective. The additional proximal term (i.e., the regularization)      6.5
guarantees the proximity between the new parameters and the
                                                                      6.0
model parameters learnt from previous graph. Therefore, the
final loss function for our pre-training model in APT is              5.5

                               k X λj                                                            5.0
               X               X              (j)        (j) 2                                               without proximal term
      L(θ) =        Li (θ) +                 Fm   ∥θm − θm  ∥ ,   (5)                                        with proximal term (L2)
                                         2                                                       4.5
                i              j=k−1 m
                                                                                                   50   55    60    65   70    75      80   85   90

where Li is given in Eq. (1), the summation in the first term                    training epoch
is taken over the subgraph instances sampled from the new in-
put graph, k is the number of previously learnt graphs, θ(j) Figure 4: Predictive uncertainty of a
is the model parameters learnt from the first j graphs, and learnt graph (“michigan”) versus train-
                                                                   ing epoch.
λj ’s are the trade-off parameters between the knowledge learnt
from new data and that from previous data. Typically, the trade-off parameters {λj } form a non-
decreasing sequence, i.e., λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ · · · ≤ λk . Inspired from the Elastic weight consolidation
(EWC) algorithm Kirkpatrick et al. (2017), we take F (j) as the Fisher information matrix of θ(j) ,
  (j)
Fm is the diagonal element of F (j) and m labels each parameter. When F is set as an identity
matrix, the second term degenerates to the L2 regularization (serves as one of our variants). Note
that the proximal term in Eq. (5) is absent when the first input graph is introduced to the model.
3.3 T RAINING AND FINE - TUNING
Integrating the graph selector and the pre-training model forms the entire APT framework, and the
overall algorithm is presented in Appendix B. After the training phase, the APT framework returns a


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


pre-trained GNN model, and then the pre-trained model can be applied to various downstream tasks
from a wide spectrum of domains. In the so-called freezing mode, the pre-trained model outputted
from APT is directly applied to downstream tasks, without any changes in parameters. Alternatively,
the fine-tuning mode uses the pre-trained graph encoder as initialization, and offers the flexibility of
training the graph encoder and the downstream classifier together in an end-to-end manner.
4 E XPERIMENTS
In the experiments, we pre-train our model on the incoming data provided by the graph selector, and
then evaluate the transferability of our pre-trained model on multiple unseen graphs from different
domains in the node classification and graph classification task. Lastly, we include the applicable
scope of our pre-trained model. Additional experiments can be found in Appendix G, including
analysis on training time, sensitivity analysis of hyper-parameters, ablation study on various combi-
nations of graph properties.
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Datasets. The datasets for pre-training and testing, and their detailed statistics are listed in Ap-
pendix C. The datasets for pre-training are collected from different domains, including social net-
works, citation networks, and movie collaboration networks. We then evaluate the pre-trained mod-
els on 13 real-world graphs, including large-scale datasets with millions of edges from Open Graph
Benchmark Hu et al. (2020a). Some of them are from the similar domain as pre-training (like citation
networks), while most of them are from a totally unseen domains (like web networks, transportation
networks, protein networks and others).
Baselines. We comprehensively evaluate our model against the following baselines for node clas-
sification and graph classification tasks, respectively. For node classification tasks, ProNE Zhang
et al. (2019), DeepWalk Perozzi et al. (2014), struc2vec Ribeiro et al. (2017), DGI Velickovic et al.
(2019), GAE Kipf et al. (2016), and GraphSAGE Hamilton et al. (2017) are used as baselines, and
then the learned representations are fed into the logistic regression for node classification (as most
of baselines did). As for graph classification tasks, we take graph2vec Narayanan et al. (2017), In-
foGraph Sun et al. (2020), DGCNN Zhang et al. (2018) and GIN Xu et al. (2019) as baselines, and
then feed the representations into SVM as the classifier (as most of baselines did). For both tasks, we
also compare our model with (1) Random, where random vectors are generated as representations;
(2) GraphCL You et al. (2020a), a GNN pre-training scheme based on contrastive learning with aug-
mentations; (3) JOAO You et al. (2021), a GNN pre-training scheme that can automatically select
data augmentations; (4) GCC Qiu et al. (2020), the state-of-the-art cross-domain graph pre-training
model (the version of our model without data selection scheme, which trains on all pre-training
data). GCC, GraphCL and JOAO are trained on the entire collected input data, and the suffix (rand,
fine-tune) indicates that the model is trained from scratch. We also include 4 variants of our model:
(1) APT-G, which removes the criteria of graph properties in the graph selector; (2) APT-P, which
removes the criterion of predictive uncertainty in the graph selector; (3) APT-R, which removes the
regularization w.r.t old knowledge in Eq. (5); (4) APT-L2, which degenerates the second term in
Eq. (5) to the L2 regularization.
Experimental settings. In the training phase, we iteratively select graphs for pre-training until the
predictive uncertainty of any candidate graph is below 3.5. For each selected graph, we choose those
samples with predictive uncertainty higher than 3. We include M = 500 query subgraph instances
in a graph when measuring the predictive uncertainty of this graph. The time-adaptive parameter γt
in Eq. (4) is drawn from γt ∼ Beta (1, βt ), where βt = 3 − 0.995t . We set the trade-off parameter
λj = 10 for all j for APT-L2, and λj = 500 for APT. The total iteration number is 100. We adopt
GCC as the backbone pre-training model with their default hyper-parameters. Note that we can also
use other pre-training models like GraphCL as the backbone, but we do not report them due to the
non-ideal performance of GraphCL. In the fine-tuning phase, we select logistic regression or SVM
as the downstream classifier and adopt the same setting as GCC. See Appendix F for more details.
4.2   E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Node classification. Table 1 presents the micro F1 score of different methods over 10 unseen
graphs from a wide spectrum of domain for node classification task. We can observe our model
beats the graph pre-training competitor by an average of 9.94% and 17.83% under freezing and
fine-tuning mode respectively. This suggests that instead of pre-training on all the collected graphs
(like GCC), it is better to choose a part of graphs better suited for pre-training (like our model APT).
Moreover, compared with the traditional models without pre-training, the performance gain of our


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Micro F1 scores of different models in the node classification task. The column “A.R.” reports the
average rank of each model. Asterisk (∗) denotes the best result on each dataset, and bold numbers denote the
best result among graph pre-training models in the freezing or fine-tuning setting. The notation “/” means out
of memory or no convergence for more than three days.
         Dataset
                            brazil      dd242         dd68       dd687      wisconsin     cornell       cora       pubmed      ogbarxiv   ogbproteins A.R.
Method
Random                    32.16(13.65) 6.71(2.44) 8.29(4.35) 5.98(2.70) 26.79(8.59) 39.77(7.26) 26.80(1.62) 38.85(0.76) 11.89(4.66) 52.69(5.94) 13.2
ProNE                     50.24(11.56) 10.04(2.56) 7.73(3.11) 3.88(1.66) 44.67(7.49) 47.32(12.14) 80.76(2.92)∗ 78.80(0.98)∗ 65.96(0.06)∗ 76.28(0.34)∗ 7.5
DeepWalk                  43.16(16.78) 8.11(1.45) 6.72(3.04) 6.17(2.18) 39.61(9.11) 47.67(8.30) 49.85(9.26) 44.99(10.89) 16.04 (2.98) 64.74(0.49) 8.7
struc2vec                 25.54(11.74) 13.71(2.66) 10.30(3.23) 7.98(2.74) 45.39(7.36) 38.39(9.18) 36.01(2.41) 44.45(0.78)           /           /      10.6
DGI                        56.44(7.79) 14.35(0.44) 13.57(0.44) 11.04(1.93) 49.46(5.46) 49.85(9.26) 30.02(0.44) 42.39(0.84) 12.93(7.67) 55.98(0.33) 6.6
GAE                       57.88(10.68) 14.09(1.52) 13.43(0.96) 10.25(2.63) 45.78(4.18) 49.26(5.24) 30.10(0.31) 40.14(0.68)          /           /       8.5
GraphSAGE                  67.93(9.28) 14.33(0.37) 13.55(0.70) 10.39(0.78) 47.03(1.98) 49.20(1.46) 35.93(1.76) 39.94(0.02)          /           /      7.1
GraphCL (freeze)           50.71(5.00) 9.53(2.50) 9.36(3.63) 6.03(1.86) 38.85(10.80) 41.05(5.67) 16.95(2.39) 41.07(1.16)            /           /      12.2
JOAO (freeze)              71.22(7.21) 7.98(2.90) 12.36(2.59) 5.34(1.43) 42.69(8.15) 43.16(5.67) 18.13(2.82) 41.05(0.87)            /           /      10.9
GCC (freeze)               67.47(4.09) 15.83(0.80) 11.95(1.13) 9.61(0.94) 52.57(1.69) 46.87(1.73) 35.47(0.51) 46.40(0.18) 14.56(7.60) 59.15(0.35) 7.0
APT-G (freeze)             68.69(3.42) 17.21(1.13) 11.98(0.75) 9.54(1.29) 54.45(1.90) 46.53(1.59) 34.89(0.25) 46.49(0.22) 12.32(7.71) 60.38(0.41) 6.3
APT-P (freeze)             66.55(2.35) 16.58(0.97) 12.48(0.85) 10.33(0.83) 51.90(1.64) 47.33(2.31) 35.63(0.56) 46.16(0.12) 12.86(7.54) 60.32(0.32) 6.2
APT-R (freeze)             68.12(3.07) 16.72(0.72) 12.42(1.24) 11.05(0.88) 54.48(1.77) 46.80(1.08) 34.93(0.36) 46.02(0.11) 18.79(5.87) 62.18(0.46) 5.0
APT-L2 (freeze)           69.82(2.32) 16.79(0.88) 12.68(0.81) 10.34(1.12) 55.11(1.74) 48.76(2.20) 34.27(0.43) 46.21(0.15) 19.64(6.46) 60.23(0.37) 4.4
APT (freeze)              73.39(2.55) 16.57(0.94) 12.08(0.89) 10.35(1.24) 53.38(1.19) 47.37(1.29) 36.69(0.49) 46.88(0.21) 22.04(0.29) 62.29(0.55) 3.8
GraphCL (rand, fine-tune) 64.43(14.95) 15.04(0.85) 14.69(2.48) 10.99(0.58) 63.85(2.18) 44.21(10.58) 30.45(0.37) 40.73(0.66)         /           /      8.3
JOAO (rand, fine-tune)     72.14(6.74) 10.93(2.85) 8.08(2.15) 7.40(3.48) 45.38(13.30) 45.26(10.31) 29.93(2.84) 42.01(0.68)          /           /      9.6
GCC (rand, fine-tune)      58.51(3.07) 15.98(1.05) 13.16(1.06) 9.74(0.95) 53.85(2.58) 50.95(2.26) 43.70(0.52) 49.72(0.17) 18.61(1.88) 59.12(0.35) 7.6
GraphCL (fine-tune)       73.57(10.33) 15.35(0.99) 13.51(2.57) 10.66(1.04) 63.85(4.42) 51.05(2.41) 30.81(0.36) 42.91(0.91)          /           /      7.5
JOAO (fine-tune)           75.00(5.76) 10.54(3.07) 7.56(1.94) 8.77(2.39) 50.0(12.28) 42.11(10.26) 29.34(3.04) 42.21(0.88)           /           /       9.5
GCC (fine-tune)            74.46(3.05) 19.32(0.80) 13.87(1.13) 10.37(1.06) 59.47(1.49) 48.32(2.42) 43.34(0.38) 50.87(0.19) 18.62(1.92) 60.08(0.56) 6.4
APT-G (fine-tune)          77.60(1.48) 25.45(0.60)∗ 17.78(1.14) 11.27(0.76) 66.09(2.28) 53.02(1.51) 45.63(0.66) 50.81(0.18) 27.33(4.80) 60.02(0.32) 3.8
APT-P (fine-tune)          78.99(2.44) 25.19(0.87) 16.40(1.22) 11.69(1.19) 64.24(1.90) 50.05(1.39) 45.53(0.30) 50.66(0.18) 27.20(4.80) 59.86(0.32) 4.8
APT-R (fine-tune)          79.14(1.97) 24.96(0.57) 17.43(1.05) 11.29(1.04) 66.28(1.94) 53.56(2.28)∗ 46.02(0.83) 51.00(0.21) 18.41(1.84) 60.10(0.38) 3.4
APT-L2 (fine-tune)         78.75(1.63) 24.62(0.90) 17.83(1.35)∗ 12.26(0.78)∗ 67.04(1.50)∗ 52.94(1.95) 47.48(0.46) 51.25(0.21) 27.40(4.97) 60.85(0.46) 2.6
APT (fine-tune)           79.67(2.30)∗ 28.62(0.55)∗ 20.30(1.13)∗ 12.80(1.54)∗ 67.08(1.75)∗ 52.15(2.25) 47.51(0.62) 51.30(0.16) 27.40(4.87) 61.64(0.35) 1.3


model is attributed to the transferable knowledge learned by pre-training strategies. We also find that
some proximity-based models like ProNE enforce neighboring nodes share similar representations,
thus they perform well on graphs with strong homophily rather than weak homophily.
Graph classification.           The micro F1 score Table 2: Micro F1 of different models in the graph
on unseen test data in the graph classification classification.
task is summarized in Table 2. Especially, our                   Method
                                                                         Dataset
                                                                                           imdb-binary       dd       msrc-21 A.R.
model is 7.2% and 1.3% on average better than                    Random                     49.30(4.82) 52.72(4.34) 4.49(2.14) 11
the graph pre-training backbone model under                      graph2vec                  56.20(5.33) 59.16(3.47) 8.22(3.67) 7.7
                                                                 InfoGraph                  66.58(0.63) 58.66(0.23) 6.01(0.59) 7.7
freezing and fine-tuning mode, respectively. In-                 GraphCL (freeze)           55.10(3.18) 57.82(4.71) 5.44(2.77) 9.3
                                                                 JOAO (freeze)              63.90(3.48) 55.97(3.61) 5.09(2.65) 9.3
terestingly, we find that the variants of APT per-               GCC (freeze)               73.09(0.55) 75.16(0.53) 11.61(1.33) 5.3
form well under graph classification, indicating                 APT-G (freeze)             73.10(0.39) 75.24(0.42) 12.81(0.74) 4.3
                                                                 APT-P (freeze)             72.83(0.81) 76.38(0.32) 13.30(0.57) 3.0
that we can apply a version with simpler archi-                  APT-R (freeze)            73.98(0.21) 75.32(0.34) 12.90(0.57) 3.0
tecture in practice yet achieve good results.                    APT-L2  (freeze)
                                                                 APT (freeze)
                                                                                            73.54(0.40) 75.81(0.30) 13.16(0.77) 2.3
                                                                                            73.00(0.50) 75.83(0.31) 13.81(1.06) 3.0
Analysis of the selected graphs.                        The      DGCNN                      71.00(4.69) 58.63(4.46) 6.01(0.59) 11.3
                                                                 GIN                        72.00(2.41) 77.61(1.47)∗ 10.54(5.08) 6.0
data sequentially selected via our graph                         GraphCL (rand, fine-tune) 63.60(3.61) 58.15(4.60) 8.25(2.94) 12.7
selector are uillinois, soc-sign0811, msu,                       JOAO (rand, fine-tune)
                                                                 GCC (rand, fine-tune)
                                                                                            67.70(3.35) 62.10(4.31) 11.40(3.06) 10.0
                                                                                            75.80(1.37) 74.26(0.59) 17.18(1.43) 7.3
michigan, wiki-vote, soc-sign0902 and dblp.                      GraphCL (fine-tune)        66.90(4.39) 65.55(5.14) 8.77(2.60) 10.7
                                                                 JOAO (fine-tune)           68.50(3.61) 62.61(4.99) 10.18(1.72) 10.0
To further analyze why these graphs are                          GCC (fine-tune)            76.19(0.90) 75.32(1.77) 24.90(1.65) 4.7
chosen, we present their detailed struc-                         APT-G (fine-tune)          76.29(0.89) 75.46(0.77) 21.94(0.73) 4.7
                                                                 APT-P (fine-tune)         76.70(1.01)∗ 75.34(0.88) 24.32(1.22) 3.7
tural properties in Table 4 in the Appendix                      APT-R (fine-tune)          76.60(1.02) 75.64(0.70) 24.09(2.12) 3.3
C. We first observe that uillinois, michi-                       APT-L2 (fine-tune)         75.93(0.84) 75.58(1.06) 25.58(1.57)∗ 3.7
                                                                 APT (fine-tune)            76.27(1.20) 75.69(1.42) 24.41(1.82) 3.0
gan and msu have the largest value of
MEAN(ϕ̂entropy , ϕ̂density , ϕ̂avg deg , ϕ̂deg var , -ϕ̂α ), while dblp has the smallest. This shows that both
criteria, the graph properties and the predictive uncertainty, play an important role in data selection.
Moreover, it is also interesting to see that wiki-vote is the smallest graph among all the pre-training
graphs, but it still contributes to the performance. This observation again verifies the curse of big
data phenomenon in graph pre-training.
4.3 D ISCUSSION : SCOPE OF APPLICATION
The transferability of the pre-trained model comes from the learnt representative structural patterns
and the ability to distinguish these patterns (as discussed in §2). Therefore, our pre-training model
is more suitable for the datasets where the target (e.g., labels) is correlated with subgraph patterns or
structural properties (e.g., motifs, triangles, betweenness, stars). For example, for node classification
on heterophilous graphs (e.g., winconsin, cornell), our model performs very well because in these
graphs, nodes with the same label are not directly connected, but share similar structural properties
and behavior (or role, position). On the contrary, graphs with strong homophily (like cora, pubmed,
ogbarxiv and ogbproteins) may not benefit too much from our models. Similar observation can


                                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


also be made on graph classification: our model could also benefit the graphs whose label has a
strong relationship with their structure, like molecular, chemical, and protein networks (e.g., dd in
our experiments) Vishwanathan et al. (2010); Gardiner et al. (2000).
5   R ELATED W ORKS
Pre-training in CV and NLP. Initially, the CV community benefits from the models like Vi-
sion Transformers Liu et al. (2021), MLP-mixers Tolstikhin et al. (2021) and ResNets He et al.
(2016), which are supervised pre-trained on large-scale image data. To take full advantage of mas-
sive unlabeled data, NLP community adapts self-supervised learning models like Transformer-based
encoder Vaswani et al. (2017); Radford & Narasimhan (2018); Devlin et al. (2019) for language pre-
training. When pre-training in CV and NLP, researchers find that scaling up the pre-training data
size would results in a better or saturating performance in downstream Tan & Le (2019); Kaplan
et al. (2020); El-Nouby et al. (2021); Abnar et al. (2022); Raffel et al. (2020). However, this is not
true in graph pre-training. In this paper we argue that adding input graphs or pre-training samples
does not necessarily improve, but sometimes even deteriorates the downstream performance.
In view of the above phenomenon in CV and NLP pre-training, data selection is not an active re-
search direction. The only related research we notice focus on domain-specific pre-training models,
which select pre-training data that is most similar to the downstream domain Cui et al. (2018); Belt-
agy et al. (2019); Dai et al. (2019; 2020); Yan et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2020); Chakraborty et al.
(2022). The assumption on the knowledge of downstream domain is different from the across-
domain graph pre-training in our paper, and thus data selection in CV/NLP pre-training is not that
relevant to the current work.
Graph pre-training. Taking inspiration from the pre-training in CV and NLP, recent efforts have
shed the light on pre-training GNNs. Initially, some unsupervised graph representation learning
can be used for graph pre-training Tang et al. (2015); He et al. (2016); Grover & Leskovec (2016);
Narayanan et al. (2017); Ribeiro et al. (2017); Donnat et al. (2018); Zhang et al. (2019); Hamilton
et al. (2017). They are designed based on neighborhood similarity assumption, thus cannot general-
ize to unseen nodes and graphs. Later, a line of graph self-supervised learning can be also treated as
graph pre-training, which are categorized into two folds: graph generative models and contrastive
models. Graph generative models capture the universal graph patterns by recovering certain parts
of input graph (e.g., masked structure or attributes) Kipf et al. (2016); Wang et al. (2017); Hu et al.
(2020c); Cui et al. (2020); Hou et al. (2022). These works rely on specific domain knowledge,
for example the node/edge/attribute type should be the same, which makes them difficult to trans-
fer across different types of graphs.ƒ On the other hand, graph contrastive models maximize the
agreement between positive pairs and minimize that between negative pairs Velickovic et al. (2019);
Hu et al. (2020b); You et al. (2020a); Zhu et al. (2020); Hassani & Khasahmadi (2020); Sun et al.
(2020); Li et al. (2021); Lu et al. (2021); Sun et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2021b); Xu et al. (2021); Zhu
et al. (2021a); Lee et al. (2022); Zeng & Xie (2021); Zhang et al. (2021b); Han et al. (2022). One
of the technical cores is to design appropriate data augmentation like attribute masking, edge pertur-
bation, node dropping, diffusion, etc., which either performed on node attributes or the whole graph
structure. So they only achieve transferability in graphs from similar (or the same) domains, or the
downstream task is restricted to graph classification. With the purpose of learning transferable pat-
terns across different domains, some works take subgraph sampling as augmentation, such that the
transferable (sampled) subgraph patterns can be captured during pre-training Qiu et al. (2020); You
et al. (2020a; 2021). However, these existing works only focus on how to design the pre-training
model, rather than how to select data for pre-training. Our paper first points out the necessity of
selecting data, and fills the gap of the data selection strategy in graph pre-training.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we observe that big data is not a necessity for pre-training GNNs. This motivates us to
wisely choose some suitable graphs and samples for pre-training rather than training on a massive
amount of data. Without any knowledge of the downstream tasks, we propose a novel graph selector
to provide the most instructive data for the model. The pre-training model is then encouraged to
learn from the data in a progressive way and reinforce itself on newly selected data. We integrate
the graph selector and the graph pre-training model in a unified framework, and form a data-active
graph pre-training (APT) paradigm. The two components in APT are able to mutually boost the
capability of each other. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed APT framework can
enhance model capability with a fewer number of input data.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We provide an open-source implementation of our model APT at https://github.com/
anonymous-APT-ai/Anonymous-APT-code. Hyperparameters necessary for reproducing
the experiments can be found in §4.1, Appendix D and Appendix F. Users can run APT on their
own datasets.

8   ETHICS STATEMENT
This paper empirically identifies the curse of big data phenomenon in graph pre-training, and devel-
ops a novel data-active graph pre-training framework. All the experiments are conducted on publicly
available datasets for reproducibility purposes. Overall, this work inherits some of the risks of the
existing works implementing these pre-existing datasets, and the risks are not amplified by the work.
Therefore, this present paper likely does not introduce any new ethical or future social concerns.

R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar, Mostafa Dehghani, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring the limits of
  large scale pre-training. In ICLR, 2022.
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. Scibert: A pretrained language model for scientific text. In
   EMNLP-IJCNLP, pp. 3615–3620, 2019.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  ICML, pp. 41–48, 2009.
Zdzislaw Burda, Jarek Duda, Jean-Marc Luck, and Bartek Waclaw. Localization of the maximal
  entropy random walk. Physical review letters, 102(16):160602, 2009.
Hongyun Cai, Vincent W Zheng, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Active learning for graph embed-
  ding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05085, 2017.
Shuvam Chakraborty, Burak Uzkent, Kumar Ayush, Kumar Tanmay, Evan Sheehan, and Stefano
  Ermon. Efficient conditional pre-training for transfer learning. In CVPR, pp. 4241–4250, 2022.
Thomas M Cover and Joy A Thomas. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Ganqu Cui, Jie Zhou, Cheng Yang, and Zhiyuan Liu. Adaptive graph encoder for attributed graph
  embedding. KDD, 2020.
Yin Cui, Yang Song, Chen Sun, Andrew Howard, and Serge J Belongie. Large scale fine-grained
  categorization and domain-specific transfer learning. In CVPR, pp. 4109–4118, 2018.
Xiang Dai, Sarvnaz Karimi, Ben Hachey, and Cecile Paris. Using similarity measures to select
  pretraining data for ner. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 1460–1470, 2019.
Xiang Dai, Sarvnaz Karimi, Ben Hachey, and Cecile Paris. Cost-effective selection of pretraining
  data: A case study of pretraining bert on social media. In EMNLP (Findings), pp. 1675–1681,
  2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Eric Tzeng, and Trevor
   Darrell. Decaf: A deep convolutional activation feature for generic visual recognition. In ICML,
   pp. 647–655, 2014.
Claire Donnat, Marinka Zitnik, David Hallac, and Jure Leskovec. Learning structural node embed-
  dings via diffusion wavelets. In SIGKDD, pp. 1320–1329, 2018.
David Easley and Jon Kleinberg. Networks, crowds, and markets: Reasoning about a highly con-
  nected world. Cambridge university press, 2010.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Gautier Izacard, Hugo Touvron, Ivan Laptev, Hervé Jegou, and Edouard
  Grave. Are large-scale datasets necessary for self-supervised pre-training? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.10740, 2021.
Eleanor J Gardiner, Peter Willett, and Peter J Artymiuk. Graph-theoretic techniques for macro-
  molecular docking. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences, 40(2):273–279,
  2000.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accu-
  rate object detection and semantic segmentation. In CVPR, pp. 580–587, 2014.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In SIGKDD,
  pp. 855–864, 2016.
Hakim Hafidi, Mounir Ghogho, Philippe Ciblat, and Ananthram Swami. Graphcl: Contrastive self-
  supervised learning of graph representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08025, 2020.
William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
 graphs. In NeurIPS, pp. 1025–1035, 2017.
Xiaotian Han, Zhimeng Jiang, Ninghao Liu, and Xia Hu. G-mixup: Graph data augmentation for
  graph classification. In ICML, pp. 8230–8248, 2022.
Kaveh Hassani and Amir Hosein Khasahmadi. Contrastive multi-view representation learning on
  graphs. In ICML, pp. 4116–4126, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Zhenyu Hou, Xiao Liu, Yukuo Cen, Yuxiao Dong, Hongxia Yang, Chunjie Wang, and Jie Tang.
  Graphmae: Self-supervised masked graph autoencoders. In SIGKDD, pp. 594–604, 2022.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2005.00687, 2020a.
Weihua Hu, Bowen Liu, Joseph Gomes, Marinka Zitnik, Percy Liang, Vijay S. Pande, and Jure
 Leskovec. Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks. In ICLR, 2020b.
Ziniu Hu, Changjun Fan, Ting Chen, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yizhou Sun. Pre-training graph neural
  networks for generic structural feature extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13728, 2019.
Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yizhou Sun. Gpt-gnn: Generative
  pre-training of graph neural networks. In SIGKDD, pp. 1857–1867, 2020c.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Thomas N Kipf et al. Variational graph auto-encoders. NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Deep Learning,
  2016.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Adit Krishnan, Mahashweta Das, Mangesh Bendre, Hao Yang, and Hari Sundaram. Transfer learn-
  ing via contextual invariants for one-to-many cross-domain recommendation. In SIGIR, pp. 1081–
  1090, 2020.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jae-
   woo Kang. Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text
   mining. Bioinformatics, 36(4):1234–1240, 2020.
Namkyeong Lee, Junseok Lee, and Chanyoung Park. Augmentation-free self-supervised learning
  on graphs. In AAAI, pp. 7372–7380, 2022.
Pengyong Li, Jun Wang, Ziliang Li, Yixuan Qiao, Xianggen Liu, Fei Ma, Peng Gao, Seng Song, and
  Guotong Xie. Pairwise half-graph discrimination: A simple graph-level self-supervised strategy
  for pre-training graph neural networks. In IJCAI, pp. 2694–2700, 2021.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In ICCV, pp. 10012–
  10022, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Online batch selection for faster training of neural networks.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06343, 2015.
Yuanfu Lu, Xunqiang Jiang, Yuan Fang, and Chuan Shi. Learning to pre-train graph neural networks.
  In AAAI, pp. 4276–4284, 2021.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed representa-
  tions of words and phrases and their compositionality. In NeurIPS, pp. 3111–3119, 2013.
Annamalai Narayanan, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Rajasekar Venkatesan, Lihui Chen, Yang Liu,
  and Shantanu Jaiswal. graph2vec: Learning distributed representations of graphs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1707.05005, 2017.
Mark E. J. Newman. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Rev., 45:167–256,
 2003.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. Deepwalk: Online learning of social representa-
  tions. In SIGKDD, pp. 701–710, 2014.
Jiezhong Qiu, Qibin Chen, Yuxiao Dong, Jing Zhang, Hongxia Yang, Ming Ding, Kuansan Wang,
   and Jie Tang. Gcc: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network pre-training. In SIGKDD,
   pp. 1150–1160, 2020.
Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. Improving language understanding by generative pre-
  training. 2018.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Leonardo FR Ribeiro, Pedro HP Saverese, and Daniel R Figueiredo. struc2vec: Learning node
  representations from structural identity. In SIGKDD, pp. 385–394, 2017.
Abhinav Shrivastava, Abhinav Gupta, and Ross Girshick. Training region-based object detectors
  with online hard example mining. In CVPR, pp. 761–769, 2016.
Edgar Simo-Serra, Eduard Trulls, Luis Ferraz, Iasonas Kokkinos, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
  Fracking deep convolutional image descriptors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6537, 2014.
Fan-Yun Sun, Jordan Hoffmann, Vikas Verma, and Jian Tang. Infograph: Unsupervised and semi-
  supervised graph-level representation learning via mutual information maximization. In ICLR,
  2020.
Mengying Sun, Jing Xing, Huijun Wang, Bin Chen, and Jiayu Zhou. Mocl: Data-driven molecular
 fingerprint via knowledge-aware contrastive learning from molecular graph. In SIGKDD, pp.
 3585–3594, 2021.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-
 works. In ICML, pp. 6105–6114, 2019.
Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale
   information network embedding. In WWW, pp. 1067–1077, 2015.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. Mlp-mixer: An
   all-mlp architecture for vision. NeurIPS, pp. 24261–24272, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.
Petar Velickovic, William Fedus, William L Hamilton, Pietro Liò, Yoshua Bengio, and R Devon
  Hjelm. Deep graph infomax. 2019.
S Vichy N Vishwanathan, Nicol N Schraudolph, Risi Kondor, and Karsten M Borgwardt. Graph
  kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:1201–1242, 2010.
C. Wang, Shirui Pan, Guodong Long, Xingquan Zhu, and Jing Jiang. Mgae: Marginalized graph
  autoencoder for graph clustering. CIKM, 2017.
Dongkuan Xu, Wei Cheng, Dongsheng Luo, Haifeng Chen, and Xiang Zhang. Infogcl: Information-
  aware graph contrastive learning. pp. 30414–30425, 2021.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks. In ICLR, 2019.
Xi Yan, David Acuna, and Sanja Fidler. Neural data server: A large-scale search engine for transfer
  learning data. In CVPR, pp. 3893–3902, 2020.
Yi Yang, Zhigang Ma, Feiping Nie, Xiaojun Chang, and Alexander G Hauptmann. Multi-class
  active learning by uncertainty sampling with diversity maximization. IJCV, 113:113–127, 2015.
Yuning You, Tianlong Chen, Yongduo Sui, Ting Chen, Zhangyang Wang, and Yang Shen. Graph
  contrastive learning with augmentations. In NeurIPS, pp. 5812–5823, 2020a.
Yuning You, Tianlong Chen, Zhangyang Wang, and Yang Shen. When does self-supervision help
  graph convolutional networks. In ICML, pp. 10871–10880, 2020b.
Yuning You, Tianlong Chen, Yang Shen, and Zhangyang Wang. Graph contrastive learning auto-
  mated. In ICML, pp. 12121–12132, 2021.
Jiaqi Zeng and Pengtao Xie. Contrastive self-supervised learning for graph classification. In AAAI,
   pp. 10824–10832, 2021.
Jie Zhang, Yuxiao Dong, Yan Wang, Jie Tang, and Ming Ding. Prone: Fast and scalable network
   representation learning. In IJCAI, pp. 4278–4284, 2019.
Muhan Zhang, Zhicheng Cui, Marion Neumann, and Yixin Chen. An end-to-end deep learning
 architecture for graph classification. In AAAI, pp. 4438–4445, 2018.
Wentao Zhang, Yu Shen, Yang Li, Lei Chen, Zhi Yang, and Bin Cui. Alg: fast and accurate active
 learning framework for graph convolutional networks. In SIGMOD, pp. 2366–2374, 2021a.
Zaixin Zhang, Qi Liu, Hao Wang, Chengqiang Lu, and Chee-Kong Lee. Motif-based graph self-
  supervised learning for molecular property prediction. In NeurIPS, pp. 15870–15882, 2021b.
Jingbo Zhu, Huizhen Wang, Tianshun Yao, and Benjamin K Tsou. Active learning with sampling
   by uncertainty and density for word sense disambiguation and text classification. In COLING, pp.
   1137–1144, 2008.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Deep graph contrastive
  representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04131, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Qiang Liu, and Shu Wu. An empirical study of graph contrastive learning.
  In NeurIPS D&B, 2021a.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Graph contrastive learning
  with adaptive augmentation. In WWW, 2021b.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    T HEORETICAL C ONNECTION B ETWEEN N ETWORK E NTROPY AND
     T YPICAL G RAPH P ROPERTIES
Many interesting graph structural properties from basic graph theory give rise to a graph with high
network entropy Lynn et al. (2020). We here theoretically show some connections between the
proposed network entropy and typical structural properties.
To make theoretical analysis, we consider connected, unweighted and undirected graph, whose net-
work entropy depends solely on its degree distribution (see Eq. (3)). Considering a random graph G
with a fixed node set, we suppose that the degree of any node vi independently follows distribution
p, which is a common setting in random graph theory Gómez-Gardenes & Latora (2008). Then the
expected network entropy of G is
                                         1 X                    ⟨d log d⟩
                            ⟨H(G)⟩ =             ⟨di log di ⟩ =           .                     (6)
                                       2|E| i                      ⟨d⟩
where every di (and d) is an independent random variable follows the distribution p.
Now we are ready to discuss the connection between network entropy ⟨H(G)⟩ and some typical
graph properties (i.e., average degree ⟨d⟩, degree variance Var(d) and the scale-free exponent α).

Average degree.      Given that the function x log x is convex in x, we have
                                               ⟨d⟩ log⟨d⟩
                                   ⟨H(G)⟩ ≥                = log⟨d⟩.                           (7)
                                                  ⟨d⟩
It is clear that average degree is the lower bound of network entropy. Based on our discussion on
§3.1, we conclude that when used for pre-training, an input graph with higher average degree would
in general result in better performance of the pre-trained model.

Degree variance.     The Taylor expansion of ⟨d log d⟩ in Eq. (6) at ⟨d⟩ gives

                                                 Var(d)           1
                           ⟨H(G)⟩ = log⟨d⟩ +              +o            .
                                                  2⟨d⟩2         ⟨d⟩2
where Var(d) is the variance of d. We find that log⟨d⟩ is exactly the zeroth-order term in the
expansion. When average degree is fixed, the network entropy and the degree variance Var(d) are
positively correlated. This in turn implies a positive correlation between degree variance and the test
performance of the model.

Scale-free exponent. Most real-world networks exhibit an interesting scale-free property (i.e.,
only a few nodes have high degrees), and thus the degree distribution often follows a power-law
distribution. That is, we can just write the degree distribution as p(x) ∼ x−α , where α is called
the scale-free exponent. For a real-world network, the scale-free exponent α is usually larger than 2
Clauset et al. (2009). Suppose the degrees of a random graph G with N nodes follows a power-
law distribution p(x) = Cx−α where C is a normalization constant. When α > 2, we could
approximately have Gómez-Gardenes & Latora (2008)
                                                1
                                  ⟨H(G)⟩ =           , if N → ∞.
                                             α−2
Clearly, a smaller scale-free exponent α results in a higher network entropy.

Remark 1 (Connection between network entropy and typical structural properties) A graph
with high network entropy arises from graphs with typical structural characteristics like large
average degree, large degree variance, and scale-free networks with low scale-free exponent.

Besides the above theoretical analysis. The motivation of choosing density, average degree, degree
variance and scale-free exponent is similar to that of network entropy. Intuitively, graphs with larger
average degree and higher density have more interactions among the nodes, thus providing more
topological information to graph pre-training. Also, the larger the diversity of node degrees, the
more diverse the subgraph samples. The diversity of node degrees can be measured by degree
variance and scale-free exponent. (A smaller scale-free exponent indicates the length of the tail of
degree distribution is relatively longer, i.e., the degree distribution spreads out wider. )


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    A LGORITHM

The overall algorithm for APT is given in Algorithm 1. Given a collection of graphs G =
{G1 , . . . , GN } from various domains, APT aims to pre-train a better generalist GNN (i.e., pre-
training model) on wisely chosen graphs and samples. Our APT pipeline involves the following
three steps. (i) At the beginning, the graph selector chooses a graph for pre-training according to
the graph properties (line 1). (ii) Given the chosen graph, the graph selector chooses the subgraph
samples whose predictive uncertainty is higher than Ts in this graph (line 3). (iii) The selected
samples are then fed into the model for pre-training until the predictive uncertainty of the chosen
graph is below Tg or the number of training iterations on this chosen graph reaches F (line 4-5). (iv)
The model’s feedback in turn helps select the most needed graph based on predictive uncertainty
and graph properties until the predictive uncertainty of any candidate graph is low enough (line 6-
7). The last three steps are repeated until the iteration number reaches a pre-set maximum value T
(which can be considered as the total iteration number required to train on all selected graphs).

Algorithm 1 Overall algorithm for APT.
Input: A collection of graphs G = {G1 , . . . , GN }, maximal period F of training one graph,
trade-off parameter γt = 0, hyperparameter {βt }, the learning rate µ, the predictive uncertainty
threshold Tg of moving to a new graph, the predictive uncertainty threshold Ts of choosing training
samples, and the maximum iteration number T .
Output: Model parameter θ of the pre-trained graph model.
 1: Choose a graph G∗ from G via the graph selector, and G ← G\{G∗ }.
 2: while The iteration number reaches T do
 3:   Sample instances with predictive uncertainty higher than Ts from G∗ via the graph selector.
 4:   Update model parameters θ ← θ − µ∇θ L(θ).
 5:   if ϕuncertain (G∗ ) < Tg or the model has been trained on G∗ by F iterations then
 6:      Update the trade-off parameter γt ∼ Beta (1, βt ).
 7:      Choose a graph G∗ from G, and G ← G\{G∗ }.
 8:   end if
 9: end while


The time complexity of our model mainly consists of five components: data augmentation, GNN
encoder propagation, contrastive loss, sample selection and graph selection. Suppose the maximal
number of nodes of subgraph instances is |V |, the batch size is B, and D is the representation
dimension. (1) As for the data augmentation, the time complexity of random walk with restart is at
least O(B|V |3 ) Xia et al. (2019). (2) The time complexity of GNN encoder propagation depends
on the architectures of the backbone GNN. We denote it as X here. (3) The time complexity of
the contrastive loss is O(B 2 D) Li et al. (2022). (4) Sample selection is conducted by choosing
the samples with high contrastive loss (the loss is computed before), which costs O(B). (5) Graph
selection costs O(|G|M 2 D) (where M the number of samples needed to compute the predictive
uncertainty of a graph, and |G| is the number of graphs that have not been selected). This step is
executed only in a few epochs (around 6% in our current model), so we ignore its time overhead in
graph selection. Therefore, the overall time complexity of APT in each batch is O(B|V |3 + X +
B 2 D + B).


C    DATASET D ETAILS

The graph datasets for pre-training and testing in this paper are collected from a wide spectrum of
domains (see Table 3 for an overview). The consideration of the graphs for pre-training and test
is as follows. When selecting pre-training data, we hope that the graph size is at least hundreds
of thousands to contain enough information for pre-training. When selecting test data, we hope
that: (1) some test data is in the same domain as the pre-training data, and some is cross-domain,
so as to comprehensively evaluate our model’s in and across-domain transferability. Accordingly,
the in-domain test data is selected from the type of movie and citations, and the others test data are
across-domain; (2) the size of test graphs can scale from hundreds to millions.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Regarding the pre-training datasets, arxiv, dblp and patents-main are citation networks collected
from Bonchi et al. (2012), Yang & Leskovec (2012) and Hall et al. (2001), respectively. Imdb is
the collection of movie from Rossi & Ahmed (2015). As for the social networks, soc-sign0902 and
soc-sign0811 are collected from Leskovec et al. (2009), wiki-vote is from Leskovec et al. (2010),
academia is from Fire et al. (2011), and michigan, msu and uillions are from Traud et al. (2012).
Regarding the test datasets, we collect the protein network dd and ogbproteins from Dobson & Doig
(2003) and Hu et al. (2020a). The image network msrc-21 is from Neumann et al. (2016). The
movie network imdb-binary is from Yanardag & Vishwanathan (2015). The citation networks, cora,
pubmed and ogbarxiv, are from McCallum et al. (2000), Namata et al. (2012) and Hu et al. (2020a).
The web networks cornell and wisconsin are collected from Pei et al. (2019). The transportation
network brazil is form Ribeiro et al. (2017), and dd242, dd68 and dd687 are from Rossi & Ahmed
(2015).
The detailed graph properties of the pre-training data and test data are presented in Table 4 and
Table 5, respectively.

Table 3: Datasets for pre-training and testing, where ∗ denotes the average statistic of multiple
graphs under graph classification setting. |V | and |E| denote the number of nodes and the number
of edges in a graph, respectively.

                         Type          Name        |V |      |E|    Description
                       citations        arxiv    86,376 517,563 citations between papers on the arxiv
                                         dblp    93,156 178,145 same as above (dblp)
                                    patents-main 240,547 560,943 citations between US patents
 pre-training data


                         social     soc-sign0902 81,867 497,672 friend/foe links between the users of Slashdot in Feb. 2009
                                    soc-sign0811 77,350 468,554 same as above (Nov. 2008)
                                      wiki-vote   7,115   100,762 voting relationships between wikipedia users
                                      academia 137,969 369,692 friendships between academics on Academia.edu
                                      michigan   30,147 1,176,516 friendships between Facebook users in University of Michigan
                                         msu     32,375 1,118,774 same as above (Michigan State University)
                                       uillinois 30,809 1,264,428 same as above (University of Uillinois)
                         movie          imdb     896,305 3,782,447 relationships between actors and movies
                        protein           dd    284.32∗ 715.66∗ molecular interactions between amino acids
                                    ogbproteins 132,534 39,561,252 biologically associations between proteins
                         image        msrc-21    77.52∗ 198.32∗ adjacency between superpixels of the image segmentations
                         movie      imdb-binary 19.77∗    96.53∗ collaboration relationships between actors/actresses
  test data


                        citations        cora    2,708     5,278   citations between Machine Learning papers
                                      pubmed    19,717    88,648 citations between scientific papers
                                      ogbarxiv 169,343 1,166,243 citation network between computer science arXiv papers
                           web         cornell    183       280    hyperlinks between webpages collected from Cornell Univer-
                                                                   sity
                                     wisconsin    251       466    same as above (Wisconsin University)
                     transportation     brazil    131      2,077   commercial flights between airports in Brazil
                         others        dd242     1,284     3,303   this network dataset is in the category of labeled networks
                                        dd68      775      2,093   same as above
                                       dd687      725      2,600   same as above


Table 4: Detailed structural properties of pre-training datasets, where avg properties equals to
MEAN(ϕ̂entropy , ϕ̂density , ϕ̂avg deg , ϕ̂deg var , -ϕ̂α ) in Eq. (4), and nei2 denotes the average number and
standard deviation of 2−hop neighbors, |V | and |E| denote the number of nodes and the number of
edges in a graph, respectively.

          Properties
                        |V |  |E| avg properties avg degree degree var density entropy α nei2 (avg, std) avg clustering coef
Dataset
soc-sign0902          81867 497672    -0.32        13.16     1643.20 1.49e-04 3.91 1.51 1192.33, 2305.99         0.06
soc-sign0811          77350 468554    -0.32        13.12     1631.77 1.57e-04 3.93 1.52 1226.93, 2312.03         0.05
imdb                 896305 3782447   -0.66         9.44     298.27 9.42e-06 3.07 1.53 316.16, 614.03           5e-05
patent               240547 560943    -0.96         5.66      34.95 1.94e-05 2.04 1.57 117.23, 172.40            0.08
academia             137969 369692    -0.89         6.36     102.14 3.88e-05 2.38 1.57 101.40, 225.96            0.14
wiki-Vote              7115 103689     0.74        29.32     3314.79 4.10e-03 4.46 1.40 972.03, 1045.13          0.14
dblp                  93156 178145    -1.12         4.82      58.05 4.11e-05 2.16 1.72 58.85, 90.46              0.27
arxiv                 86376 517563    -0.43        12.98      382.12 1.39e-04 3.22 1.41 145.21, 309.12           0.68
michigan              30147 1176516    1.40        79.05     6369.17 2.59e-03 4.78 1.23 4683.90, 3655.25         0.21
msu                   32375 1118774    1.13        70.11     5087.53 2.13e-03 4.62 1.23 4567.63, 3465.16         0.21
uillinois             30809 1264428    1.44        83.08     6306.02 2.66e-03 4.78 1.22 5267.10, 3831.37         0.21


                                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Detailed structural properties of test datasets, where nei2 denotes the average number and
standard deviation of 2−hop neighbors, and the numbers with ∗ denote the average statistics of
multiple graphs under graph classification setting. |V |, |E| and |G| denote he number of nodes in
a graph, the number of edges in a graph and the number of graphs in graph classification datasets,
respectively.

           Properties
                         |V |    |E|   |G| avg degree degree var density entropy  nei2 (avg, std) avg clustering coef # of classes
Dataset
imdb-binary           19.77∗ 193.06∗ 1000     9.89∗    116.01∗     1.04∗  1.07∗   24.89∗ ,15.91∗         0.95∗              2
msrc-21               77.52∗ 198.32∗ 563      6.10∗     30.26∗ 6.81e-02∗ 1.71∗    17.00∗ , 5.81∗         0.51∗             20
dd                    284.32∗ 715.66∗ 1178    6.00∗     27.60∗ 2.78e-02∗ 1.65∗     14.30∗ ,5.68∗         0.48∗              2
cora                    2708    5278    /      4.90      42.53   1.44e-03 1.71     34.98,47.70           0.24               7
pubmed                 19717   44327    /      5.50      75.44   2.28e-04 2.23     57.10,82.72           0.06               3
brazil                  131     1074    /     16.85     539.18   1.26e-01 3.14     92.27,28.50           0.66              4
dd242                   1284    3303    /      6.14      28.80   4.01e-03 1.68      14.57,4.30           0.47              20
dd68                    775     2093    /      6.40      33.42   6.98e-03 1.76      17.40,8.93           0.44              20
dd687                   725     2600    /      8.17      55.78   9.91e-03 2.01      25.45,9.96           0.48              20
wiscosin                251      466    /      4.65      76.26   1.49e-02 1.84     68.04,58.22           0.23               5
cornell                 183      280    /      4.04      58.48   1.68e-02 1.74     54.09,44.30           0.18               5
ogbarxiv               16343 1157799    /     14.67    4898.17 8.07e-05 3.63     3483.08,6711.40         0.23              40
ogbproteins           132534 39561252 /      598.00 742637.58 4.50e-03 6.84 32265.17,19401.46            0.28              2


D    A DDITIONAL O BSERVATIONS OF Curse of Big Data P HENOMENON

This section provides more comprehensive observations to support the curse of big data phe-
nomenon in cross-domain graph pre-training, i.e., more training samples and graph datasets do not
necessarily lead to better downstream performance.
We investigate 3630 experiments with GCC Qiu et al. (2020) and GraphCL Hafidi et al. (2020)
model with different model configurations (i.e., the number of GNN layers is set to be 3, 4 and 5
respectively), when pre-trained on all training graphs listed in Table 3 and evaluated on different
test graphs (annotated in the upper left corner of each figure) under freezing setting. Note that GCC
and GraphCL are the only two pre-training models that can be adopted for the cross-domain setting.
For each experiment, we calculate the mean and standard deviation over 10 evaluation results of the
downstream task with random training/testing splits.
The observations of GCC and GraphCL model can be found in Figure 5 and Figure 6 respectively.
The downstream results of different test data are presented in separate rows. The figures in left three
columns present the effect of scaling up the number of graphs on the downstream performance under
different model configurations (i.e., the number of GNN layers) respectively. We first pre-train the
model with only two input graphs, and the result is plotted in a dotted line. The largest standard
deviation among the results w.r.t different graph last is also marked by the blue arrow. The figures
in the last column illustrate the effect of scaling up sample size (log scale) on the performance.


Table 6: The value of parameters for fitting the curve according to the function f (x) = a1 ln x/xa2 +
a3 (a1 , a2 , a3 > 0), based on the points in the last column in Figure 5 and Figure 6.

                                                            GCC                            GraphCL
                                 Parameter
                                                   a1         a2        a3           a1           a2        a3
                 Dataset
                           cora                   0.45        0       33.43       1038.19       1.24      17.15
                         pubmed                   4.74       0.11     39.63         3.50        0.12      36.83
                          brazil                  39.10      0.09        0         29.59        0.19      41.83
                          dd242                   6.60       0.08      3.82         7.84        0.12        0
                           dd68                   6.44       0.11      3.83      2.08e+17       6.55      10.37
                          dd687                  968.01      1.37     10.31         5.21        0.12       1.35
                        wisconsin                26.78       0.11     16.59        11.42        0.21      38.24
                         cornell                  15.46      0.41     45.45         7.84        4.83      51.79
                       imdb-binary                7.43       0.13     64.97         1.06          0       51.69
                            dd                    0.81       0.31     75.53        13.76        0.10      36.33
                           msrc                   5.56       0.11      4.85         4.71        0.13         0


                                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The explanation of convex hull fit. In order to better show the changing trend, the blue curve in
the last column in Figure 5 and Figure 6 is fitted to the convex hull of the points. The convex hull
is proposed to capture the performance of a randomized classifier made by choosing pre-training
models with different probabilities Abnar et al. (2022).
We first introduce the concept of randomized classifier. Given two classifiers with training sample
size and downstream performance c1 = (csz        ds             sz ds
                                            1 , c1 ) and c2 = (c2 , c2 ), a randomized classifier can be
made to choose the first classifier with probability p and the second classifier with probability 1 − p.
Then the output of the randomized classifier is pc1 + (1 − p)c2 , which is the convex combination
of c1 and c2 . All the points on this convex combination can be obtained by choosing different p.
Extend the notion to the case of multiple classifiers, we can consider the output of such a random-
ized classifier to be a convex combination of the outputs of its endpoints Abnar et al. (2022). All
the points on the convex hull are achievable. Therefore, the output of the randomized classifier is
equivalent to the convex hull of our trained classifiers’ performance.
In our experiments, we include the upper hull of the convex hull of the model performances, i.e., the
highest downstream performance for every given sample size. Such convex hull fit is proved to be
robust to the density of the points in each figure Abnar et al. (2022).
A final remark is that our observations on different downstream datasets do not result in a one-
model-fits-all trend. So we propose to fit a complicated curve whose function has form f (x) =
a1 ln x/xa2 +a3 (a1 , a2 , a3 > 0) to the best performing models (i.e., the convex hull fit as discussed
above). The fitted parameters a1 , a2 and a3 in this function of each curve are given in Table 6.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      wisconsin                                      wisconsin                                         wisconsin                                                             model config.
                                                                                                                                                                                     wisconsin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                5 layers


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                                         micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                4 layers
                                                                                                                                            std : 1.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                3 layers
                                                       std :2.1                              std :1.5                                                                                                          convex hull fit
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      brazil                                         brazil                                            brazil                                        brazil


                                                                         micro F1
                           micr oF1


                                                                                                                            micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                        std :5.0
                                                                                                         std : 3.1                                      std : 4.1
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      dd687                                          dd687                                             dd687                                         dd687
                           micro F1


                                                                         micro F1


                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                           std : 0.8


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                                                          std : 1.1                                     std : 1.1
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                   # of samples
(a) Node classification


                                      dd242                                          dd242                                             dd242                                         dd242


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                         micro F1
                           micro F1


                                       std : 0.5
                                                                                                            std : 0.6                   std : 0.5
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      dd68                                           dd68                                              dd68                                          dd68
                           micro F1


                                                                         micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                                                                                            micro F1

                                                                                                std : 1.0

                                                           std : 0.8
                                                                                                                                                std : 0.5
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      cora                                           cora                                              cora                                          cora
                           micro F1


                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                            micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                               std : 0.6

                                                                                             std : 0.7                                  std : 0.8
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      pubmed                                         pubmed                                            pubmed                                        pubmed
                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                         micro F1


                                                                                                                            micro F1


                                                                                                      std : 0.3                         std : 0.3
                                      std : 0.5
                                                       GCC (5 layers)                                     GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      cornell                                        cornell                                           cornell                                       cornell
                                                                         micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                                                                                            micro F1


                                                       std : 2.0                                                                                std : 1.3
                                                                                                            std : 1.8
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                    GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                      # of graphs                                   # of samples
                                      dd                                             dd                                                dd                                            dd
                           micro F1


                                                                         micro F1


                                                                                                                           micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1


                                                            std : 0.7
                                                                                                                                        std : 0.5
                                                                                               std : 0.6
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                   GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                    # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples
(b) Graph classification


                                      imdb-binary                                    imdb-binary                                       imdb-binary                                   imdb-binary
                           micro F1


                                                                         micro F1


                                                                                                                           micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                        std :1.4
                                                    std : 1.3                                                                                       std :1.4
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                   GCC (4 layers)                                 GCC (3 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                    # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                      msrc-21                                        msrc-21                                           msrc-21                                       msrc-21
                                                                                                                                                                          micro F1
                                                                                                                           micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                         micro F1


                                        std : 1.2
                                                                                      std : 1.4                                             std : 1.4 GCC (3 layers)
                                                        GCC (5 layers)                                   GCC (4 layers)

                                               # of graphs                                    # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples


Figure 5: The additional observations of curse of big data phenomenon, performed on different
GCC pre-training models.



                                                                                                                           20
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       wisconsin                                      wisconsin                                          wisconsin                                     wisconsin               model config.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5 layers


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                              micro F1
                           micro F1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 layers

                                                                                               std : 2.0                                                                                                          3 layers
                                              std :3.0                                                                                    std : 3.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 convex hull fit
                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                 GraphCL (4 layers)                            GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                       brazil                                         brazil                                             brazil                                        brazil


                                                                                                                              micro F1
                                                                          micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                            std :3.3


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                        std : 5.7                                             std : 3.1
                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                 GraphCL (4 layers)                            GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples
                                       dd687                                          dd687                                              dd687                                         dd687
                                            std : 0.8

                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                              micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                                                                                                           std : 0.8


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                                 std : 1.0

                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                 GraphCL (4 layers)                            GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                       dd242                                          dd242                                              dd242                                         dd242


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                              micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                                                       std : 0.7                                   std : 1.2
                                              std : 1.0
(a) Node classification


                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                GraphCL (4 layers)                              GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                       dd68                                           dd68                                               dd68                                          dd68                                    dd68
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                                                              micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                    std : 1.0                           std : 1.1
                                                                                                                                                       std : 1.3
                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                 GraphCL (4 layers)                            GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples
                                       cora                                            cora                                              cora                                          cora
                                                                           micro F1


                                                                                                                              micro F1
                           micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                              std : 0.6
                                                    std : 0.8                                                                                          std : 1.0
                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                 GraphCL (4 layers)                            GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                       pubmed                                         pubmed                                             pubmed                                        pubmed
                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                                                              micro F1
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                           std : 0.7                                                           std : 1.7
                            micro F1


                                        std : 0.3

                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                 GraphCL (4 layers)                             GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                       cornell                                        cornell                                            cornell                                       cornell
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                              micro F1
                            micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1


                                                                                                                                                           std : 5.1
                                            std : 2.5                                       std : 4.7

                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                                GraphCL (4 layers)                              GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                # of graphs                                     # of graphs                                       # of graphs                                 # of samples

                                       dd                                             dd                                                 dd                                            dd
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                             micro F1
                            micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1


                                              std : 1.4                                             std : 1.4
                                                                                                                                                     std : 6.1

                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                             GraphCL (4 layers)                                GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                 # of graphs                                   # of graphs                                        # of graphs                                   # of samples
(b) Graph classification


                                       imdb-binary                                    imdb-binary                                        imdb-binary                                   imdb-binary
                                                                          micro F1


                                                                                                                             micro F1


                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                            micro F1


                                                                                                    std : 1.7
                                                    std : 1.4                                                                                                  std : 3.4
                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                             GraphCL (4 layers)                                GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                 # of graphs                                   # of graphs                                        # of graphs                                   # of samples

                                       msrc-21                                        msrc-21                                            msrc-21                                       msrc-21
                                                                                                                                                                            micro F1
                                                                                                                             micro F1
                                                                          micro F1
                            micro F1


                                                                                             std : 1.0
                                        std : 1.4                                                                                                         std : 0.7
                                                     GraphCL (5 layers)                             GraphCL (4 layers)                                GraphCL (3 layers)

                                                 # of graphs                                   # of graphs                                        # of graphs                                   # of samples

     Figure 6: The additional observations of curse of big data phenomenon, performed on different
     GraphCL pre-training models.


                                                                                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    E MPIRICAL S TUDY OF G RAPH P ROPERTIES

Additional properties for part (b) in Figure 2. In Figure 7, we plot the Pearson correlation
between the graph properties of the graph used in pre-training (shown in the y-axis) and the per-
formance of the pre-trained model using this graph on different unseen test datasets (shown in the
x-axis). Note that the pre-training is performed on each of the input training graphs (in Table 3)
via GCC. The results indicate that network entropy, density, average degree and degree variance
exhibit a clear positive correlation with the performance, while the scale-free exponent presents an
obviously negative relation with the performance. On the contrary, some other properties of graphs,
including clique number, transitivity, degree assortativity and average clustering coefficient, do not
seem to have connections with downstream performance, and also exhibit little or no correlation with
the performance. Therefore, the favorable properties of network entropy, density, average degree,
degree variance and the scale-free exponent of a real graph are able to characterize the contribution
of a graph to pre-training.
                                                                                                      e
                                                           e
                                                       itiv on                   no ation         ativ on
                                                    pos relati                               negrelati
                                                      r                           rel            r
                                                    co                         cor           c o
                                      cora                                                                0.8

                                                                                                          0.6
                                    pubmed
                                                                                                          0.4
                                     brazil
                                                                                                          0.2
                                     dd242
                                                                                                          0.0

                                      dd68                                                                −0.2


                                wisconsin                                                                 −0.4

                                                                                                          −0.6
                                    cornell
                                              En   D A        D    C    T     D    C      S
                                                tro ensi verag egre lique rans egre luste cale-
                                                   py ty      ed ev       n iv     e     ri       fr
                                                                egr aria umb ity asso ng co ee ex
                                                                   ee nc       er        rta
                                                                           e                 tiv effic pone
                                                                                                ity ien nt
                                                                                                        t


Figure 7: Pearson correlation between the structural features of the graph used in pre-training and
the performance of the pre-trained model (using this graph) on different unseen test datasets.

Detailed illustrations of Figure 3. In Figure 3, the illustrative graphs are generated by the con-
figuration model with 15-18 nodes. The shaded area groups the illustrative graphs whose network
entropy and graph properties are similar. Each four points on the same horizontal coordinate repre-
sent four graph properties of an illustrating graph. Each curve is fitted by least squares and represents
the relation between entropy and other graph properties.

Additional real-world example for Figure 3. In Figure 8, we provide a real-world example
of how network entropy correlates with four typical structural properties (in red), as well as the
performance of the pre-trained model on test graphs (in blue). Numerical experiments again support
our explanation (or intuition) of their strong correlation.

 5                         56   5                                56        5                                     56   5                         56
        Network entropy                    Network entropy                               Network entropy                     Network entropy
        Performance (%)    54              Performance (%)       54                      Performance (%)         54          Performance (%)    54
 4                              4                                          4                                          4

                           52                                    52                                              52                             52
 3                              3                                          3                                          3
                           50                                    50                                              50                             50

 2                              2                                          2                                          2
                           48                                    48                                              48                             48

 1                         46   1                                46        1                                     46   1                         46
      1e-3   2e-3   3e-3              20      40     60                             20      40       60                    1.35   1.50   1.65


       (a) Density                  (b) Average degree                          (c) Degree variance                   (d) Scale-free exponent

Figure 8: The red plot shows the network entropy (left y-axis) versus typical structural properties in
a graph (i.e., density, average degree, degree variance, and the parameter α in a scale-free network),
and the blue one shows the pre-training performances on wisconsin dataset (right y-axis) versus
structural features.


                                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F      I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
The number reported in all the experiments are the mean and standard deviation over 10 evaluation
results of the downstream task with random training/testing splits. When conducting the downstream
task, For each dataset, we consistently use 90% of the data as the training set, and 10% as the testing
set. We conduct all experiments on a single machine of Linux system with an Intel Xeon Gold
5118 (128G memory) and a GeForce GTX Tesla P4 (8GB memory). Our codes are available at
https://github.com/anonymous-APT-ai/Anonymous-APT-code.

Implementations of our model. The regularization for weights of the model in Eq. (5) is applied
to first 2 layers of GIN. The maximal period of training one graph F is 6, the maximum iteration
number T is 100, and the predictive uncertainty thresholds Ts and Tg are set to be 3 and 2 respec-
tively. The selected instances are sampled from 20,000 instances each epoch. Since the pre-training
model is unable to provide precise predictive uncertainty in the initial training stage, the model is
warmed up over the first 20 iterations. Since we adopt GCC as the backbone pre-training model, the
other settings are the same as GCC.
Our model is implemented under the following software settings: Pytorch version 1.4.0+cu100,
CUDA version 10.0, networkx version 2.3, DGL version 0.4.3post2, sklearn version 0.20.3, numpy
version 1.19.4, Python version 3.7.1.

Implementations of baselines. We compare against several graph representation learning meth-
ods. For implementation, we directly adopt their public source codes and most of their default
hyperparameters. The key parameter settings and code links can be found in Table 7.

             Table 7: The source code and major hyper-parameters used in the baselines.

 Method      Hyper-parameter                              Code
 DeepWalk    The dimension of output representations is   https://github.com/shenweichen/GraphEmbedding
             64, walk length = 10, number of walks =
             80
 struc2vec   The dimension of output representations is   https://github.com/leoribeiro/struc2vec
             32, walk length = 80, number of walks =
             10, window size = 5
 DGI         512 hidden units per GNN layer, learning     https://github.com/PetarV-/DGI
             rate = 0.001
 GAE         32 hidden units per GNN layer, learning      https://github.com/zfjsail/gae-pytorch
             rate = 0.01
 graph2vec   The dimension of output representations is   https://github.com/benedekrozemberczki/graph2vec
             128
 InfoGraph   32 hidden units per GNN layer, 5 layers      https://github.com/fanyun-sun/InfoGraph
 DGCNN       32 hidden units per GNN layer, learning      https://github.com/leftthomas/DGCNN
             rate = 0.001, batch size = 50
 GIN         64 hidden units per GNN layer, 5 layers,     https://github.com/weihua916/powerful-gnns
             learning rate = 0.01, sum pooling
 GraphCL     300 hidden units per GNN layer, 5 layers,    https://github.com/Shen-Lab/GraphCL
             learning rate = 0.001
 GCC         64 hidden units per GNN layer, 5 layers,     https://github.com/THUDM/GCC
             learning rate = 0.005, number of samples
             per epoch = 20000


                                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Effects of hyper-parameter {λj }. The hyper-parameter {λj } is the trade-off parameters between
the knowledge learnt from new data and that from previous data in Eq. (5). We simply set λ1 =
λ2 = · · · = λk . We use the dataset dd242 as an example to find the suitable values of the hyper-
parameter under the L2 and EWC regularization setting respectively, and present here for reference
(see Figure 9). Clearly, a too small or too large λ would deteriorate the performance. Thus, an
appropriate value of λ is preferred to ensure that the graph pre-training model can learn from new
data as well as remember previous knowledge. We leave changing {λj } as the future work.

                    16.8

                                                                                                16.5
                    16.7


                                                                                     micro F1
         micro F1


                                                                                                16.4
                    16.6
                                                                                                16.3
                    16.5

                             1          10       50               100                                  100                300      500   700

            (a) Ablation study on APT-L2 (freeze)                                         (b) Ablation study on APT (freeze)

                                 Figure 9: Performance of our model on dd242 w.r.t varying {λj }.

Effects of hyper-parameter F, Tg , Ts .         Our model training involves three hyper-parameter
F, Tg , Ts , where F controls the largest number of epochs training on each graph, Tg is the pre-
dictive uncertainty threshold of moving to a new graph, Ts is the predictive uncertainty threshold
of choosing training samples. We use grid search to show F ∈ {4, 5, 6}’s, Tg ∈ {3, 3.5, 4}’s and
Ts ∈ {1, 2, 3}’s role in the pre-training. F remains at 5 while studying Tg and Ts , Tg remains at
3.5 while studying F and Ts , and Ts remains at 2 while studying F and Tg . Figure 10 presents the
effect of these parameters, We find that if the value of F is set too small or that of Tg is too large,
the model cannot learn sufficient knowledge from each graph, leading to suboptimal results. Too
large F or small Tg also lead to poor performance. This indicates that instead of training on a graph
for a large period, it would be better to switch to training on various graphs in different domains
to gain diverse and comprehensive knowledge. Regarding the hyper-parameter Ts , we observe that
large Ts would make the model having too few training samples to learn knowledge, and small Ts
could not select the most uncertain and representative samples, thus both cases achieve suboptimal
performance.
                 17.0                                            17.0                                                   17.0

                 16.0                                            16.0                                                   16.0
      micro F1


                                                      micro F1


                                                                                                             micro F1


                 15.0                                            15.0                                                   15.0


                        5           6        7                          1        2               3                             1     2     3

             (a) Ablation study on F                       (b) Ablation study on Tg                                (c) Ablation study on Ts

                            Figure 10: Performance of our model on dd242 w.r.t varying F, Tg , Ts .

The choice of βt , its alternatives, and ablation study. At the beginning of the pre-training, the
model is less accurate and needs more guidance from graph properties. We therefore set γt as larger
at the beginning and gradually decrease it. To simplify this process, we follow Cai et al. (2017) to
use the exponential formula of βt = c1 − ct2 to set the expectation of γt to be strictly decreasing
(where γt ∼ Beta(1, βt )).
The parameters c1 and c2 in the exponential formula of βt = c1 − ct2 are suggested as 1.005 and
0.995 in Cai et al. (2017). We simply perform grid search on c1 in {1.005, 3, 5}; see the effect of c1
in the Figure 11.


                                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 8: Micro F1 of APT-L2 (freeze) with the different decay functions in the node classification
task.

         Dataset
                            brazil      dd242        dd68       dd687            wisconsin   cornell   cora       pubmed
Method
linear                    72.30(1.37) 16.28(0.57) 12.44(0.72) 10.29(0.87) 54.20(1.50) 47.66(1.53) 35.74(0.52) 46.49(0.19)
step                      68.70(3.95) 16.74(0.45) 12.86(1.07) 10.09(0.76) 52.55(2.39) 48.08(1.28) 35.50(0.46) 46.58(0.21)
exponential               69.82(2.32) 16.79(0.88) 12.68(0.81) 10.34(1.12) 55.11(1.74) 48.76(2.20) 34.27(0.43) 46.21(0.15)

Table 9: Micro F1 of APT-L2 (freeze) with the different decay functions in the graph classification
task.

                                            Dataset
                                                    imdb-binary     dd       msrc-21
                                     Method
                                     linear         73.66(0.34) 75.47(0.26) 13.01(0.78)
                                     step           72.99(0.40) 75.41(0.41) 14.13(0.56)
                                     exponential    73.54(0.40) 75.81(0.30) 13.16(0.77)


We then illustrate that the choice of the decay function of βt is robust. Table 8 and Table 9 below
show the effect of linear decay, step decay and exponential decay on βt . (The function for linear
decay and step decay are designed as βt = 2.001 + 0.004t, βt = 2.005 + floor(t/20), respectively.
The initial value β1 is set the same as ours.) While there is no universally better decay function, the
performance of our method is not significantly impacted by the choice of different decay functions,
and our performance is better than the baselines in most cases regardless of the choices of specific
decay functions.


                     55                                                          74


                     54                                                          73
          micro F1


                                                                      micro F1


                     53                                                          72


                      1.005              3              5                         1.005          3            5
              (a) Wisconsin on node classification                      (b) Imdb-binary on graph classification

                               Figure 11: Performance of APT-L2 (freeze) w.r.t varying c1 .



Impact of five graph properties combination. As a further experimental analysis, we study the
effect of the strategy of utilizing only one graph property in Table 10 and Table 11. We find that the
five properties used in our model are all indispensable, and the most important one probably varies
for different tasks and datasets. That’s why we choose to combine all graph properties.
Moreover, these case studies may provide some clues of how to select pre-training graphs when
some knowledge of the downstream tasks is known. For example, if the downstream dataset is
extremely dense (like imdb-binary), the density property dominates among the selection criteria
(such that the probability of encountering very dense out-of-distribution samples during testing can
be reduced). If the entropy of downstream dataset is very high (like brazil), it is perhaps better to
choose graphs with high entropy for pre-training. But still, when the downstream task is unknown,
using the combination of five metrics often leads to the most satisfactory and robust results.

The justification of input graphs’ learning order. Table 12 reveals the downstream performance
can be affected by the learning order of input training graphs. With the guidance of graph selector,
the pre-training model is encouraged to first learn the graphs and samples with higher predictive


                                                               25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


uncertainty and graph properties. Such learning order accomplishes better downstream performance
compared to the reverse or random one.

The choice of the “difficult” data. Among all the data, “difficult” samples contribute the most to
the loss function, and thus they can yield gradients with large magnitude. Comparatively, training
with easy samples may suffer from inefficiency and poor performance as these data points produce
gradients with magnitudes close to zero Huang et al. (2016); Sohn (2016). In addition, learning from
difficult samples has proven to be able to accelerate convergence and enhance the expressive power
of the learnt representations Suh et al. (2019); Schroff et al. (2015). For our model, the importance
of learning from difficult samples is also justified empirically, as shown in Table 13.

Training time. As empirically noted in Table 14, the total training time of APT-L2 and APT is
18321.39 seconds and 18592.01 seconds respectively (including the time consumed in graph selec-
tion and regularization term), while the competitive graph pre-training model GCC takes 40161.68
seconds for the same number of training epochs on the same datasets.

• The time spent on the inference on all graphs during graph selection (which is the main time spent
  for graph selection) only accounts for 3.95% and 3.87% of the total time under APT-L2 and APT
  respectively. Note that this step is executed only in a few epochs (around 6% in our current model)
  if and only if the condition in line 5 in Algorithm 1 is satisfied.
• The time cost of the L2 regularization term only accounts for 0.08% of the total time and the EWC
  regularization term only accounts for 0.45% of the total time, which is calculated by the runtime
  gap between the models with and without the regularization term. Note that the regularization
  term is imposed on the first two layers of the GNN encoder, which only accounts for 12.4% of the
  total number of parameters.

The efficiency of our model is due to a much smaller number of carefully selected training graphs
and samples at each epoch. In addition, the number of parameters in our model is 190,544, which is
the same order of magnitude as classical GNNs like GraphSAGE, GraphSAINT, etc. and is relatively
small among models in open graph benchmark Hu et al. (2020b).

Time comparison: pre-training vs. training from scratch. Using a pre-trained model can
significantly reduce the time required for training from scratch. The reason is that the weights of the
pre-trained model have already been put close to appropriate and reasonable values; thus the model
converges faster during fine-tuning on a test data. As shown in Figure 12, compared to regular GNN
model (e.g. GIN), our model yields a speedup of 4.7× on average (which is measured by the ratio of
the training time of GIN to the fine-tuning time of APT). Based on above analysis, we can draw a
conclusion that pre-training is beneficial both in effectiveness and efficiency.


                                               600         GIN
                                                           APT
                          running time (sec)


                                               400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.9⇥<latexit sha1_base64="bOTtxKgBv1/Y3YpPvW7uqUlUa+A=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lqQY8FLx4r2A9oQ9lsN+3azSbsToQS+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WNza3tneJuaW//4PCofHzSNnGqGW+xWMa6G1DDpVC8hQIl7yaa0yiQvBNMbud+54lrI2L1gNOE+xEdKREKRtFK7T6KiJtBueJW3QXIOvFyUoEczUH5qz+MWRpxhUxSY3qem6CfUY2CST4r9VPDE8omdMR7lipql/jZ4toZubDKkISxtqWQLNTfExmNjJlGge2MKI7NqjcX//N6KYY3fiZUkiJXbLkoTCXBmMxfJ0OhOUM5tYQyLeythI2ppgxtQCUbgrf68jpp16reVbV2X6806nkcRTiDc7gED66hAXfQhBYweIRneIU3J3ZenHfnY9lacPKZU/gD5/MHs0OPKg==</latexit>


                                               200
                                                           5.2⇥
                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="bOTtxKgBv1/Y3YpPvW7uqUlUa+A=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lqQY8FLx4r2A9oQ9lsN+3azSbsToQS+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WNza3tneJuaW//4PCofHzSNnGqGW+xWMa6G1DDpVC8hQIl7yaa0yiQvBNMbud+54lrI2L1gNOE+xEdKREKRtFK7T6KiJtBueJW3QXIOvFyUoEczUH5qz+MWRpxhUxSY3qem6CfUY2CST4r9VPDE8omdMR7lipql/jZ4toZubDKkISxtqWQLNTfExmNjJlGge2MKI7NqjcX//N6KYY3fiZUkiJXbLkoTCXBmMxfJ0OhOUM5tYQyLeythI2ppgxtQCUbgrf68jpp16reVbV2X6806nkcRTiDc7gED66hAXfQhBYweIRneIU3J3ZenHfnY9lacPKZU/gD5/MHs0OPKg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4.9⇥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="bOTtxKgBv1/Y3YpPvW7uqUlUa+A=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lqQY8FLx4r2A9oQ9lsN+3azSbsToQS+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WNza3tneJuaW//4PCofHzSNnGqGW+xWMa6G1DDpVC8hQIl7yaa0yiQvBNMbud+54lrI2L1gNOE+xEdKREKRtFK7T6KiJtBueJW3QXIOvFyUoEczUH5qz+MWRpxhUxSY3qem6CfUY2CST4r9VPDE8omdMR7lipql/jZ4toZubDKkISxtqWQLNTfExmNjJlGge2MKI7NqjcX//N6KYY3fiZUkiJXbLkoTCXBmMxfJ0OhOUM5tYQyLeythI2ppgxtQCUbgrf68jpp16reVbV2X6806nkcRTiDc7gED66hAXfQhBYweIRneIU3J3ZenHfnY9lacPKZU/gD5/MHs0OPKg==</latexit>


                                                     imdb-binary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    msrc-21

Figure 12: The running time of our model and the basic GNN model on graph classification task.
Our model achieves a speedup of 4.7× on average compared with GIN.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 10: The effect of different graph properties on downstream performance (micro F1 is reported)
under APT-L2 (fine-tune) in the node classification task. The last row is our strategy of combining
all the graph properties, and each of the first five rows is the strategy of only utilizing one graph
property.

         Dataset
                          brazil          dd242        dd68         dd687      wisconsin       cornell        cora        pubmed
Method
Entropy             80.04(2.15) 25.79(0.94) 16.31(0.81) 11.08(0.82) 67.01(2.00) 52.80(2.46) 45.41(0.85) 50.85(0.19)
Density             79.23(1.92) 27.29(0.62) 19.89(0.95) 12.22(1.06) 65.58(1.87) 51.15(1.59) 46.18(0.71) 50.74(0.15)
Average degree      79.22(1.65) 24.99(0.67) 16.56(1.01) 11.67(1.18) 67.02(1.86) 51.43(4.16) 46.38(0.48) 50.99(0.31)
Degree variance     78.44(2.24) 24.94(0.61) 16.62(1.04) 11.51(1.17) 65.65(1.28) 50.45(2.14) 45.76(0.65) 50.70(0.21)
Scale-free exponent 79.70(2.71) 24.94(0.68) 17.26(0.63) 12.03(1.41) 64.77(2.31) 51.37(2.70) 45.18(0.52) 50.84(0.26)
Our combination 78.75(1.63) 24.62(0.90) 17.83(1.35) 12.26(0.78) 67.04(1.50) 52.94(1.95) 47.48(0.46) 51.25(0.21)



Table 11: The effect of different graph properties on downstream performance (micro F1 is reported)
under APT-L2 (fine-tune) in the graph classification task.

                                            Dataset
                                                       imdb-binary      dd       msrc-21
                                   Method
                                   Entropy              76.78(0.84) 75.56(0.84) 24.34(1.50)
                                   Density             77.20(0.66) 75.29(0.54) 24.20(1.31)
                                   Average degree       76.87(0.93) 75.46(0.53) 25.14(1.54)
                                   Degree variance      76.39(1.04) 75.47(0.67) 25.22(1.51)
                                   Scale-free exponent 75.24(0.62) 75.52(1.24) 23.19(1.39)
                                   Our combination      75.93(0.84) 75.58(1.06) 25.58(1.57)



Table 12: The effect of input graphs’ learning order on downstream performance (micro F1 is re-
ported) under freezing mode in the node classification task. The first row is the order learnt from
APT-L2, and the second and third rows are the reverse and random order of the first row, respectively.

          Dataset
                       brazil         dd242         dd68         dd687        wisconsin       cornell         cora        pubmed
Method
Our order     69.82(2.32) 16.79(0.88) 12.68(0.81) 10.34(1.12) 55.11(1.74) 48.76(2.20) 34.27(0.43) 46.21(0.15)
Reverse order 69.60(2.71) 16.00(0.47) 11.41(0.91) 10.65(0.65) 51.46(1.64) 44.36(1.38) 35.66(0.62) 45.92(0.14)
Random order 67.25(2.40) 16.11(0.79) 12.57(1.17) 11.06(0.75) 53.06(2.41) 46.76(1.95) 35.90(0.72) 46.36(0.20)



Table 13: The comparison of learning from easy samples and learning from difficult sample in
our pipeline (APT-L2 (freeze)) on node classification. Micro F1 is reported in the table. (Under
the setting of learning from easy samples, we replace ϕuncertain with −ϕuncertain in Eq.(4), and only
sample instances with predictive uncertainty lower than Ts .)

                                Dataset
                                          brazil     dd242       dd68        dd687     wisconsin    cornell       cora      pubmed
Method
Learning from easy samples             56.34(3.45) 14.38(0.53) 11.76(1.04) 9.90(0.64) 50.65(1.84) 48.09(1.72) 35.74(0.42) 46.03(0.17)
Learning from difficult samples (ours) 69.82(2.32) 16.79(0.88) 12.68(0.81) 10.34(1.12) 55.11(1.74) 48.76(2.20) 34.27(0.43) 46.21(0.15)



Table 14: Training time (sec) comparison between our model and GCC. All the models are trained
under the same number of epochs, which is set as 100 in practice. (The difference in time cost of
inference on all graphs is due to different runs.)

                                                                        GCC            APT-L2              APT
                 Time of the inference on all graphs                     -             723.92             719.64
                 Time of the regularization term                         -              15.98              83.58
                 Total time                                           40161.68        18321.39           18592.01



                                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    DISCUSSION: THE DESIGN OF PREDICTIVE UNCERTAINTY.

We here discuss two advantages of using the model loss (i.e., InfoNCE loss) as predictive uncertainty
to select samples. First, InfoNCE loss is exactly the objective function of our model, so what we
do is actually to select the samples with the greatest contributions to the objective function (i.e.,
select the samples with the greatest InfoNCE loss). Such strategy has been justified to accelerate
convergence and enhance the discriminative power of the learned representations [1-4]. Second,
as the loss function of our model, InfoNCE is already computed during the training, and thus no
additional computation expense is needed in the data selection phase.

R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar, Mostafa Dehghani, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring the limits of
  large scale pre-training. In ICLR, 2022.

Francesco Bonchi, Pooya Esfandiar, David F Gleich, Chen Greif, and Laks VS Lakshmanan. Fast
  matrix computations for pairwise and columnwise commute times and katz scores. Internet Math-
  ematics, 8(1-2):73–112, 2012.

Hongyun Cai, Vincent W Zheng, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Active learning for graph embed-
  ding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05085, 2017.

Aaron Clauset, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, and Mark EJ Newman. Power-law distributions in empirical
  data. SIAM review, 51(4):661–703, 2009.

Paul D Dobson and Andrew J Doig. Distinguishing enzyme structures from non-enzymes without
  alignments. Journal of molecular biology, 330(4):771–783, 2003.

M. Fire, L. Tenenboim, O. Lesser, R. Puzis, L. Rokach, and Y. Elovici. Link prediction in so-
 cial networks using computationally efficient topological features. In IEEE third international
 conference on social computing, pp. 73–80, 2011.

Jesús Gómez-Gardenes and Vito Latora. Entropy rate of diffusion processes on complex networks.
  Physical Review E, 78(6):065102, 2008.

Hakim Hafidi, Mounir Ghogho, Philippe Ciblat, and Ananthram Swami. Graphcl: Contrastive self-
  supervised learning of graph representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08025, 2020.

Bronwyn H Hall, Adam B Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. The nber patent citations data file: lessons,
  insights and methodological tools. 2001.

Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2005.00687, 2020a.

Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. NeurIPS,
 33:22118–22133, 2020b.

Chen Huang, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. Local similarity-aware deep feature embedding.
  In NeurIPS, pp. 1262–1270, 2016.

Jure Leskovec, Kevin J Lang, Anirban Dasgupta, and Michael W Mahoney. Community structure
  in large networks: Natural cluster sizes and the absence of large well-defined clusters. Internet
  Mathematics, 6(1):29–123, 2009.

Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg. Predicting positive and negative links in
  online social networks. In WWW, pp. 641–650, 2010.

Sihang Li, Xiang Wang, An Zhang, Yingxin Wu, Xiangnan He, and Tat-Seng Chua. Let invariant
  rationale discovery inspire graph contrastive learning. In ICML, pp. 13052–13065, 2022.


                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christopher W Lynn, Lia Papadopoulos, Ari E Kahn, and Danielle S Bassett. Human information
  processing in complex networks. Nature Physics, 16(9):965–973, 2020.
Andrew Kachites McCallum, Kamal Nigam, Jason Rennie, and Kristie Seymore. Automating the
  construction of internet portals with machine learning. Information Retrieval, 2(3):127–163,
  2000.
Galileo Namata, Ben London, Lise Getoor, and Bert Huang. Query-driven active surveying for
  collective classification. In MLG, pp. 1, 2012.
Marion Neumann, Roman Garnett, Christian Bauckhage, and Kristian Kersting. Propagation ker-
 nels: efficient graph kernels from propagated information. Machine Learning, 102(2):209–245,
 2016.
Hongbin Pei, Bingzhe Wei, Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang, Yu Lei, and Bo Yang. Geom-gcn: Geometric
  graph convolutional networks. In ICLR, 2019.
Jiezhong Qiu, Qibin Chen, Yuxiao Dong, Jing Zhang, Hongxia Yang, Ming Ding, Kuansan Wang,
   and Jie Tang. Gcc: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network pre-training. In SIGKDD,
   pp. 1150–1160, 2020.
Leonardo FR Ribeiro, Pedro HP Saverese, and Daniel R Figueiredo. struc2vec: Learning node
  representations from structural identity. In SIGKDD, pp. 385–394, 2017.
Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. The network data repository with interactive graph analytics
  and visualization. In AAAI, pp. 4292–4293, 2015.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In CVPR, pp. 815–823, 2015.
Kihyuk Sohn. Improved deep metric learning with multi-class n-pair loss objective. In NeurIPS, pp.
  1849–1857, 2016.
Yumin Suh, Bohyung Han, Wonsik Kim, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Stochastic class-based hard example
  mining for deep metric learning. In CVPR, pp. 7244–7252, 2019.
Amanda L Traud, Peter J Mucha, and Mason A Porter. Social structure of Facebook networks.
 Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 391(16):4165–4180, 2012.
Feng Xia, Jiaying Liu, Hansong Nie, Yonghao Fu, Liangtian Wan, and Xiangjie Kong. Random
  walks: A review of algorithms and applications. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Com-
  putational Intelligence, 4(2):95–107, 2019.
Pinar Yanardag and SVN Vishwanathan. Deep graph kernels. In SIGKDD, pp. 1365–1374, 2015.
Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. Defining and evaluating network communities based on ground-
  truth. In SIGKDD, pp. 1–8, 2012.


                                               29
