Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


V ISUAL E XPERTISE AND THE L OG -P OLAR T RANS -
FORM E XPLAIN I MAGE I NVERSION E FFECTS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Visual expertise can be defined as the ability to discriminate among subordinate-
         level objects in homogeneous classes, such as identities of faces within the class
         ”face”. Despite being able to discriminate many faces, subjects perform poorly at
         recognizing even familiar faces once inverted. This face-inversion effect is in con-
         trast to subjects’ performance identifying inverted objects for which their experi-
         ence is at a basic level, which results in less impairment. Experimental results have
         suggested that when identifying mono-oriented objects, such as cars, car novices’
         performance is between that of faces and other objects. We build an anatomically-
         inspired neurocomputational model to explore this effect. Our model includes a
         foveated retina and the log-polar mapping from the visual field to V1. This trans-
         formation causes changes in scale to appear as horizontal translations, leading to
         scale equivariance. Rotation is similarly equivariant, leading to vertical transla-
         tions. When fed into a standard convolutional network, this provides rotation and
         scale invariance. It may be surprising that a rotation-invariant network shows any
         inversion effect at all. This is because there is a crucial topological difference be-
         tween scale and rotation: Rotational invariance is discontinuous, with V1 ranging
         from 90°(vertically up) to 270°(vertically down). Hence when a face is inverted,
         the configural information in the face is disrupted while feature information is
         relatively unaffected. We show that the inversion effect arises as a result of vi-
         sual expertise, where configural information becomes relevant as more identities
         are learned at the subordinate level. Our model matches the classic result: faces
         suffer more from inversion than mono-oriented objects, which are more disrupted
         than non-mono-oriented objects when objects are only familiar at a basic level.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Since 1969, researchers have been studying the effects of inverting images (Yin, 1969). Some re-
searchers have focused on defining the bounds of inversion effects: what the measurable effect is
for what types of images (Farah et al., 1995; Yin, 1969; Jacques et al., 2007; Rezlescu et al., 2017).
Others looked to explain how inversion effects arise: what part of the brain was active during inver-
sion tasks or what level of experience a participant had with the stimuli in the experiment (Gauthier
et al., 2000; Gauthier & Bukach, 2007; Gauthier et al., 2014; Kanwisher et al., 1997; 1998; Richler
et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014).
In Yin (1969), participants studied a set of images during the training phase, and then they were
shown pairs of images in testing and asked to select the image that was in the study set. Trials with
upright images and trials with inverted images were compared to determine the inversion effect.
Using images of faces resulted in a strong and significant inversion effect - performance was much
worse for inverted faces. Images of houses - a mono-oriented category - had a lesser, but still
significant effect. Images of airplanes had an insignificant inversion effect. We draw two conclusions
from this work: the effects of inversion on performance are greater when images of faces are used as
the stimuli and insignificant when images of certain objects (e.g., planes, that are less mono-oriented
than houses) are used as the stimuli (Yin, 1969). The second conclusion is that not all objects
produce the same inversion effects. Mono-oriented objects, which are objects that are typically seen
in only one orientation such as the houses in Yin’s 1969 work, do show an inversion effect, though
it is smaller than that of faces (Yin, 1969).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since Yin’s 1969 paper on inversion, a great deal of research has focused on explaining inversion
effects. Why is it that different stimuli - faces, objects, mono-oriented objects - produce different
inversion effects? One explanation of inversion effects, supported by brain imaging and behavioral
studies, is that visual expertise changes the way we process visual stimuli. Faces are processed holis-
tically, which means that not just the features, but the configuration of the features matters. When
such stimuli are inverted, the configuration is disrupted, and we are left with featural processing
(Gauthier et al., 2000; 1999; 2003). Similar inversion effects have been observed in experts of other
domains, such as dog show judges or bird watchers (Diamond & Carey, 1986; Gauthier et al., 2000).
Visual expertise is defined with respect to Rosch’s basic level categories. In a category hierarchy,
the basic level is the level at which objects are most commonly labeled, such as ”chair”, ”tree”,
or ”car”. Basic level categories define broad categories of objects that share properties such as
general appearance, function, and common parts (Rosch et al., 1976). For example, cars can look
very different from each other, but they all have wheels, an enclosed space for passengers, and are
used for ground transportation. Visual expertise is defined as having proficiency in differentiating
subordinate-level sub-classes of basic level categories. For example, subordinates of the basic level
category ”tree” could include ”sugar maple”, ”american elm”, or ”northern red oak”.
Most people are face experts in this sense. It has been estimated that we are able to identify on
the order of 5,000 different people (Jenkins et al., 2018). Identity is a subordinate-level judgment
because faces share the same features (eyes, nose, mouth, ears, etc.) in the same general configu-
ration. We also process faces holistically (Gauthier & Bukach, 2007). This means that instead of
just using the features of a face to recognize a person, we use the configural information, such as
the distance between the eyes, or the distance from the nose to the mouth. Hence, expertise is fine
grained discrimination of homogeneous categories. The research into expertise suggests that experts
in other domains, such as cars or birds, also use configural information when viewing basic level
categories in which the participants are experts (Gauthier et al., 2000).
We conduct experiments in order to ask if there is a way to characterize inversion effects in dif-
ferent stimuli in terms of levels of expertise. In doing so, we explore the changes in visual signal
processing that occur between novice level and expert level. To do this, We build an anatomically
inspired network that incorporates foveation - high resolution central vision and low resolution pe-
ripheral vision - and the log polar mapping between the visual field and the primary visual cortex
(Polimeni et al., 2006). The log polar mapping causes changes in image scale to appear as horizontal
translations. When presented as input to a convolutional neural network (CNN), which is translation
invariant, the log polar mapping makes the network relatively scale invariant. Image rotation is sim-
ilarly equivariant in the log-polar representation, because it leads to vertical translations. However,
the two differ topologically: pixels that shift vertically can ”fall off” the edge of the image and wrap
around to the opposite edge. This causes a rearranging of features in the image, hence a disruption
of configural information.
Using this model, we test the inversion effects of different types of stimuli across increasing expertise
in order to gain an insight into how and why visual processing changes based on the visual stimulus.
Our model is consistent with the view that expertise plays a significant role in the way we process
visual inputs, and leads to the inversion effects seen in previous work.

2     M ETHODS

2.1   M ODEL

We use ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) to perform all experiments, trained from scratch with the
foveated, log-polar representation. We call this LPnet. We compare our results to a ”vanilla” ResNet-
50 with standard images. Unless otherwise noted, all experiments use the Adam optimizer, an initial
learning rate of 1e-4, and a minibatch size of 48.

2.2   DATA

To test the effects of expertise in visual processing, we use four different datasets. To model experts,
the first three datasets are images of faces, cars, and dogs, generally mono-oriented objects, with
targets at the subordinate level. To model novices, who mainly know basic-level labels, the fourth


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 A                         B                           C                         D


Figure 1: Example images used for recognition experiments from four datasets: (A) a lab-gathered
face dataset, (B) Comprehensive Cars dataset, (C) ImageNet (dog categories only), and (D) Ima-
geNet (dog categories excluded).


dataset contains 128 categories with basic-level targets. 124 are ImageNet categories, containing
objects that are seen in a variety of orientations in natural scenes. The remaining four are mono-
oriented: faces, cars, houses, and dogs. We randomly chose our sets with a 80/10/10 split.
Faces We used a dataset collected by lab members which includes 128 separate identities and ap-
proximately 200 example images per identity. The images for each identity portray the person in a
variety of contexts, with differing backgrounds, lighting conditions, orientations, and facial expres-
sions. Example images from the dataset are shown in Figure 1A.
Subordinate level mono-oriented objects: Cars Cars are an appropriate choice for mono-oriented
objects because they are almost exclusively seen upright in natural scenes. ”Car” is also a basic
level category with a number of sub-classes. Car expertise is associated with discrimination at the
level of model, e.g., 2010 Toyota Camry. The dataset used is the Comprehensive Cars dataset (Yang
et al., 2015). These images include cars of a variety of makes, models, and years. The dataset
contains 136,726 total images across 163 car makes and 1,716 car models. The cars are of varying
orientations, lighting conditions, and backgrounds. Examples of cars from the Comprehensive Cars
dataset are shown in Figure 1B.
Subordinate level mono-oriented objects: Dogs In the same way that models of cars are subor-
dinates of the category ”car”, dog breeds are subordinates of the category ”dog”. We use 117 dog
breeds included in ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Like all of ImageNet, these images are highly
variable in pose, context, and scale. Because of this we use all available images from ImageNet in
these 117 categories. Examples of dogs in the dataset are shown in Figure 1C.
Basic level categories We use a subset of 124 categories from ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) which
were chosen specifically because they are naturally viewed in multiple orientations, such as ”ladle”,
”screwdriver”, or ”dumbbell” (Figure 1D). We avoided categories such as ”clock” or ”candle” which,
although can be oriented multiple ways, are naturally seen primarily in a limited number of orienta-
tions. The labels for the stimuli in this category are at the basic level, instead of at the subordinate
level as in the previous two datasets (Rosch et al., 1976). Again, due to the within-category variance,
we used all examples in ImageNet in order to achieve acceptable performance. We also included 4
categories (bringing the total number of categories to 128) that are mono-oriented. They are: ”face”,
”car”, ”dog”, and ”house”. Using these mono-oriented objects in our experiment with basic level
categorization allows us to compare how performance changes between experts and novices as vi-
sual expertise general increases. We aggregate data from each of the subordinates of ”face”, ”car”,
and ”dog” to get a varied sample of images for these categories. We matched the number of images
approximately to the number of images the ImageNet categories included.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Crop 1                                            Crop 2
                 0°        15°             180°                0°              15°            180°

 Standard
 Log Polar


Figure 2: A visualization of the log polar transformation for two crops of the same image. The
top row shows standard images, or a depiction of the visual field. The bottom row shows images
that have been transformed, using the log polar mapping that approximates the representation of the
visual field in V1. For each crop, we show both image types at three amounts of rotation: 0°, 15°,
and 180°.


2.3          DATA TRANSFORMATIONS

Cropping We augment our data by performing random cropping on the images. We take four
random crops of each image, with each crop including approximately 65% of the pixels in the image.
The crops cannot extend past the edge of the image, so none of the crops include any padding.
Rotation We randomly rotated our training images to be between -15°and 15°, because scenes may
be viewed with some small amount of rotation from the tilting of the viewers own head. To study
the effects of inversion in the network, our validation images are shown at 0°and 180°.
Foveation For LPNet only, we foveate each crop using the algorithm described in Jiang et al. (2015).
The foveation leaves the center of the crop (the point of fixation) at a high resolution and transforms
the periphery to be at a lower resolution. The further a pixel is from the center of the image, the
greater the degree of blurring. This mimics the foveation of the retina (Jiang et al., 2015).
Log-polar transform For LPNet only, we further preprocessed our images to create an
anatomically-realistic mapping of the visual field onto the visual cortex. Previous work has shown
the validity of using log polar transformations as a 2D approximation to the mapping of the visual
field onto the visual cortex in primates (Polimeni et al., 2006) and in computational models of facial
recognition (Anonymous). For each case of rotation, we first rotated the image and then took the
log polar transformation of the image. After the images have undergone a log polar transformation,
the changes in degrees of rotation appear as changes in vertical translation. This is in contrast to the
shifts that occur when scaled images undergo a log polar transformation, which are in the horizontal
direction. This vertical shift causes pixels to “fall off” the edge of V1. Those pixels wrap around
to the opposite side of V1. Instead of appearing as a simple translation, changes in rotation in im-
ages that have undergone a log polar transformation result in a fundamental rearranging of image
components. A visualization of the log polar transform is provided in Figure 2.
All transformations cropping, rotation, and foveation and log-polarization for LPNet are done at the
beginning of every epoch. For LPNet, the cropping has a large effect, as the fixation point changes
with each crop. To see this, note the difference in the two fixations in Figure 2.


3            E XPERIMENT I: FACES AND O BJECTS

Based on Yin (1969), we first explore the difference in the effect of inversion based on whether a
participant is viewing faces (objects of expertise) or objects for which the subject is a novice, so only
categorized at the basic level. In that work, Yin found that images of faces produced a significant
and large inversion effect, while images of airplanes did not produce a significant inversion effect.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

We define expertise in our model as the ability to differentiate between subordinates of basic level
categories. When using subordinate level visual stimuli, such as individual face identities, the net-
work has to learn to discriminate between very similar visual stimuli. For example, faces share fea-
tures and the same overall organization of features. Just as with humans, being able to discriminate
very few subordinates demonstrates a low level of expertise with a particular basic level category
of visual stimuli. Being able to discriminate visually between many subordinates demonstrates high
visual expertise with that category. Our network learned to perform categorization tasks using 4, 8,
16, 32, 64, or 128 categories of either faces or non mono-oriented objects.
Over training, we increase the number of classifications the network makes in order to mimic the
increase of visual expertise over time, similar to first knowing only family members, then adding
family friends, then pre-K, etc. The network is trained for 40 epochs with 4 category outputs (iden-
tities for faces, object categories for the ”novice” network). After 40 epochs, 4 new categories are
added. There is an immediate sharp drop in accuracy, but during the next 40 epochs the network
learns the 8 categories. This continues for a total of 240 epochs, across 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128
category outputs. Each phase of training is essentially performing pretraining of the network for the
next phase of training by learning features that are helpful for discrimination.
During training, cropped images are rotated randomly between -15°and 15°. Testing images are
presented in two conditions: upright (0°) and inverted (180°). The upright condition provides a
baseline so that we can measure the amount the accuracy decreases after inversion. The amount the
accuracy drops in the inverted condition is relative to the accuracy of the upright condition, so we
report the percent drop in accuracy due to inversion, i.e.,
                                Acclost = (Accup − Accinv )/Accup                                      (1)
By looking at the percent drop between the accuracies for the two testing conditions, we can deter-
mine the effect inversion had on the network’s recognition capabilities.
This experiment includes four configurations of networks and data: (1) CNN with face dataset (2)
CNN with object dataset (3) LPNet with face dataset and (4) LPNet with object dataset.

3.2   R ESULTS

We ran all experiments five times and averaged the results. Figure 3 shows the accuracy over train-
ing. The first row is for standard CNNs and the second row is LPNet. The effect of the stimuli and
the category level of the stimuli, either basic level or subordinate level, is clear. The green line is the
training accuracy, the yellow line is the validation accuracy for upright images, and the magenta line
is the validation accuracy for inverted images. For the face stimuli, even in early phases of train-
ing, there is a performance gap between the upright validation accuracy and the inverted validation
accuracy. As the network learns to differentiate more identities, this performance gap continues to
increase. When using objects as the training stimuli, the difference in performance between the two
validation conditions is overall much smaller, with no apparent gap during the first phase of training.
In addition, the size of the gap changes less throughout training.
The results on the CNN and LPNet have similar trends in that both show performance gaps between
the two validation conditions which increase as the number of identities increases. This gap is larger
for the CNN, in part because the inverted condition is more difficult for it. With inverted faces, the
CNN fails nearly completely on inverted images of faces with an accuracy of approximately 4%.
This is because the log polar transform provides some rotation invariance that standard CNNs do
not have. Hence LPnet is more representative of human ability on inverted images.
Figure 4 shows the percent accuracy lost as in Eq. 1, i.e., the accuracy lost relative to the upright
accuracy, directly measuring how much inverting an image will disrupt performance in any given
experiment. In Figure 4, it is clear that image inversion has a significant impact with face stimuli,
and a much smaller impact with object stimuli. This mirrors the first conclusion of Yin 1969. One of
the categories included in the object experiment is houses. In order to recreate Yin’s experiment, we
also plot the percent accuracy lost on just the house category. The percent accuracy lost for houses
is much lower than that of faces, but slightly higher than objects. This mirrors the second conclusion
of Yin 1969. Figure 4 also shows how the percent accuracy lost on a standard CNN is higher than the


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                              Face Stimuli                                                               Object Stimuli
              1.0                                                                                1.0

              0.8                                                                                0.8

              0.6                                                                                0.6
    CNN


              0.4                                                                                0.4
                               Training                                                                         Training
              0.2              Upright Val                                                       0.2            Upright Val
                               Inverted Val                                                                     Inverted Val
              0.0                                                                                0.0
                      0        40        80         120        160         200       240               0        40     80      120      160    200   240
                                                Epochs                                                                         Epochs
              1.0                                                                                1.0

              0.8                                                                                0.8
    LPNet


              0.6                                                                                0.6

              0.4                                                                                0.4
                               Training                                                                         Training
              0.2              Upright Val                                                       0.2            Upright Val
                               Inverted Val                                                                     Inverted Val
              0.0                                                                                0.0
                      0        40        80         120        160         200       240               0        40     80      120      160    200   240
                                                Epochs                                                                         Epochs
Figure 3: Accuracy throughout training on standard CNNs and LPNet for face and object stimuli.
The green line is training accuracy, the orange line is accuracy on validation images at 0°, and
the magenta line is accuracy on validation images rotated 180°. Shaded regions are +/-1 standard
deviation.
                          CNN                                        LPNet
            1.0                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                           Cars
                                                                                                           Faces
            0.8                                                                            0.8             Dogs
                                                                                                           Houses
            0.6                                                                            0.6             Objects

            0.4                                                            Faces           0.4
                                                                           Cars
                                                                           Dogs
            0.2                                                            Houses          0.2
                                                                           Objects
            0.0                                                                            0.0
                  0       20        40         60         80         100     120                 0         20    40       60     80      100   120
                                    Number of Categories                                                         Number of Categories

Figure 4: Percent accuracy lost across all phases of training on a standard CNN and LPNet. Shown
for faces, car models, and dog breeds (all expert networks), and houses and objects from the basic-
level categorizer.


corresponding values on LPnet. This is because there is such a significant performance decrease on
inverted images; the standard CNN is losing a larger proportion of the upright validation accuracy.


4           E XPERIMENT II: E XPERTISE EFFECTS WITH CARS MODELS AND DOG
            BREEDS

In the previous experiment we saw that the inversion effect for faces was significant and the inversion
effect for objects using a network with ability at the basic level was not significant. Here we explore


                                                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


expertise with mono-oriented objects, cars and dogs, to compare the inversion effect of faces to that
of mono-oriented objects identified by models with expert level knowledge. We can also determine
if the degree of expertise of the network changes the magnitude of inversion effects.

4.1   E XPERIMENT SETUP

To study expertise in mono-oriented objects, we trained two different sets of networks: one to dis-
tinguish the sub-class of car models and one to distinguish the sub-class of dog breeds. Being able
to differentiate between different car models (e.g. Toyota Camry, Hyundai Santa Fe) is indicative of
a car ”expert”. We again run experiments with both standard CNNs and LPNet.
Aside from the data chosen, this experiment follows the same setup and procedure as the previous
experiment. We increase the number of identities being differentiated during each phase of training.
For car models, our phases of training include 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128 category outputs. The mean
number of examples per car model used in our experiments is 151 images. For dogs, our phases of
training include 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 117 category outputs. This is limited by the number of dog
breeds available in ImageNet. These images inherently have more variation in pose (dogs sitting,
standing, jumping, rolling around, etc.), so we used all available images from the dog categories of
ImageNet, which averages to approximately 1500 images per dog breed.

4.2   R ESULTS

The results for these experiments are shown in Figure 5 with the first row of plots representing
results on a standard CNN and the second row representing results on LPNet. For all plots, the
validation accuracy gap is much smaller at the beginning of training, but continues to increase as
more categories are added. Like the previous experiment, it is much more difficult for the CNN
to distinguish inverted images than it is for LPNet, because of the rotation invariance provided by
LPNet. Looking just at LPNet plots, the car and dog upright validation accuracies (Figure 5) and
the face upright validation accuracies (Figure 3) vary widely. In addition, the number of percentage
points lost because of inversion in these experiments also varies. This is because of differences
in data that are hard to control for, like more complicated backgrounds for cars and dogs, similar
contexts for faces, and amount of data available to train on. Despite these differences, when looking
at the percent accuracy lost in Figure 4, it is clear that the network experienced a very similar
inversion effect in each expert LPNet network. This is because percent accuracy lost measures how
much of the upright validation accuracy was lost due to inversion (how big of an impact inversion
had), not the net number of percentage points lost.
Discriminating between different subordinate categories may become harder or easier for the net-
work depending on the stimulus class itself or the context of the images. However, the percent
accuracy lost shows that image inversion affects LPNet trained as an expert on car models or dogs
in almost the same way it affects LPNet trained on faces. This is consistent with the Diamond &
Carey (1986) results.


5     E XPERIMENT III: R ECREATION OF HUMAN EXPERIMENT: C OMPLETE
      COMPOSITE PARADIGM

To further compare network performance more directly to human data, we recreate the complete
composite paradigm (Gauthier & Bukach, 2007; Meinhardt et al., 2014) for LPNet with face data
and for a standard CNN with face data. The complete composite paradigm is a way to measure
holistic face processing. Subjects view two faces and are asked to attend only to the top half of the
face. They are then asked to determine if the top halves are the same or different. This is done in four
conditions. In congruent trials the answer for the top and bottom images are the same: both the top
and bottom halves are the same or both the top and bottom halves are different. Incongruent trials
have the same top half of the face with different bottom halves of the face or vice versa. Holistic
processing is measured as the difference between congruent and incongruent trials. Figure 6A shows
a diagram of the complete composite paradigm from (Meinhardt et al., 2014) and Figure 6B shows
example images used in our experiment.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                         Car Model Stimuli                                             Dog Breed Stimuli
         1.0                                                 1.0

         0.8                                                 0.8

         0.6                                                 0.6
 CNN


         0.4                                                 0.4
                   Training                                                     Training
         0.2       Upright Val                               0.2                Upright Val
                   Inverted Val                                                 Inverted Val
         0.0                                                 0.0
               0   40     80      120      160   200   240                  0   40      80     120      160      200      240
                                  Epochs                                                       Epochs
         1.0                                                 1.0

         0.8                                                 0.8
 LPNet


         0.6                                                 0.6

         0.4                                                 0.4
                   Training                                                     Training
         0.2       Upright Val                               0.2                Upright Val
                   Inverted Val                                                 Inverted Val
         0.0                                                 0.0
               0   40     80      120      160   200   240                  0   40      80     120      160      200      240
                                  Epochs                                                       Epochs
Figure 5: Accuracy throughout training on standard CNNs and LPNet for car model stimuli and dog
breed stimuli. LPNet dog breed plot averaged over three runs.



         A                                                          B                Same                     Different
                                                              Congruent
                                                              Incongruent


Figure 6: (A) A figure from (Meinhardt et al., 2014) showing different combinations of facial com-
ponents included in the complete composite paradigm. (B) Images of whole and mismatched faces
used to recreate the complete composite paradigm in our network. Here, ”Same” judgments are on
the top half of the face.


We compare the output from the last convolutional layer of the network for different images and
calculate the cosine similarity for a pair of images. The fixation point for the network on the images
is between the eyes (as subjects are instructed to attend to the top potion of the face) and three pixels
left of center, which comes from data that the first fixation people make when viewing a face is to
the left of center (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2008). We perform three trials for each network using three sets
of images and average over the trials to get the final cosine similarities. This experiment is done for
both upright and inverted images.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Upright Images                Inverted Images
          Network     Trial type    |congruent - incongruent |    |congruent - incongruent |
          CNN         Same                    0.3086                         0.4061
          CNN         Different               0.0913                         0.0661
          LPNet       Same                    0.2463                         0.1983
          LPNet       Different               0.0848                         0.1196

Table 1: Difference in cosine similarity between congruent and incongruent trials for CNN and
LPNet.



5.1   R ESULTS

In Gauthier (2007), the holistic processing effect is calculated as the difference between the congru-
ent and incongruent trials for d’ or the hit rate. Because we do not have the data to calculate a hit
rate, we instead subtract our cosine similarities between congruent and incongruent trials. As seen
in Table 1, both LPNet and the CNN show holistic processing of upright faces with a difference
between congruent and incongruent trials being larger than zero. The CNN shows a larger effect,
meaning it preforms holistic processing to a greater degree. This helps explain why CNNs preform
so poorly on inverted images; they rely on the configural information but do not have any rotation
invariance. The CNN has the same performance with inverted faces. LPNet, however, sees a drastic
decrease in holistic processing for inverted faces, just as people do [REF].



6     C ONCLUSION

We explored image inversion effects and the impact of visual expertise on performance. By using
images of faces, objects, cars, and dogs, we were able to show that LPNet, a convolutional neural
network that includes a foveated retina and the log polar mapping from the visual field to V1, can
reproduce experimental results of image inversion despite being nominally rotation invariant. We
showed that there is a larger effect on performance from inverting images of faces than images
of objects, which increases as the number of categories being discriminated increases. We then
explored the result that images of mono-oriented objects have an inversion effect between that of
faces and objects by showing performance of a house-novice network. Expert networks on mono-
oreinted objects do not show an effect between that of faces and objects. We showed that LPNet
trained to distinguish car models or dog breeds showed similar inversion effects to faces. This
suggests that inversion effects are not dependent on the stimulus, but rather on the level of visual
expertise with the stimulus and on the categorization level of the stimulus (expert or novice viewing
subordinate or basic level categories).
Image inversion effects are dependent on the level of expertise because of an expert’s reliance on
configural information to do fine grain discrimination. These effects occur with both CNNs and
LPNet. LPNet is more realistic to human vision for the inclusion of the log polar transform, which
provides scale and rotation invariance. This is seen with inverted images, when CNNs nearly com-
pletely fail to perform differentiation while LPNet is still able to perform some differentiation. We
have shown that, when using the log polar transform, the inversion of an image causes a rearrange-
ment of features and a loss of configural information.
The log polar transform approximates the mapping from the visual field to V1, meaning that dis-
ruption of configural information occurs before V1 - before the cortex gets the visual input. When
LPnet is not an expert, the loss of configural information has a minimal impact on discrimination
ability, and it is able to perform the task with only minor performance changes. As LPNet is asked
to do more fine grain discrimination between categories, it relies more heavily on the configural
information held within the image.
Our results support the hypothesis that the source of the inversion effect in visual expertise, including
face expertise, is disruption of configural information at the level of V1.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Anonymous.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009.
R Diamond and S Carey. Why faces are and are not special: An effect of expertise. Journal of
  Experimental Psychology: General, 115(2):107–117, 1986.
Martha J. Farah, James W. Tanaka, and H. Maxwell Drain. What causes the face inversion effect?
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21:628–634, 1995.
Isabel Gauthier and Cindy Bukach. Should we reject the expertise hypothesis? Cognition, 103:
   322–330, 2007.
Isabel Gauthier, Michael Tarr, Adam Anderson, Pawel Skudlarski, and John Gore. Activation of
   the middle fusiform ’face area’ increases with expertise in recognizing novel objects. Nature
   neuroscience, 2:568–73, 07 1999.
Isabel Gauthier, Pawel Skudlarskiand John C. Gore, and Adam W. Anderson. Expertise for cars and
   birds recruits brain areas involved in face recognition. Nature Neuroscience, 3:191–197, 2000.
Isabel Gauthier, Tim Curran, Kim M Curby, and Daniel Collins. Perceptual interference supports a
   non-modular account of face processing. Nature Neuroscience, 6:428–432, 2003.
Isabel Gauthier, Rankin W. McGugin, Jennifer J. Richler, Grit Herzmann, Magen Speegle, and Ana
   E. Van Gulick. Experience moderates overlap between object and facerecognition, suggesting a
   common ability. Journal of Vision, 14:1–12, 2014.
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. 2016 IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
Janet Huiwen Hsiao and Garrison Cottrell. Two fixations suffice in face recognition. Psychological
  science, 19:998–1006, 2008.
Corentin Jacques, Olivier d’Arripe, and Bruno Rossion. The time course of the inversion effect
  during individual face discrimination. Journal of Vision, 7, 6 2007.
R. Jenkins, A. J. Dowsett, and A. M. Burton. How many faces do people know? Proceedings of the
  Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 285), 2018.
Ming Jiang, Shengsheng Huang, Juanyong Duan, and Qi Zhao. Salicon: Saliency in context. 2015
 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1072–1080, 2015.
N. Kanwisher, F. Tong, and K. Nakayama. The effect of face inversion on the human fusiform face
  area. Cognition, 68, 1998.
Nancy Kanwisher, Josh McDermott, and Marvin M. Chun. The fusiform face area: A module
  in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. Journal of Neuroscience, 17(11):
  4302–4311, 1997.
Günter Meinhardt, Bozana Meinhardt-Injac, and Malte Persike. The complete design in the com-
  posite face paradigm: role of response bias, target certainty, and feedback. Frontiers in human
  neuroscience, 2014.
J.R. Polimeni, M. Balasubramanian, and E.L. Schwartz. Multi-area visuotopic map complexes in
   macaque striate and extra-striate cortex. Vision Research, 2006.
C. Rezlescu, T. Susilo, Jeremy B. Wilmer, and A. Caramazza. The inversion, part-whole, and com-
  posite effects reflect distinct perceptual mechanisms with varied relationships to face recognition.
  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 43:1961–1973, 2017.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jennifer J. Richler, Olivia S. Cheung, and Isabel Gauthier. Holistic processing predicts face recog-
  nition. Psychological Science, 22:464–471, 2011.
Eleanor Rosch, Carolyn B Mervis, Wayne D Gray, David M Johnson, and Penny Boyes-Braem.
  Basic objects in natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8(3):382–439, 1976.
Panqu Wang, Isabel Gauthier, and Garrison Cottrell. Experience matters: Modeling the relationship
  between face and object recognition. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
  Science Society, 2014.
Linjie Yang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. A large-scale car dataset for fine-
  grained categorization and verification. 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3973–3981, 2015.
Robert K Yin. Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81:141–145,
  1969.


                                                11
