Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E XCESS R ISK OF T WO -L AYER R E LU N EURAL N ET-
WORKS IN T EACHER -S TUDENT S ETTINGS AND ITS S U -
PERIORITY TO K ERNEL M ETHODS

 Shunta Akiyama
 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Japan
 shunta akiyama@mist.i-tokyo.ac.jp

 Taiji Suzuki
 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Japan
 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
 taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp



                                            A BSTRACT

         While deep learning has outperformed other methods for various tasks, theoretical
         frameworks that explain its reason have not been fully established. We investigate
         the excess risk of two-layer ReLU neural networks in a teacher-student regression
         model, in which a student network learns an unknown teacher network through its
         outputs. Especially, we consider the student network that has the same width as
         the teacher network and is trained in two phases: first by noisy gradient descent
         and then by the vanilla gradient descent. Our result shows that the student net-
         work provably reaches a near-global optimal solution and outperforms any kernel
         methods estimator (more generally, linear estimators), including neural tangent
         kernel approach, random feature model, and other kernel methods, in a sense of
         the minimax optimal rate. The key concept inducing this superiority is the non-
         convexity of the neural network models. Even though the loss landscape is highly
         non-convex, the student network adaptively learns the teacher neurons.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Explaining why deep learning empirically outperforms other methods has been one of the most sig-
nificant issues. In particular, from the theoretical viewpoint, it is important to reveal the mechanism
of how deep learning trained by an optimization method such as gradient descent can achieve supe-
rior generalization performance. To this end, we focus on the excess risk of two-layer ReLU neural
networks in a nonparametric regression problem and compare its rate to that of kernel methods.
One of the difficulties in showing generalization abilities of deep learning is the non-convexity of
the associated optimization problem Li et al. (2018), which may let the solution stacked in a bad
local minimum. To alleviate the non-convexity of neural network optimization, recent studies focus
on over-parameterization as the promising approaches. Indeed, it is fully exploited by (i) Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019;
Weinan et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2020) and (ii) mean field analysis (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017; Chizat
& Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2019; Tzen & Raginsky, 2020; Chizat, 2021; Suzuki & Akiyama, 2021).
In the setting of NTK, a relatively large-scale initialization is considered. Then the gradient descent
related to parameters of neural networks can be reduced to the convex optimization in RKHS, which
is easier to analyze. However, in this regime, it is hard to explain the superiority of deep learning
because the estimation ability of the obtained estimator is reduced to that of the corresponding
kernel. From this perspective, recent works focus on the “beyond kernel” type analysis Allen-Zhu &
Li (2019); Bai & Lee (2020); Li et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2020); Refinetti et al. (2021); Abbe et al.
(2022). Although their analysis shows the superiority of deep learning to kernel   √ methods in each
setting, in terms of the sample size (n), all derived bounds are essentially Ω(1/ n). This bound is
known to be sub-optimal for regression problems Caponnetto & De Vito (2007).


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In the mean field analysis setting, a kind of continuous limit of the neural network is considered, and
its convergence to some specific target functions has been analyzed. This regime is more suitable in
terms of a “beyond kernel” perspective, but it essentially deals with a continuous limit and hence is
difficult to control the discretization error when considering a teacher network with a finite width.
Indeed, the optimization complexity has been exploited recently in some research, but it still requires
an exponential time complexity in the worst case (Mei et al., 2018b; Hu et al., 2019; Nitanda et al.,
2021a). This problem is mainly due to the lack of landscape analysis that requires closer exploitation
of the problem structure. For example, we may consider the teacher student setting where the true
function is represented as a neural network. This allows us to use the landscape analysis in the
optimization analysis and give a more precise analysis of the statistical performance. In particular,
we can obtain a more precise characterization of the excess risk (e.g., Suzuki & Akiyama (2021)).
More recently, some studies have focused on the feature learning ability of neural networks (Abbe
et al., 2021; 2022; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Ba et al., 2022; Nguyen, 2021). Among them, Abbe et al.
(2021) considers estimation of the function with staircase property and multi-dimensional Boolean
inputs and shows that neural networks can learn that structure through stochastic gradient descent.
Moreover, Abbe et al. (2022) studies a similar setting and shows that in a high-dimensional setting,
two-layer neural networks with sufficiently
                                       √ smooth activation can outperform the kernel method.
However, obtained bound is still O(1/ n) and requires a higher smoothness for activation as the
dimensionality of the Boolean inputs increases.
The teacher-student setting is one of the most common settings for theoretical studies, e.g., (Tian,
2017; Safran & Shamir, 2018; Goldt et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Safran et al., 2021; Tian, 2020;
Yehudai & Shamir, 2020; Suzuki & Akiyama, 2021; Zhou et al., 2021; Akiyama & Suzuki, 2021) to
name a few. Zhong et al. (2017) studies the case where the teacher and student have the same width,
shows that the strong convexity holds around the parameters of the teacher network and proposes
a special tensor method for initialization to achieve the global convergence to the global optimal.
However, its global convergence is guaranteed only for a special initialization which excludes a pure
gradient descent method. Safran & Shamir (2018) empirically shows that gradient descent is likely
to converge to non-global optimal local minima, even if we prepare a student that has the same
size as the teacher. More recently, Yehudai & Shamir (2020) shows that even in the simplest case
where the teacher and student have the width one, there exist distributions and activation functions
in which gradient descent fails to learn. Safran et al. (2021) shows the strong convexity around
the parameters of the teacher network in the case where the teacher and student have the same
width for Gaussian inputs. They also study the effect of over-parameterization and show that over-
parameterization will change the spurious local minima into the saddle points. However, it should be
noted that this does not imply that gradient descent can reach the global optima. Akiyama & Suzuki
(2021) shows that the gradient descent with a sparse regularization can achieve the global optimal
solution for an over-parameterized student network. Thanks to the sparse regularization, the global
optimal solution can exactly recover the teacher network. However, this research requires a highly
over-parameterized network. Indeed, it requires an exponentially large number of widths in terms
of the dimensionality and the sample size. Moreover, they impose quite strong assumptions such
that there is no observation noise and the parameter of each neuron in the teacher network should be
orthogonal to each other.
The superiority of deep learning against kernel methods has also been discussed in the nonparametric
statistics literature. They show the minimax optimality of deep learning in terms of excess risk.
Especially a line of research (Schmidt-Hieber, 2020; Suzuki, 2018; Hayakawa & Suzuki, 2020;
Suzuki & Nitanda, 2021; Suzuki & Akiyama, 2021) shows that deep learning achieves faster rates
of convergence than linear estimators in several settings. Here, the linear estimators are a general
class of estimators that includes kernel ridge regression, k-NN regression, and Nadaraya-Watson
estimator. Among them, Suzuki & Akiyama (2021) treats a tractable optimization algorithm in
a teacher-student setting, but they require an exponential computational complexity and smooth
activation function, which does not include ReLU.
In this paper, we consider a gradient descent with two phases, a noisy gradient descent first and
a vanilla gradient descent next. Our analysis shows that through this method, the student network
recovers the teacher network in a polynomial order computational complexity (with respet to the
sample size) without using an exponentially wide network, even though we do not need the strong
assumptions such as the no-existence of noise and orthogonality. Moreover, we evaluate the excess
risk of the trained network and show that the trained network can outperform any linear estimators,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


including kernel methods, in terms of its dependence on the sample size. More specifically, our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We show that by two-phase gradient descent, the student network, which has the same
         width as the teacher network, provably reaches the near-optimal solution. Moreover, we
         conduct a refined analysis of the excess risk and provide the upper bound for the excess risk
         of the student network, which is much faster than that obtained by the generalization bound
         analysis with the Rademacher complexity argument. Throughout this paper, our analysis
         does not require the highly over-parameterization and any special initialization schemes.
       • We provide a comparison of the excess risk between the student network and linear estima-
         tors and show that while the linear estimators much suffer from the curse of dimensionality,
         the student network less suffers from that. Particularly, in high dimensional settings, the
         convergence rate of the excess risk of any linear estimators becomes close to O(n−1/2 ),
         which coincides with the classical bound derived by the Rademacher complexity argument.
       • The lower bound of the excess risk derived in this paper is valid for any linear estimator.
         The analysis is considerably general because the class of linear estimators includes kernel
         ridge regression with any kernel. This generality implies that the derived upper bound can-
         not be derived by the argument that uses a fixed kernel, including Neural Tangent Kernel.

2     P ROBLEM SETTINGS

Notations For m ∈ N, let [m] := {1, . . . , m}. For x ∈ Rd , kxk denotes its Euclidean norm. We
                                                        Pd
denote the inner product between x, y ∈ Rd by hx, yi = j=1 xi yi . Sd−1 denotes the unit sphere in
Rd . For a matrix W , we denote its operator and Frobenius norm by kW k2 and kW kF , respectively.
Here, we introduce the problem setting and the model that we consider in this paper. We focus on
a regression problem where we observe n training examples Dn = (xi , yi )ni=1 generated by the
following model for an unknown measurable function f ◦ : Rd → R:
                                          yi = f ◦ (xi ) +  i ,
where (xi )ni=1 is independently identically distributed sequence from PX that is the uniform distri-
bution over Ω = Sd−1 , and  i are i.i.d. random variables satisfying E[ i ] = 0, E[ 2i ] = v 2 , and
| i | ≤ U a.s.. Our goal is to estimate the true function f ◦ through the training data. To this end,
we consider the square loss `(y, f (x)) = (y − f (x))2 and define the expected risk and the em-
pirical risk as L(f ) := EX,Y [`(Y, f (X)] and L(fb ) := 1 `(yi , f (xi )), respectively. In this paper,
                                                           n
we measure the performance of an estimator fb by the excess risk L(fb) −             inf L(f ). Since
                                                                                f :measurable
                                                                                     2
inf L(f ) = L(f ) = 0, we can check that the excess risk coincides with kfb − f ◦ kL2 (PX ) , the L2 -
                 ◦

distance between fb and f ◦ . We remark that the excess risk is different from the generalization gap
L(fb) − L(
         b fb). Indeed, when considering the convergence rate with respect to n, the generalization
                                            √
gap typically converges to zero with O(1/ n) √   Wainwright (2019). On the other hand, the excess
risk can converge with the rate faster than O(1/ n), which is known as fast learning rate.

2.1   M ODEL OF TRUE FUNCTIONS

To evaluate the excess risk, we introduce a function class in which the true function f ◦ is included.
In this paper, we focus on the teacher-student setting with two-layer ReLU neural networks, in which
the true function (called teacher) is given by
                                                    m
                                                    X
                                   fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) =         a◦j σ(hwj◦ , xi),
                                                    j=1

where σ(u) = max{u, 0} is the ReLU activation, m is the width of the teacher model satisfying
m ≤ d, and a◦j ∈ R, wj◦ ∈ Rd for j ∈ [m] are its parameters. We impose several conditions for the
parameters of the teacher networks. Let W ◦ = (w1◦ w2◦ · · · wm
                                                              ◦
                                                                ) ∈ Rd×m and σ1 ≥ σ2 ≥ · · · ≥ σm


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


be the singular values of W ◦ . First, we assume that a◦j ∈ {±1} for any j ∈ [m]. Note that by 1-
homogeneity of the ReLU activation1 , this condition does not restrict the generality of the teacher
networks. Moreover, we assume that there exists σmin > 0 such that σm > σmin . If σm = 0, there
exists an example in which fa◦ ,W ◦ has multiple
                                             P representations. Indeed, ZhouP   et al. (2021) shows
                                                                                 m
that in the case a◦j = 1 for all j ∈ [m] and wj◦ = 0, it holds that fa◦ ,W ◦ = j=1 σ(hwj◦ , xi) =
Pm             ◦
   j=1 σ(h−wj , xi). Hence, throughout this paper, we focus on the estimation problem in which the
true function is included in the following class:
                        F ◦ := {fa◦ ,W ◦ | a◦ ∈ {±1}m , kW ◦ k2 ≤ 1, σm > σmin }.                            (1)
This class represents the two-layer neural networks with the ReLU activation whose width is at
most the dimensionality of the inputs. The constraint kW ◦ k2 ≤ 1 is assumed only for the analytical
simplicity and can be extended to any positive constants.

3       E STIMATORS

In this section, we introduce the classes of estimators: linear estimators and neural networks (student
networks) trained by two-phase gradient descent. The linear estimator is introduced as a general-
ization of the kernel method. We will show separation between any linear estimator and neural net-
works by giving a suboptimal rate of the excess risk for the linear estimators (Theorem 4.1), which
simultaneously gives separation between the kernel methods and the neural network approach. A
detailed comparison of the excess risk of these estimators will be conducted in Section 4.

3.1      L INEAR ESTIMATORS

Given observation (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ), an estimator fb is called linear if it is represented by
                                               n
                                               X
                                     fb(x) =         yi ϕi (x1 , . . . , xn , x),
                                               i=1
               n
where (ϕi )i=1 is a sequence of measurable and L2 (PX )-integrable functions. The most important
example in this study is the kernel ridge regression estimator. We note that the kernel ridge estimator
is given by fb(x) = Y T (KX + λI)−1 k(x), where KX = (k(xi , xj ))ni,j=1 ∈ Rn×n , k(x) =
[k(x, x1 ), . . . , k(x, xn )]T ∈ Rn and Y = [y1 , . . . , yn ]T ∈ Rn for a kernel function k : Rd × Rd →
R, which is linear to the output observation Y . Since this form is involved in the definition of linear
estimators, the kernel ridge regression with any kernel function can be seen as one of the linear
estimators. The choice of ϕi is arbitrary, and thus the choice of the kernel function is also arbitrary.
Therefore, we may choose the best kernel function before we observe the data. However, as we will
show in Theorem 4.1, it suffers from a suboptimal rate. Other examples include the k-NN estimator
and the Nadaraya-Watson estimator. Thus our analysis gives a suboptimality of not only the kernel
method but also these well-known linear estimators. Suzuki (2018); Hayakawa & Suzuki (2020)
utilized such an argument to show the superiority of deep learning but did not present any tractable
optimization algorithm.

3.2      S TUDENT NETWORKS TRAINED BY TWO - PHASE GRADIENT DESCENT

We prepare the neural network trained through the observation data (called student), defined by
                                                     m
                                                     X
                                       f (x; θ) =          aj σ(hwj , xi),
                                                     j=1

where θ = ((a1 , w1 ), . . . (am , wm )) ∈ R(d+1)m =: Θ. We assume that the student and teacher
networks have the same width. Based on this formulation, we aim to train the parameter θ that will
be provably close to that of the teacher network. To this end, we introduce the training algorithm,
two-phase gradient descent, which we consider in this paper.
    1
        σ(hw, xi) = kwkσ(hw/kwk, xi) for any w ∈ Rd /{0} and x ∈ Rd .


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Phase I: noisy gradient descent For r ∈ R, let r̄ := R · tanh (r|r|/2R) be a clipping of r, where
R > 1 is a fixed constant. In the first phase, we conduct a noisy gradient descent with the weight
decay regularization. The objective function used to train the student network is given as follows:
                                   n                           m
                    b λ (θ) := 1
                                  X                           X
                                                                                 2
                   R                  (yi − f (xi ; θ̄))2 + λ      |aj |2 + kwj k ,
                               2n i=1                         j=1

where θ̄ is the element-wise clipping of θ and λ > 0 is a regularization parameter. The parameter
clipping ensures the bounded objective value and smoothness of the expected risk around the origin,
which will be helpful in our analysis. Then, the parameters of the student network are updated by
                                                                s
                             (k+1)    (k)    (1)

                                                        (k)
                                                                  2η (1) (k)
                           θ       = θ − η ∇R      bλ θ       +         ζ ,
                                                                    β
                                        ∞
where η (1) > 0 is a step-size, ζ (k) k=1 are independently identically distributed noises from the
standard normal distribution, and β > 0 is a constant called inverse temperature. This type of noisy
gradient descent is called gradient Langevin dynamics. It is known that by letting β be large, we
can ensure that the smooth objective function will decrease. On the other hand, because of the
non-smoothness of the ReLU activation, the objective function R   b λ is also non-smooth. Hence it is
difficult to guarantee the small objective value. To overcome this problem, we evaluate the expected
one instead in the theoretical analysis, which is given by
                                                                 m
                             1 h                         2 i    X                   2

                 Rλ (θ) := Ex fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ̄)       +λ       |aj |2 + kwj k .
                             2                                  j=1

We can ensure a small Rλ (θ) after a sufficient number of iterations (see Section 4.2 for the detail).

Phase II: vanilla gradient descent After phase I, we can ensure that for each node of the student
network, there is a node of the teacher network that is relatively close to each other. Then we move
to conduct the vanilla gradient descent to estimate the parameters of the teacher more precisely.
Before conducting the gradient descent, we rescale the parameters as follows:
                        (k)                   (k)
                       aj     ← sgn(ā(k) ), wj     ← ā(k) w̄j (k) ,   ∀j ∈ [m].
We note this transformation does not change the output of the student network thanks to the 1-
homogeneity of the ReLU activation. After that, we update the parameters of the first layer by

                              W (k+1) = W (k) − η (2) ∇W R  b W (k) ,

                                                                    1
                                                                       Pn
where η (2) > 0 is a step-size different from η (1) and R(W
                                                        b    ) := 2n                           2
                                                                          i=1 (yi − f (xi ; θ)) . In this
phase, we no longer need to update the parameters of both layers. Moreover, the regularization
term and the gradient noise added in phase I are also unnecessary. These simplifications of the
optimization algorithm are based on the strong convexity of R(Wb     ) around W ◦ , the parameters of
the teacher network. The analysis for this local convergence property is based on that of Zhang et al.
(2019), and eventually, we can evaluate the excess risk of the student network.
The overall training algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 1. In summary, we characterize the role
of each phase as follows: in phase I, the student network explore the parameter space globally and
finds the parameters that are relatively close to that of teachers, and in phase II, the vanilla gradient
descent for the first layer outputs more precise parameters, as we analyze in Section 4.2.
Remark 3.1. Akiyama & Suzuki (2021) also considered the convergence      Pm of the gradient descent in
a teacher-student model. They considered a sparse regularization, j=1 |aj |kwj k, for the ReLU
                                                                   Pm
activation while we consider the L2 -regularization given by j=1 (|aj |2 + kwj k2 ). These two
regularizations are essentially the same since the Pmminimum of the later regularization under the
constraint of |aj |kwj k = const. is given by 2 j=1 |aj |kwj k by the arithmetic-geometric mean
relation. On the other hand, Akiyama & Suzuki (2021) consider a vanilla gradient descent instead
of the noisy gradient descent. This makes it difficult to reach the local region around the optimal
solution, and their analysis required an exponentially large width to find the region. We may use a
narrow network in this paper with the same width as the teacher network. This is due to the ability of
the gradient Langevin dynamics to explore the entire space and find the near global optimal solution.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Two-Phase Gradient Descent
Input: max iteration k (1) and k (2) , stepsize parameter η (1) , η (2) > 0, regularization parameter
    λ > 0, inverse temperature β > 0.
 1: Initialization: θ (0) ∼ ρ0 .
 2: for k = 1, 2, . . . , k (1) do
 3:    ζ (k) ∼ N (0, Im(d+1) )
                                             q
 4:    θ(k+1) = θ(k) − η (1) ∇R    b λ θ(k) + 2η(1) ζ (k)
                                                        β
 5: end for
                         (k)       (k)   (k)   (k) (k)
 6: Reparameterization: aj = sgn(āj ), wj = āj w̄j
 7: for k = k (1) + 1, k (1) + 2, . . . , k (2) do

 8:   W (k+1) = W (k) − η (2) ∇W R       b W (k)
 9: end for

4     E XCESS RISK ANALYSIS AND ITS COMPARISON
This section provides the excess risk bounds for linear estimators and the deep learning estimator
(the trained student network). More precisely, we give its lower bound for linear estimators and
upper bound for the student network. As a consequence, it will be provided that the student network
achieves a faster learning rate and less hurt from a curse of dimensionality than linear estimators.

4.1   M INIMAX LOWER BOUND FOR LINEAR ESTIMATORS

Here, we analyze the excess risk of linear estimators and introduce its lower bound. More specifi-
cally, we consider the minimax excess risk over the class of linear estimators given as follows:
                             Rlin (F ◦ ) = inf         sup EDn [kfb − f ◦ k2L2 (PX ) ],
                                            fb:linear f ◦ ∈F ◦

where the infimum is taken over all linear estimators, and the expectation is taken for the training
data. This expresses the infimum of worst-case error over the class of linear estimators to estimate
a function class F ◦ . Namely, any class of linear estimators cannot achieve a faster excess risk
than Rlin (F ◦ ). Based on this concept, we provide our result about the excess risk bound for linear
estimators. Under the definition of F ◦ by Eq. (1), we can obtain the lower bound as follows:
Theorem 4.1. For arbitrary small κ > 0, we have that
                                                                 d+2
                                          Rlin (F ◦ ) & n− 2d+2 n−κ .

The proof can be seen in Appendix A. This theorem implies that under d ≥ 2, the convergence
                                                2+2
rate of excess risk is at least slower than n− 2·2+2 = n−2/3 . Moreover, since − 2d+2
                                                                                  d+2
                                                                                       → −1/2 as
                                                                −1/2
d → ∞, the convergence rate of excess risk will be close to n         in high dimensional settings,
which coincides with the generalization bounds derived by the Rademacher complexity argument.
Hence, we can conclude that the linear estimators suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
The key strategy to show this theorem is the following “convex-hull argument” given as follows:
                                        Rlin (F ◦ ) = Rlin (conv(F ◦ )),
                       PN                                          PN
where conv(F ◦ ) := { j=1 λj fj | N ∈ N, fj ∈ F ◦ , λj ≥ 0, j=1 λj = 1} and conv(·) is the
closure of conv(·) in L2 (PX ). By combining this argument with the minimax optimal rate analysis
exploited in Zhang et al. (2002) for linear estimators, we obtain the rate in Theorem 4.1.
This equality implies that the linear estimators cannot distinguish the original class F ◦ and its convex
hull conv(F ◦ ). Therefore, if the function class F ◦ is highly non-convex, then the linear estimators
result in a much slower convergence rate since conv(F ◦ ) will be much larger than that of the original
class F ◦ . Indeed, we can show that the convex hull of the teacher network class is considerably
larger than the original function class, which causes the curse of dimensionality. For example, the
mean of two teacher networks with a width m can be a network with width 2m, which shows that
conv(F ◦ ) can consist of much wider networks. See Appendix A for more details.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   E XCESS RISK OF THE NEURAL NETWORKS

Here, we give an upper bound of the excess risk of the student network trained by Algorithm 1. The
main result is shown in Theorem 4.6, which states that the student network can achieve the excess
risk with O(n−1 ). This consequence is obtained by three-step analysis. First, (1) we provide a con-
vergence guarantee for phase I and phase II in Algorithm 1. We first show that by phase I, the value
of Rλ (θ(k) ) will be sufficiently small (see Proposition 4.3). Then, (2) we can show that the param-
eters of the student network and the teacher networks are close to each other by Proposition 4.4. By
using the strong convexity around the parameters of the teacher network, the convergence of phase II
is ensured. By combining these result, (3) we get the excess risk bound as Theorem 4.6.

(1) Convergence in phase I: First, we provide a convergence result and theoretical strategy of the
proof for phase I. Since the ReLU activation is non-smooth, the loss function R  b λ (·) is also non-
smooth. Therefore it is difficult to ensure the convergence of the gradient Langevin dynamics. To
overcome this problem, weqevaluate the value of Rλ (·) instead by considering the update θ(k+1) =
                                (1)
θ(k) − η (1) ∇Rλ θ(k) + 2η ζ (k) , and bound the residual due to using the gradient of R

                                                                                               b λ (·).
                                β
This update can be interpreted as the discretization of the following stochastic differential equation:
                                                            √
                                   dθ = −β∇Rλ (θ)dt + 2dBt ,
where (Bt )t≥0 is the standard Brownian motion in Θ(= R(d+1)m ). It is known that this process has
a unique invariant distribution π∞ that satisfies dπ
                                                   dθ (θ) ∝ exp(−βRλ (θ)). Intuitively, as β → ∞,
                                                     ∞

this invariant measure concentrates around the minimizer of Rλ . Hence, by letting β sufficiently
large, obtaining a near-optimal solution will be guaranteed.
Such a technique for optimization is guaranteed in recent works (Raginsky et al., 2017; Erdogdu
et al., 2018). However, as we stated above, they require a smooth objective function. Therefore we
cannot use the same technique here directly. To overcome this difficulty, we evaluate the difference
between ∇R  b λ and ∇Rλ as follows:
Lemma 4.2. There exists a constant C > 0 such that with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that
                                                                r
                 Vgrad := sup ∇Rλ (θ) − ∇R     b λ (θ) ≤ CR m d log(mdn/δ) .
                                                             3
                            θ                                             n

This lemma implies that with high probability, the difference between ∇R        b λ and ∇Rλ will vanish
as n → ∞. Thanks to this lemma, we can connect the dynamics of the non-smooth objective with
that of the smooth objective and import the convergence analysis developed so far in the smooth
objective. In particular, we utilize the technique developed by Vempala & Wibisono (2019) (see
Appendix C for more details). We should note that our result extends the existing one Vempala &
Wibisono (2019) in the sense that it gives the convergence for the non-differential objective function
Rb λ (·). As a consequence, we obtain the following convergence result as for phase I.
Proposition 4.3. Let R∗λ be the minimum value of Rλ in Θ, q be a density function of π∞ (i.e.,
q(θ) ∝ exp(−βRλ (θ))) and Hq (p) := R p(θ) log p(θ             )
                                                 R
                                                           q(θ ) dx be the KL-divergence. There exists a
constant c, C > 0 and the log-Sobolev constant α (defined in Lemma C.4) such that with step-size
                                                   2H (ρ )
0 < η (1) < c βRδλα
                  3 m3 d , after k
                                   (1)
                                       ≥ αηβ(1) log qδ 0 iteration, the output θ(k) satisfies
                                        "                     r                       3  #
                                                                       1     d        m dβ
            E[Rλ (θ(k) )] − R∗λ ≤ C (λ + m) exp m2 β

                                                                 δ+       +     log
                                                                     3nλ 2β             λ
with probability at least 1 − δ, where the expectation is taken over the initialization and Gaussian
random variables added in the algorithm.

Therefore, we can see that phase I optimization can find a near optimal solution with a polynomial
time complexity (with respect to n) even though the objective function is non-smooth. It also may
be considered to use the gradient Langevin dynamics to reach the global optimal solution by using
higher β. However, it requires increasing the inverse temperature β exponentially related to n and
other parameters, which leads to exponential computational complexity. To overcome this difficulty,


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we utilize the local landscape of the objective function. We can show the objective function will be
strongly convex around the teacher parameters and we do not need to use the gradient noise and any
regularization. Indeed, we can show that the vanilla gradient descent can reach the global optimal
solution in phase II, as shown in the following.

(2) Convergence in phase II: Next, we prove the convergence guarantee of phase II and provide
an upper bound of the excess risk. The convergence result is based on the fact that when Rλ (θ) is
small enough (guaranteed in Proposition 4.3), the parameters of the student network will be close to
those of the teacher network, as the following proposition:
Proposition 4.4. There exists a threshold  0 = poly(m−1 , σmin ) such that by letting λ ≤  0 /m, if
  = Rλ (θ)−R∗λ ≤  0 , it holds that for every j ∈ [m], there exists kj ∈ [m] such that sgn(akj ) = a◦j
and akj wkj − wj◦ ≤ cσm /κ3 m3 .

The proof of this proposition can be seen in Appendix D. We utilize the technique in Zhou et al.
(2021), which give the same results to the cases when the activation is the absolute value function.
In this proposition, we compare the parameters of the teacher network with the normalized student
parameters. This normalization is needed because of the 1-homogeneity of the ReLU activation.
The inequality akj wkj − wj◦ ≤ cσm /κ3 m3 ensures the closeness of parameters in the sense of
the direction and the amplitude. Combining this with the equality sgn(akj ) = a◦j , we can conclude
the closeness and move to ensure the local convergence. Thanks to this closeness and local strong
convexity, we can ensure the convergence in phase II as follows:
                                              Qm           m
Lemma 4.5. Let κ := σ1 /σm and σ̃ := ( j=1 σj )/σm            . Suppose that the condition is Proposi-
tion 4.4 holds. Then there exists absolute constants c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 , c5 such that under
                                c1 κ10 m9 d

                                                  κmd
                                                          · kW ∗ k2F + v 2 ,

                           n≥               log
                                    σm             σm
                                                         1
the output of the gradient descent with step-size η ≤ c2 κm 2 satisfies


                                                  −4
                                            σ̃ 2 σmin m5 log n          c3 η  k σm
                   kfb − f ◦ k2L2 (PX ) .                      + c4 1 −        · 3 2
                                                      n                 σ̃κ2    κ m
after k iterations with probability at least 1 − c5 d−10 .

(3) Unified risk bound: By combining (1) and (2), we obtain a unified result as follows:
Theorem 4.6. There exists  0 = poly(m−1                                     0
                                              , σmin ) and constants C and C > 0 such that for
                                                                                               any
0 < b < 1, under n ≥ λσb−3 exp σb−1 m2 where σb := b 0 , let k (1) = Cλ−2 β −1 exp m2 β and
k (2) = k (1) + log C 0 nη (2)−2 , then the output of Algorithm 1 with λ = σb d−1 , β = Ω(σb−1 d),


η (1) = O(λσb3 exp σb−1 m2 ) and η (2) = O(σmin m−2 ) satisfies


                                                        −4
                                                  σ̃ 2 σmin m5 log n
                                  kfb − f ◦ k2L2 (PX ) .
                                                            n
                                   −10
                                                  Qm             m
with probability at least 1 − b − d , where σ̃ = ( j=1 σj )/σm     .

The proof of this theorem also can be seen in Appendix D. This theorem implies that for fixed m,
the excess risk of the student networks is bounded by
                                                      2
                                     EDn [kfb − f ◦ kL2 (PX ) ] . n−1 .

As compared to the lower bound derived for linear estimators in Theorem 4.1, we get the faster rate
n−1 in terms of the sample size. Moreover, the dependence of the excess risk on the dimensionality
d does not appear explicitly. Therefore we can conclude that the student network less suffers from
the curse of dimensionality than linear estimators. As we pointed out in the previous subsection,
the convex hull argument causes the curse of dimensionality for linear estimators since they only
prepare a fixed basis. On the other hand, the student network can “find” the basis of the teacher
network via noisy gradient descent in phase I and eventually avoid the curse of dimensionality.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             phaseⅠ                     phaseⅡ
                                       (noisy gradient descent)   (vanilla gradient descent)


                      Figure 1: Convergence of the training loss and test loss.

Remark 4.7. Akiyama & Suzuki (2021) establishes the local convergence theory for the student
wider than the teacher. However, it cannot apply here since they only consider the teacher whose
parameters are orthogonal to each other. Suzuki & Akiyama (2021) also showed the benefit of
the neural network and showed the superiority of deep learning in a teacher-student setting where
the teacher has infinite width. They P
                                     assume that the teacher has decaying importance; that is, the
                                       ∞
teacher can be written as f ◦ (x) = j=1 a◦j σ(hwj◦ , xi) where a◦j . j −a and wj◦ . j −b (with an
exponent a, b > 0) for a bounded smooth activation σ. Our analysis does not assume the decay of
importance, and the activation function is the non-differential ReLU function. Moreover, Suzuki &
Akiyama (2021) considers a pure gradient Langevin dynamics instead of the two-stage algorithm,
which results in the exponential computational complexity in contrast to our analysis.


5   N UMERICAL EXPERIMENT

In this section, we conduct a numerical experiment to justify our theoretical results. We apply
Algorithm 1 to the settings d = m = 50. For the teacher network, we employ a◦j = 1 for 1 ≤ j ≤
25, a◦j = −1 for 26 ≤ j ≤ 50 and (w1◦ , . . . , w50
                                                 ◦
                                                    ) = I50 as its parameters. The parameters of the
                                    (0)
student network are initialized by θ ∼ N (0, Im(d+1) ). We use the sample with n = 1000 as the
                                                                                               (1)
training data. Hyperparameters are set to η (1) = η (2) = 0.01, β = 100, λ = 0.01, kmax = 1000
      (2)
and kmax = 2000. Figure 1 shows the experimental result. The orange line represents the training
loss without the regularization term. The blue line represents the test loss. Since we can compute
the generalization error analytically (see Appendix B), we utilize its value as the test loss.
We can see that in phase I, both the training and test losses decrease first and then fall flat. At
the beginning of phase II, we can observe that both the training and test losses decrease linearly.
This reflects the strong convexity around the parameters of the teacher network, as we stated in the
convergence guarantee of phase II. While the training loss keeps going up and down, the curve of
the test loss is relatively smooth. This difference is due to the smoothness of the generalization loss
(or Rλ ), which we use in the convergence analysis in phase I. The test loss does not keep decreasing
and converges to a constant. The existence of the sample noise causes this phenomenon: even if the
parameters of the student coincide with that of the teacher, its training loss will not be zero. Thus
we can say that the numerical experiment is consistent with our theoretical results.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we focus on the nonparametric regression problem, in which a true function is given
by a two-layer neural network with the ReLU activation, and evaluate the excess risks of linear esti-
mators and neural networks trained by two-phase gradient descent. Our analysis revealed that while
any linear estimator suffers from the curse of dimensionality, deep learning can avoid it and out-
perform linear estimators, which include the neural tangent kernel approach, random feature model,
and other kernel methods. Essentially, the non-convexity of the model induces this difference.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, Matthew S Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Dheeraj Nagaraj. The
  staircase property: How hierarchical structure can guide deep learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26989–27002. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
  necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08658, 2022.
Shunta Akiyama and Taiji Suzuki. On learnability via gradient method for two-layer relu neural net-
  works in teacher-student setting. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139, pp. 152–162. PMLR, 2021.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. What can resnet learn efficiently, going beyond kernels? In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 9017–9028, 2019.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 242–252. PMLR, 2019.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, and Ruosong Wang. Fine-grained analysis of op-
  timization and generalization for overparameterized two-layer neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 322–332. PMLR, 2019.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, Denny Wu, and Greg Yang. High-
  dimensional asymptotics of feature learning: How one gradient step improves the representation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01445, 2022.
Yu Bai and Jason D. Lee. Beyond linearization: On quadratic and higher-order approximation of
  wide neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkllGyBFPH.
D. Bakry and M. Émery. Diffusions hypercontractives. In Séminaire de Probabilités XIX 1983/84,
  pp. 177–206. Springer, 1985.
Alon Brutzkus and Amir Globerson. Globally optimal gradient descent for a ConvNet with Gaussian
  inputs. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70,
  pp. 605–614. PMLR, 2017.
T Tony Cai, Jianqing Fan, and Tiefeng Jiang. Distributions of angles in random packing on spheres.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14:1837–1864, 2013.
Andrea Caponnetto and Ernesto De Vito. Optimal rates for the regularized least-squares algorithm.
  Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 7(3):331–368, 2007.
Minshuo Chen, Yu Bai, Jason D Lee, Tuo Zhao, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Richard
 Socher.   Towards understanding hierarchical learning: Benefits of neural representa-
 tions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 22134–
 22145, 2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
 fb647ca6672b0930e9d00dc384d8b16f-Paper.pdf.
Lenaic Chizat. Sparse optimization on measures with over-parameterized gradient descent. Mathe-
  matical Programming, pp. 1–46, 2021.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
  parameterized models using optimal transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 31, pp. 3036–3046, 2018.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks
  trained with the logistic loss. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1305–1338. PMLR, 2020.
Youngmin Cho and Lawrence Saul. Kernel methods for deep learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 22, 2009.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu Zhai. Gradient descent finds global
  minima of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1675–
  1685, 2019.
Murat A Erdogdu, Lester Mackey, and Ohad Shamir. Global non-convex optimization with dis-
 cretized diffusions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, pp. 9671–9680,
 2018.
Sebastian Goldt, Madhu Advani, Andrew M Saxe, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Dy-
  namics of stochastic gradient descent for two-layer neural networks in the teacher-student setup.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6981–6991, 2019.
Satoshi Hayakawa and Taiji Suzuki. On the minimax optimality and superiority of deep neural
  network learning over sparse parameter spaces. Neural Networks, 123:343–361, 2020.
Richard Holley and Daniel W Stroock. Logarithmic sobolev inequalities and stochastic ising models.
  Journal of Statistical Physics, 46:1159–1194, 1987.
Kaitong Hu, Zhenjie Ren, David Siska, and Lukasz Szpruch. Mean-field langevin dynamics and
  energy landscape of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07769, 2019.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8571–
  8580, 2018.
Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss land-
  scape of neural nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6389–6399,
  2018.
Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang R. Zhang. Learning over-parametrized two-layer neural
  networks beyond NTK. In Proceedings of Thirty Third Conference on Learning Theory, volume
  125 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2613–2682. PMLR, 2020.
Song Mei, Yu Bai, and Andrea Montanari. The landscape of empirical risk for nonconvex losses.
  The Annals of Statistics, 46(6A):2747–2774, 2018a. ISSN 00905364, 21688966.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018b.
Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Mean-field theory of two-layers neural
  networks: dimension-free bounds and kernel limit. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2388–
  2464. PMLR, 2019.
Phan-Minh Nguyen. Analysis of feature learning in weight-tied autoencoders via the mean field
  lens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08373, 2021.
Atsushi Nitanda and Taiji Suzuki. Stochastic particle gradient descent for infinite ensembles. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1712.05438, 2017.
Atsushi Nitanda, Denny Wu, and Taiji Suzuki. Particle dual averaging: Optimization of mean
  field neural networks with global convergence rate analysis. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021a. to appear.
Atsushi Nitanda, Denny Wu, and Taiji Suzuki. Particle dual averaging: Optimization of mean field
  neural network with global convergence rate analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34, 2021b.
Maxim Raginsky, Alexander Rakhlin, and Matus Telgarsky. Non-convex learning via stochastic
 gradient langevin dynamics: a nonasymptotic analysis. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
 1674–1703. PMLR, 2017.
Maria Refinetti, Sebastian Goldt, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Classifying high-
 dimensional gaussian mixtures: Where kernel methods fail and neural networks succeed. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8936–8947. PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Itay Safran and Ohad Shamir. Spurious local minima are common in two-layer ReLU neural net-
   works. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4433–4441. PMLR, 2018.
Itay M Safran, Gilad Yehudai, and Ohad Shamir. The effects of mild over-parameterization on the
   optimization landscape of shallow relu neural networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   3889–3934. PMLR, 2021.
Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Nonparametric regression using deep neural networks with ReLU acti-
  vation function. The Annals of Statistics, 48(4):1875–1897, 2020.
Taiji Suzuki. Adaptivity of deep relu network for learning in besov and mixed smooth besov spaces:
  optimal rate and curse of dimensionality. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2018.
Taiji Suzuki and Shunta Akiyama. Benefit of deep learning with non-convex noisy gradient descent:
  Provable excess risk bound and superiority to kernel methods. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Taiji Suzuki and Atsushi Nitanda. Deep learning is adaptive to intrinsic dimensionality of model
  smoothness in anisotropic Besov space. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, pp. 3609–3621, 2021.
Yuandong Tian. An analytical formula of population gradient for two-layered ReLU network and its
  applications in convergence and critical point analysis. In Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70, pp. 3404–3413, 2017.
Yuandong Tian. Student specialization in deep rectified networks with finite width and input dimen-
  sion. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119, pp.
  9470–9480. PMLR, 2020.
Belinda Tzen and Maxim Raginsky. A mean-field theory of lazy training in two-layer neu-
  ral nets: entropic regularization and controlled McKean-Vlasov dynamics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.01987, 2020.
Santosh Vempala and Andre Wibisono. Rapid convergence of the unadjusted langevin algorithm:
  Isoperimetry suffices. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32:8094–8106, 2019.
Martin J. Wainwright. High-Dimensional Statistics: A Non-Asymptotic Viewpoint. Cambridge Series
 in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 2019. doi: 10.1017/
 9781108627771.
E Weinan, Chao Ma, and Lei Wu. A comparative analysis of optimization and generalization prop-
  erties of two-layer neural network and random feature models under gradient descent dynamics.
  Science China Mathematics, pp. 1–24, 2020.
Gilad Yehudai and Ohad Shamir. Learning a single neuron with gradient methods. In Proceedings
  of the 33rd Conference on Learning Theory, volume 125, pp. 3756–3786, 2020.
Shuanglin Zhang, Man-Yu Wong, and Zhongguo Zheng. Wavelet threshold estimation of a regres-
  sion function with random design. Journal of multivariate analysis, 80(2):256–284, 2002.
Xiao Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Lingxiao Wang, and Quanquan Gu. Learning one-hidden-layer relu
  networks via gradient descent. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 89, pp.
  1524–1534. PMLR, 2019.
Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, Prateek Jain, Peter L Bartlett, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Recovery guaran-
  tees for one-hidden-layer neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  4140–4149. PMLR, 2017.
Mo Zhou, Rong Ge, and Chi Jin. A local convergence theory for mildly over-parameterized two-
 layer neural network. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4577–4632. PMLR, 2021.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Gradient descent optimizes over-
  parameterized deep ReLU networks. Machine Learning, 109(3):467–492, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1
First, we introduce the formal statement of the “convex hull argmunent” we stated in Section 4.1.
Proposition A.1 (Hayakawa & Suzuki (2020)). The minimax optimal rate of linear estimators on a
target function class F ◦ is the same as that on the convex hull of F ◦ :
                                Rlin (F ◦ ) = Rlin (conv(F ◦ )),
                       PN                                       PN
where conv(F ◦ ) := { j=1 λj fj | N ∈ N, fj ∈ F ◦ , λj ≥ 0, j=1 λj = 1} and conv(·) is the
closure of conv(·) in L2 (PX ).

For the proof, we use this convex hull argument and the minimax optimal rate analysis for linear
estimators developed by Zhang et al. (2002). They essentially showed the following statement in
their Theorem 1. Note that they consider the class of linear estimators on the Euclidean space, but
we can apply the same argument for the class of linear estimators on Sd−1 .
Proposition A.2 (Theorem 1 of Zhang et al. (2002)). Let µ be uniform measure on Sd−1 satisfying
µ(Sd−1 ) = 1. Suppose that the space Ω has even partition A such that |A| = 2K for an integer
K ∈ N, each A ∈ A has measure α1 2−K ≤ µ(A) ≤ α2 2−K for constants α1 , α2 > 0, and A is
indeed a partition of Ω, i.e., ∪A∈A A = Ω, A ∩ A0 = ∅ for A, A0 ∈ A and A 6= A0 . Then, if K
is chosen as n−γ1 ≤ 2−K ≤ n−γ2 for constants γ1 , γ2 > 0 that are independent of n, then there
exists an event E such that, for a constant C 0 > 0,
         P (E) ≥ 1 − o(1) and |{xi | xi ∈ A (i ∈ {1, . . . , n})}| ≤ C 0 α2 n2−K (∀A ∈ A).
Moreover, suppose that, for a class F ◦ of functions on Ω, there exists ∆ > 0 that satisfies the
following conditions:

      1. There exists F > 0 such that, for any A ∈ A, there exists g ∈ F ◦ that satisfies g(x) ≥
         1
         2 ∆F for all x ∈ A,
                                                   Pn         2             0
      2. There exists K 0 and C 00 > 0 such that n1 i=1 g(xi ) ≤ C 00 ∆2 2−K for any g ∈ F ◦ on
         the event E.

Then, there exists a constant F1 such that at least one of the following inequalities holds:
                                                 0
                                        F 2 2K
                                                 ≤ Rlin (F ◦ ),
                                      4F1 C 00 n
                                      F 3 2 −K
                                         ∆ 2     ≤ Rlin (F ◦ ),
                                      32
for sufficiently large n.
Lemma A.3. Let 0 < ∆ ≤ 1/2 and let g : Sd−1 → R be a function defined by
                               d
                          1 X              1                  1
               g(x) =             −σ(xj ) + σ(xj + 2∆ · x1 ) + σ(xj − 2∆ · x1 ) .
                        d − 1 j=2          2                  2

Then it holds that g(x) ≥ ∆/2 for x ∈ B∞     ∆ (e1 ) and g(x) = 0 for x ∈/ B∞
                                                                            2∆ (e1 ), where e1 :=
                     d−1      ∞               d−1
(1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ S    and Br (e1 ) := x ∈ S     | kx − e1 k∞ ≤ r for r > 0.

Proof. Let gj (x) = −σ(xj ) + 12 σ(xj + 2∆ · x1 ) + 21 σ(xj − 2∆ · x1 ). First we suppose that x ∈ B∞
                                                                                                    ∆.
Then, we have x1 ≥ 1 − ∆ and |xj | ≤ ∆ for any j ∈ {2, . . . , d}. If 0 ≤ xj ≤ ∆, it holds that
                  1                  1                  1                            1
gj (x) = −σ(xj ) + σ(xj + 2∆ · x1 ) + σ(xj − 2∆ · x1 ) = (2∆ · x1 − xj ) ≥ ∆(1 − ∆) ≥ ∆.
                  2                  2                  2                            2
Moreover, if −∆ ≤ xj ≤ 0, we get
                    1                     1                 1                        1
gj (x) = −σ(xj ) + σ(xj + 2∆ · x1 ) + σ(xj − 2∆ · x1 ) = (xj + 2∆ · x1 ) ≥ ∆(1 − ∆) ≥ ∆.
                    2                     2                 2                        2
                                             1
                                               Pd            ∆
Hence, we get the first assertion by g(x) = d−1 j=2 gj (x) ≥ 2 .


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next we suppose x ∈    / B∞
                          2∆ (e1 ). Then, it holds that xj ≥ 2∆ ≥ 2∆x1 for any j ∈ {2, . . . , d}. Hence
it holds that |xj /x1 | ≥ 2∆, and we obtain that sgn(xj + 2∆ · x1 ) = sgn(xj ) = sgn(xj − 2∆ · x1 ) ∈
{±1}. We can check gj (x) = 0 for each case, and hence it holds that g(x) = 0. Thus we get the
second assertion.

proof of Theorem 4.1. Let us consider the covering of Sd−1 by spherical caps, i.e., Br (x) ∩ Sd−1
for some x ∈ Sd−1 with radius r satisfying r ∈ (0, 1). It is known that there is a covering A with
|A| ∼ r−d (ignoring logarithm terms). Then, by letting r ∼ 2−K/d , there exists a covering A
satisfying |A| = 2K .
For each A ∈ A, we define a function gA by the same manner as in Lemma A.3, i.e., for A ∈ A
written by Br (xA ) ∩ Sd−1 with xA ∈ Sd−1 , we consider the orthogonal basis including xA and
                                             ◦ :=
define gA with regrading xA as e1 . Define FA     {gA /2 | A ∈ A}. It is not difficult to check that
  ◦
FA  ∈ conv(F ◦ ). Then by Proposition A.1, it holds that
                               Rlin (F ◦ ) = Rlin (conv(F ◦ )) ≥ Rlin (FA
                                                                        ◦
                                                                          ),
                                        ◦
where the inequality follows from FA       ∈ conv(F ◦ ). Hence, it suffices to give the lower bound
for the right hand side. Now, we apply Proposition A.2 with F ◦ = FA        ◦
                                                                              and K = K 0 . Applying
                          −K/d
Lemma A.3 with ∆ = 2             In the event E which we introduce in Proposition A.2, there exists a
constant C 0 such that |{xi | xi ∈ A (i ∈ {1, . . . , n})}| ≤ C 0 α2 n2−K for all A ∈ A. Therefore, we
obtain that
                                   n
                               1X            2 1
                                     gA (xi ) . n2−K · ∆2 = 2−K ∆2
                               n i=1           n
                                                           K
                                        ◦
Therefore, Proposition A.2 gives Rlin (FA ) & min{ 2n , 2−(1+2/d)K }. By letting 2K ∼ nd/2(d+1) ,
we get the assertion.

B    E XPLICIT FORM OF THE OBJECTIVE FUNCTION AND ITS GRADIENT

In this section, we derive the explicit form of Rλ (·) and its gradient, which we utilize in our analysis
(especially that of the convergence in phase I). First, for w, v ∈ Rd /{0}, we have that
                                              Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) [σ(hw, xi)σ(hv, xi)]
          Ex∼PX [σ(hw, xi)σ(hv, xi)] =                                 2
                                                     Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) [kx̃k ]
                                              sin φ(w, v) + (π − φ(w, v)) cos φ(w, v)
                                          =                                           kwkkvk,                 (2)
                                                               2πd
                                                                                                          2
where φ(w, v) := arccos(hw, vi/kwkkvk). The second equality follows from Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) [kx̃k ] =
d and
                                                sin φ(w, v) + (π − φ(w, v)) cos φ(w, v)
        Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) [σ(hw, xi)σ(hv, xi)] =                                            kwkkvk
                                                                  2π
(see Cho & Saul (2009) or Safran & Shamir (2018)). Moreover, the first equality follows from that
                                         2
fact that for x̃ ∼ N (0, Id ), r2 := kx̃k and φ := x̃/kx̃k are random variables that independently
follow the Chi-squared distribution and the uniform distribution on Sd−1 respectively, and therefore,
        Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) [σ(hw, xi)σ(hv, xi)] = Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) r2 σ(hw, φi)σ(hv, φi)


                                                                                                   2
                                              = Ex∼PX [σ(hw, xi)σ(hv, xi)] · Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) [kx̃k ].
By using Eq. (2), we get
              1 h                        2 i             2
   Rλ (θ) = Ex fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ̄)       + λkθk
              2
                                   m                                 m
              1 h            2
                               i X                               1 X                                 2
          = Ex (fa◦ ,W ◦ (x)) −          āi a◦j I(w̄i , wj◦ ) +         āi a¯j I(w̄i , w̄j ) + λkθk ,
              2                  i,j=1
                                                                 2 i,j=1



                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where w̄ is the element-wise clipping of w ∈ Rd and
                                 sin φ(w, v) + (π − φ(w, v)) cos φ(w, v)
                    I(w, v) =                                            kwkkvk.
                                                  2πd
                                                                             2
Next, we move to derive the gradient of Rλ (·). Note that dr̄
                                                            dr = |r|/cosh (r|r|/2R). Then, since
 r      −r                                                                  2             dr̄
e +e        ≥ 2 + |r| for r ∈ R, we have that cosh(r|r|/2R) ≥ 1 + r /4R, and hence | dr       | ≤
    |r|                      2      4
(1+r 2 /4R)2 ≤ min{|r|, 16R |r|/r } ≤ 4R. Moreover, through a straightforward calculation, we
can show that dr̄
               dr is 1-Lipschitz (in other words, the mapping r 7→ r̄ is 1-smooth).
Using this, each component of the gradient of Rλ (·) can be written as follows:
                        m                                m
                        X                         dāj X ◦                     dāj
         ∇aj Rλ (θ) =       āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) ·       −     ai I(wi◦ , w̄j ) ·      + 2λaj                  (3)
                        i=1
                                                  daj   i=1
                                                                               daj
                           m                                     m
                          X                               dw̄j X                            dw̄j
         ∇wj Rλ (θ) = −         āi a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ )         +     āi a¯j J(w̄i , w̄j )        + 2λwj ,   (4)
                          i=1
                                                          dwj   i=1
                                                                                            dwj
where     denotes the Hadamard product and
                                                  −1
                                     kvkkwk sin φ(w, v)w + (π − φ(w, v))v
                      J(w, v) =                                           ,
                                                     2πd
which is the gradient of I(w, v) with respect to w (see Brutzkus & Globerson (2017) or Safran &
Shamir (2018)).

C     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.3
This section provides the convergence guarantee for phase I. Our objective is to give the proof of
Proposition 4.3. To this end, we first introduce the theory around the gradient Langevin dynamics
exploited in Vempala & Wibisono (2019).

C.1     A BRIEF NOTE ON THE GRADIENT L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS

In their analysis, the following notion of the log-Sobolev inequality plays the essential role, which
defined as follows:
Definition C.1. A probability distribution with a density function q satisfies the log-Sobolev in-
equality (LSI) if there exists a constant α > 0 such that for all smooth function g, it holds that
                                                                          2         2
                         Eq [g 2 log g 2 ] − Eq [g 2 ] log Eq [g 2 ] ≤      Eq [k∇gk ].
                                                                          α
α is called a log-Sobolev constant.

It is known that the LSI is equivalent to the following inequality:
                                                         1
                                       Hq (p) ≤            Jq (p) (∀p ∈ P),                                 (5)
                                                        2α
                                                                                          2
where Hq (p) := R p(θ) log p(θ    )
                                                                    := R p(θ) ∇ log p(θ )
                  R                                                     R
                              q(θ ) dx is the KL divergence, Jq (p)                 q(θ )   dθ is the
relative Fisher information, and P is the set of all probability density functions.
Now we consider the sampling from the probability distribution q over Rd . We assume that
− log q(·) : Rd → R is differentiable. One of the well-known and promising approaches is up-
dating the parameter θ(0) sampled from an initial distribution ρ0 as follows:
                                                                 p
                          θ(k+1) = θ(k) − η∇(− log q)(θ(k) ) + 2ηζ (k) ,                 (6)
where η > 0 is a constant and ζ (k) ∼ N (0, Id ) is an independent standard Gaussian random
variable. Vempala & Wibisono (2019) shows that if the LSI holds and − log q has a smoothness,
the sufficient number of updates (6) actually achieves the sampling from q, in a sense that the KL
divergence between the distribution of θ(k) and q will be small.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem C.2 ((Vempala & Wibisono, 2019, Theorem 1)). Suppose that a probability measure with
a density function q satisfies the LSI and − log q is L-smooth. Then for any θ(0) ∼ p0 with Hq (p0 ),
the sequence (θ(k) )∞                             α
                    k=0 with step-size 0 < η < 4L2 satisfies



                                                                    8ηdL2
                                 Hq (pt ) ≤ exp(−αηk)Hq (p0 ) +           .
                                                                      α

                                                                      α           δ
Hence for any δ > 0, the output of the update (6) with step-size η ≤ 4L 2 min{1, 4d } achieves
                        1    2H (p )
Hq (pt ) < δ after k ≥ αη log qδ t iterations.



C.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.2

The goal of this section is to prove Proposition 4.3, the convergence of gradient Langevin dynamics.
As we stated in Section 4.2, we consider the value of Rλ (·) instead of R  b λ (·), and ensure its value
will decrease enough. To this end, we first prove Lemma 4.2, which evaluates the difference between
∇Rλ (·) and ∇R  b λ (·).


proof of Lemma 4.2. The proof of Lemma 4.2 is basically based on that of Theorem 1 in Mei
et al. (2018a) and Lemma 5.3 in Zhang et al. (2019). For the      √notational
                                                                           simplicity we denote
m(d + 1) =: D. Let N  be the  -covering number of B 0, DR with respect to the `2 -

distance. Let Θ   = θ 1 , . . . , θ̄ N be a corresponding  -cover with |Θ  | = N . It is known that
                  √
log N = D log 3 DR/  is sufficient to ensure the existence of such covering.

                              b λ (θ) = 1       Pn
First we note that ∇Rλ (θ) − ∇R         n          i=1 ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇E[`(y, f
                                                                                       (x; θ̄))]. For each
                                                                           √
θ ∈ Θ, let j(θ) ∈ arg min θ̄ − θ̄ j            θ := θ̄ j(θ ) . For θ ∈ B 0, DR , we consider the
                                           and b
                        j∈[N ]
following decomposition:

     n                                                  n
  1X                                                 1 Xh                                            i
        ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] =       ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                                                                                  θ))
  n i=1                                              n i=1
                                                           n
                                                                                                         !
                                                       1X
                                                   +         ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                                                             θ)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; b
                                                                                                 θ))]
                                                       n i=1

                                                   + ∇E[`(y, f (x; b θ))] − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] .


This gives that

       n                                                       n
   1X                                                 1 Xh                                             i
         ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≤       ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                                                                                   θ))
   n i=1                                              n i=1
                                                               n
                                                         1X
                                                     +         ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                                                               θ)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; b
                                                                                                   θ))]
                                                         n i=1

                                                     + ∇E[`(y, f (x; b
                                                                     θ))] − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ,


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and hence itholds that                                                                 
                                  n
                                 1X
          P        sup
                      √
                                         ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≥ t
               θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                 n i=1
                                                                                                     
                                               n
                                             1 Xh                                            i       t
                   ≤ P           sup√
                                                ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                                                                       θ))       ≥
                              θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                          n i=1                                                      3
                      |                                   {z                                           }
                                                              (I)
                                                                                                    
                                               n
                                          1    X                                          t
                  + P            sup√
                                                ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b                   θ))] ≥ 
                                                                θ)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; b
                              θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                          n i=1
                                                                                          3
                     |                                     {z                               }
                                                             (II)
                                                                                                
                                                                                    t
                  + P            sup√
                                                        θ))] − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≥ 
                                          ∇E[`(y, f (x; b
                              θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                                                                    3
                     |                                 {z                             }
                                                          (III)
for any t > 0. Then we evaluate the each term of the RHS.

Upper bound on (I): Since ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) = 2 f (xi ; θ̄) − yi ∇f (xi ; θ̄), it holds that
 ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                        θ))

             = 2 f (xi ; θ̄) − f (xi ; bθ) ∇f (xi ; θ̄) − 2(f (xi ; b
                                                                    θ) − yi )(∇f (xi ; b
                                                                                       θ) − ∇f (xi ; θ̄)).
Therefore, we have that
                                                                                  
                            n h
                         1  X                                            i       t
        P    sup√
                               ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇`(yi , f (xi ; b
                                                                      θ)) ≥ 
          θ ∈B(0, DR)
                         n i=1                                                  3
                                                                                       
                                   n h
                                2 X                                            i      t
            ≤ P       sup√
                                          f (xi ; θ̄) − f (xi ; b
                                                                θ) ∇f (xi ; θ̄) ≥ 
                   θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                n i=1                                                6
                                                                                           
                                   n h
                                2 X                                                     i t
            + P       sup√
                                                 θ) − yi )(∇f (xi ; b
                                        (f (xi ; b                   θ) − ∇f (xi ; θ̄)) ≥ ,
                  θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                n i=1                                                     6

Since the mapping b    θ 7→ f (x; bθ) is 2R-Lipschitz and ∇f (x; θ̄) ≤ 2mR for any θ ∈ Θ, it holds
that the first term must be zero as long as t ≥ 4mR2  . As for the second term, since |f (x; θ̄) − yi | ≤
mR2 + U + 1 for any xi , yi and θ ∈ Θ, it holds that
                                                                                                 
                                   n h
                               2  X                                                      i      t
   (I) = P         sup√
                                                 θ) − yi )(∇f (xi ; b
                                        (f (xi ; b                  θ) − ∇f (xi ; θ̄)) ≥ 
                θ ∈B(0, DR)
                               n  i=1
                                                                                                6
                                                                                                        
                                             n h
                                          2 X                                i                 t
                  ≤ P       sup                   ∇f (xi ; b
                                                            θ) − ∇f (xi ; θ̄) ≥                          .
                                √
                         θ ∈B(0, DR)
                                         n  i=1
                                                                                     6(mR2 + U + 1)
                                                   2
                                                     Pn h                                 i
Hence, we move to evaluate            sup√         n   i=1   ∇f (x i ; θ)
                                                                       b  − ∇f (x i ; θ̄)   . To this end, we con-
                                θ ∈B(0, DR)
sider the decomposition
      n
  2 Xh                                i
           ∇f (xi ; b
                    θ) − ∇f (xi ; θ̄)
  n i=1
           m          n                                                  n h
                                                                                                                !
          X        2 Xh                                     i       2   X                                     i
       ≤                   ∇aj f (xi ; b
                                       θ) − ∇aj f (xi ; θ̄) +               ∇wj f (xi ; b θ) − ∇wj f (xi ; θ̄)   ,
          j=1
                   n i=1                                            n i=1


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                                           dāj                                                     dw̄j
        ∇aj f (xi ; θ̄) = σ(hw̄j , xi i)        ,   ∇wj f (xi ; θ̄) = āj 1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0}xi          .
                                           daj                                                      dwj
This decomposition implies that
                                                                                       
                                 n h
                              2 X                                   i         t
 (I) ≤ P max       sup                         θ) − ∇aj f (xi ; θ̄) ≥
                                    ∇aj f (xi ; b                                       
          j∈[m]θ ∈B 0,√DR
                    (      ) n i=1                                     12m(mR2 + U + 1)
                                                                                        
                                 n h
                              2 X                                    i         t
     + P max       sup                         θ) − ∇wj f (xi ; θ̄) ≥
                                    ∇wj f (xi ; b                                        .
          j∈[m]θ ∈B 0,√DR
                    (      )  n i=1
                                                                        12m(mR2 + U + 1)

For each term, it holds that

                                                                     dāj                    dāj   dâj
             θ) − ∇aj f (xi ; θ̄) ≤ (σ(hw̄j , xi i) − σ(hŵj , xi i))
 ∇aj f (xi ; b                                                            + σ(hŵj , xi i)        −
                                                                     daj                     daj    daj
                                                  dāj     dāj     dâj
                                   ≤ kw̄j − ŵj k      +        −
                                                  daj      daj      daj
                                   ≤ 4Rkw̄j − ŵj k + 2|āj − âj | ≤ 4R  +
and
                                                                                                  dw̄j
               θ) − ∇wj f (xi ; θ̄) ≤ āj (1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0} − 1l{hŵj , xi i ≥ 0})xi
   ∇wj f (xi ; b
                                                                                                  dwj
                                                                                       dw̄j
                                              + (āj − âj )1l{hŵj , xi i ≥ 0}xi
                                                                                       dwj

                                                                                  dw̄j   dŵj
                                              + âj 1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0}xi              −
                                                                                  dwj    dwj
                                                                                            dw̄j
                                      ≤ R (1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0} − 1l{hŵj , xi i ≥ 0})xi
                                                                                            dwj
                                              + 4Rkāj − âj k + 4Rkw̄j − ŵj k
                                                                                                  dw̄j
                                      ≤ R (1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0} − 1l{hŵj , xi i ≥ 0})xi                + 8R .
                                                                                                  dwj
The first term can be bounded by
                                                    dw̄j
 (1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0} − 1l{hŵj , xi i ≥ 0})xi              ≤ k(1l{hw̄j , xi i ≥ 0} − 1l{hŵj , xi i ≥ 0})xi k · kŵj k
                                                    dwj
                                                            ≤ 1l{|hŵj , xi i| ≤  } · kŵj k,
where the last inequality follows from |hw̄j , xi i − hŵj , xi i| ≤ kw̄j − ŵj k · kxi k ≤  . Therefore,
we obtain that
                                                                                                  
                                  #{i  ∈  [n]  | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  } · k ŵ j k          t
   (I) ≤ P max          sup                                                   ≥                   
              j∈[m]θ ∈B 0,√DR
                         (      )                      n                         24mR(mR2 + U + 1)
                                                                                             !
                           #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  } · kŵj k                  t
       = P       max                                                 ≥
              θ ∈Θ  ,j∈[m]
              b                             n                            24mR(mR2 + U + 1)
                  t
as long as 24mR(mR  2 +U +1) ≥ max{4R ,  , 8R } = 8R . We have that


                 #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  } · kŵj k          t
             P                                           ≥
                                  n                        24mR(mR2 + U + 1)

                          #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  }             t
                  = P                                     ≥
                                         n                  24mR(mR2 + U + 1)kŵj k


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


when ŵj 6= 0. If ŵj = 0, the LHS must be zero as long as t > 0. Lemma 12 in Cai et al. (2013)
shows that for each j and i, the angle between ŵj and xi is distributed with density function
                                   1 Γ d2

                        h(φ) = √                · (sin φ)d−2 :     φ ∈ [0, π].
                                    π Γ d−1
                                          2
                                                                                           Γ( d
                                                                                              2)
Since π2 − φ ≤ ∆ implies |cos φ| = sin π2 − φ            ≤ ∆ for any ∆ > 0 and h(φ) ≤ √1π Γ d−1

                                                                                                 for
                                                                                           ( 2 )
any φ ∈ [0, π], it holds that
                                                                             √
                                                         2  1 Γ d2

                                   π                                       2 d
         P(|hŵj , xi i| ≤  ) ≤ P    − φij ≤          ≤       √          ≤√         ,
                                   2         kŵj k     kŵj k π Γ d−1
                                                                    2
                                                                            πkŵj k
where φij is the angle between ŵj and x√   i . Therefore, #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  } follows the
                                          2    d
Binomial distribution B(n, p) with p ≤ √πkŵ    jk
                                                   . Since a random variables that follows the Binomial
distribution is bounded and especially sub-Gaussian Wainwright (2019), it holds that
                                               √      !
      #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  }        2 d                 #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  }
 P                                   ≥s+ √               ≤ P                                   ≥s+p
                   n                         πkŵj k                         n
                                                         ≤ exp −2ns2 .


for an arbitrarily s > 0. By taking uniform bound, we obtain that
                                                                 √      !
                           #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  }      2 d
                                                                          ≤ N exp −2ns2

          P       max                                     ≥s+ √
              θ ∈Θ  ,j∈[m]
              b                         n                       πkŵj k
                                       √
                                         π
Hence, as long as   ≤                           √ t
                                96mR(mR2 +U +1)2 d
                                                        (verified later in this proof), by letting s =
        t
48mR(mR2 +U +1)kŵj k , we obtain that
                                                                               !
                                  #{i ∈ [n] | |hŵj , xi i| ≤  }        d
                   P    max                                      ≥s+ √
                     θ ∈Θ  ,j∈[m]
                     b                         n                       πkŵj k
                                                                               2 !
                                                                  t
                             ≤ mN exp −2n
                                                  24mR(mR2 + U + 1)kŵj k
                                                                            2 !
                                             2n                  t
                             ≤ mN exp − 2                                       ,
                                            dR 24mR(mR2 + U + 1)
                                              2
where the last inequality follows from kŵj k ≤ dR2 . As a result, the term (I) can be bounded by
                                                                          2 !
                                           2n              t
                      (I) ≤ mN exp − 2                                        .
                                          dR 24mR(mR2 + U + 1)

Upper bound on (II): First, we observe that the term (II) is equivalent to
                              n
                                                                                      !
                           1X                                                       t
                  P max          ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄ j )) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄ j ))] ≥    .
                    j∈[N ] n                                                        3
                             i=1

For each j ∈ [N ], a straightforward calculation gives that k∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ j ))k ≤ 2R(mR2 + 1),
and hence the vector ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ j )) is sub-Gaussian with a parameter R(mR2 + 1), i.e., it holds
that
                      n
                                                                               !
                   1X                                                        t          nt2
             P            ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄ j )) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄ j ))] ≥     ≤ 2e− 18G2
                   n i=1                                                     3

with G = R(mR2 + 1) for arbitrary t > 0. By taking uniform bound, we obtain
                     n
                                                                             !
                  1X                                                       t            t2
        P max           ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄ j )) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄ j ))] ≥     ≤ 2N e− 18G2 .
           j∈[N ] n                                                        3
                    i=1


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Upper bound on (III): The goal is obtaining (III) = 0 for a sufficiently small  . Particularly, we
assume that   < 1 here. To this end, we aim to show

                                      θ))] − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≤ cL0  1/2
                        ∇E[`(y, f (x; b                                                           (7)

with a constant c > 0 and L = O(m2 R3 ). First we consider the case where the absolute value of
the each component in θ̄ is bounded by 1/2. By Lemma C.5, it holds that
                                                                                            1
                                                                                          2 2
                      θ))] − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≤ L0 kθ − θ j(θ ) k = L0 · kθ − θ j(θ ) k
        ∇E[`(y, f (x; b

for any θ ∈ Θ with L0 = O(m2 R3 ). Moreover, a straightforward calculation shows that a mapping
r 7→ 2R tanh−1 (r/R) (the inverse mapping of r 7→ R tanh(r/2R)) is 8-Lipschitz in [0, 1/2], we
                   2
have kθ − θ j(θ ) k ≤ 8kθ̄ − b
                             θk ≤ 8 . Therefore, we obtain that

                                     θ))] − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≤ L0 (8 )1/2 ,
                       ∇E[`(y, f (x; b

i.e., Eq. (7) with c = 8. Assume that there is a component of θ whose absolute value is greater
than 1/2. First, suppose that a component of w̄j is greater than 1/2 for j ∈ [m]. We consider the
decomposition

 ∇wj E[`(y, f (x; b
                  θ))] − ∇wj E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))]
                                                     dŵj                             dŵj   dw̄j
≤ ∇ŵj E[`(y, f (x; b
                    θ))] − ∇w̄j E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ·      + ∇w̄j E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ·      −      .
                                                     dwj                              dwj    dwj
Since kw̄j k > 1/2, we can check that the mapping ŵj 7→ E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] is L00 smooth
with L00 = O(mR2 d−1/2 ) according to its Hessian (see Safran & Shamir (2018)). Since
 dŵj       √
 dwj   ≤ 4 dR, the first term is at most O(mR3 ) ·  . Since E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≤ 2R(mR2 +
1) and r 7→ r̄ is 1-smooth, the second term is at most O(mR3 ) ·  . Hence we get that
      j          θ))] − ∇w E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≤ O(mR3 ) ·  . In the case |aj | > 1/2 for j ∈ [m],
 ∇w E[`(y, f (x; b           j


the same bound also holds with ∇aj E[`(y, f (x; b      θ))] − ∇aj E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] . By using these
bound instead of Lemma E.5 and   < 1, we obtain the same bound Eq. (7) in this case. Eq. (7)
implies (III) = 0 as long as 3t ≥ cL0  1/2 , which gives the assertion.

Combining (I)–(III): Combining these bounds, we get that
                                                                     
                     n
                 1 X
 P     sup√
                        ∇`(yi , f (xi ; θ̄)) − ∇E[`(y, f (x; θ̄))] ≥ t
    θ ∈B(0, DR)
                 n  i=1
                                                 2 !
                2n                 t                             t2
 ≤ mN exp − 2                       2
                                                     + 2N e− 18G2 + 0
               dR 24mR(mR + U + 1)
               √       !
              3 DR
 = exp D log

           "                                             2 !                                  #
                                                                                 nt2

                        2n                   t
          · m exp − 2                                          + 2 exp −
                       dR 24mR(mR2 + U + 1)                              18R2 (mR2 + U + 1)2

as long as t ≥ C0 max{mR2  , mR(mR2 + U ) , L0  1/2 } holds with a constant C0 > 0. By letting
t = C1 L0  1/2 and   = C2 dnm
                            log δ
                               2 with constants C1 > 0 and C2 > 0 , we obtain the conclusion.



C.3       P ROOF OF THE CONVERGENCE IN PHASE I

Based on the results so far, we move to the proof of Proposition 4.3. The proof is conducted in two-
step. First, we evaluate the “distance” between the π∞ and the distribution of θ(k) . Moreover, it is


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ensured that the function value Rλ (θ), where θ is sampled from π∞ , will be small for a sufficiently
large β. Combining these two facts, we can guarantee that the function value Rλ (θ(k) ) also will be
small, which concludes Proposition 4.3. The following proposition ensures the convergence of the
marginal distribution of θ(k) to the invariant measure π∞ :
Proposition C.3. Suppose that the probability measure π∞ satisfies the LSI with a constant α and
Rλ (·) is L-smooth with L > 1. Let q be a density function of π∞ (i.e., q(θ) ∝ exp(−βRλ (θ))) with
β > 2. For any θ(0) ∼ ρ0 with Hq (ρ0 ) < +∞, the sequence (θ(k) )∞    k=0 with step-size 0 < η
                                                                                               (1)
                                                                                                   <
  α
4βL2 satisfies

                                                                          2
                                  αη (1)              16βη (1) DL2   32βVgrad

                 Hq (ρk ) ≤ exp −        k Hq (ρ0 ) +              +          ,
                                   β                       α            3α
where D := m(d + 1), ρk is the density function of the marginal distribution of θ(k) , and Vgrad is a
constant introduced in Lemma 4.2. In particular, for any δ > 0, the output of phase I with step-size
                                                2
                                           32βVgrad                     2H (ρ )
          δα
η (1) ≤ 32βL 2 D achieves Hq (ρk ) < δ +      3α    after k ≥ αηβ(1) log qδ 0 iterations.

As we stated in Section 4.2, our result extends the existing one Vempala & Wibisono (2019) in the
sense that it gives the convergence for the non-differential objective function R
                                                                                b λ (·). Indeed, this
                                      32βV 2
difference appears in the last term,      grad
                                         3α
                                                         2
                                               . Since Vgrad . n−1 by Lemma 4.2, we can ensure
that this error diverges to zero as the sample size n increases. To apply this result to ensure the
convergence of the phase I, we just need to check that the invariant measure π∞ satisfies the LSI
and Rλ is smooth, and we clarify them as follows:
Lemma C.4 (log-Sobolev  inequality). The invariant measure π∞ satisfies the LSI with a constant
α = 2βλ exp −8βm2 R4 .
Lemma C.5 (smoothness). Rλ (·) is L-smooth, i.e., for any θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ, ∇Rλ (θ) − ∇Rλ (θ 0 ) ≤
L θ − θ 0 holds with L = O(m2 R3 + λ).

The proof of these lemmas can be seen in Appendix E.
Remark C.6. In Lemma C.4, the LSI constant α depends exponentially on m, which results in the
exponential dependency of phase I convergence on m. This is caused by the fact that the sup-norm
of the student network depends on m (see the proof of Lemma C.4). Therefore, we can indeed
remove this dependency by considering the following settings: (1) utilizing the mean field network
(multiplying 1/m to the output of the student), (2) wj s are directed to different directions to some
extent, and hence the sup-norm can be bounded.

To ensure Proposition C.3, we first show the following lemma, which evaluates the each step of the
gradient Langevin dynamics.
Lemma C.7. Suppose that π∞ satisfies the LSI with a constant α and Rλ (·) is L-smooth with
                                                                          α
L > 1, and β > 2. Then for any θ(0) ∼ ρ0 with Hq (ρ0 ) < +∞, if 0 < η < 4βL 2 ,it holds that



                       Hq (ρk+1 ) ≤ e−αη/β Hq (ρk ) + 12η 2 DL2 + 8ηVgrad
                                                                      2
                                                                          ,

where ρk is the density function of the marginal distribution of θ(k) and Vgrad is the constant defined
in Lemma 4.2.

Proof. The proof of Lemma C.7 is basically based on that of Lemma 3 in Vempala & Wibisono
(2019). For notational simplicity suppose k = 0 and let θ 0 = θ(0) . The one step of the gradient
Langevin dynamics
                                                        r 2η
                              (1)    (0)          (0)
                            θ = θ − η∇Rλ θ   b         +       ζ (0)
                                                             β
can be seen as an output at time ηβ −1 of the following SDE:
                                                             √
                                 dθ t = −β∇R   b λ (θ 0 )dt + 2dBt ,


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where {Bt }t≥0 is the standard Brownian motion in Θ (= R(d+1)×m ). As Vempala & Wibisono
(2019), it holds that
                      ∂ρt|0 (θt |θ 0 )
                                       = ∇ · ρt|0 (θt |θ0 )β∇R
                                                             b λ (θ0 ) + ∆ρt|0 (θt |θ0 ),
                           ∂t
and therefore,

             d                                                        b λ (θ0 ), ∇ log ρt (θt ) ,
                Hq (ρt ) = −Jq (ρt ) + β · Eρ0t ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇R
            dt                                                                         q(θt )
where ρt|0 (·|θ 0 ) the conditional density, and ρt0 is the density of the joint distribution of θ 0 and θ t .
Then we evaluate the second term. The inner product in this term can be bounded by

                                                                     2                   2
  ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇Rb λ (θ0 ), ∇ log ρt (θt ) ≤ ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇R  b λ (θ0 ) + 1 ∇ log ρt (θt )
                                 q(θ t )                                4        q(θ t )
                                                                                   2
                                                 ≤ 2 ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇Rλ (θ0 )
                                                                                         2                         2
                                                                                               1            ρt (θt )
                                                      + 2 ∇Rλ (θ0 ) − ∇R
                                                                       b λ (θ0 )             +     ∇ log             .
                                                                                               4            q(θ t )
In the above bound, we use ha, bi ≤ a2 + b2 /4 for a, b ∈ RD in the first inequality and ka − bk2 ≤
2kak2 + 2kbk2 for a, b ∈ RD in the second inequality. Therefore, by using Lemma 4.2, we get that

                                                 ρt (θt )
       Eρ0t ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇Rλ (θ0 ), ∇ log
                                                 q(θ t )
                                                                                        "                       #

                                                                       2
                                                                                                              2
                          2                                                    1                   ρt (θt )
                   ≤ 2Vgrad + 2Eρ0t ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇Rλ (θ0 )                  + Eρ0t ∇ log
                                                                               4                    q(θ)

                                                                       2       1
                          2
                   = 2Vgrad  + 2Eρ0t ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇Rλ (θ0 )                 + Jq (ρt ).
                                                                               4
Then the second term is bounded by

                                    2              h               i
                                                                 2
  Eρ0t ∇Rλ (θt ) − ∇Rλ (θ0 )            ≤ L2 Eρ0t kθ t − θ 0 k
                                                                                          2
                                                   "                       r                #
                                                                               2t
                                        = L2 Eρ0t −t∇R       b λ (θ 0 ) +         ζ (0)
                                                                               β

                                                                                                             2
                                        = t2 L2 Eρ0t ∇Rλ (θ 0 ) + (∇R          b λ (θ 0 ) − ∇Rλ (θ 0 ))

                                                                                 2
                                                              " r                  #
                                                         2             2t (0)
                                                   + L Eρ0t               ζ
                                                                       β
                                                          h
                                                                           2
                                                                             i                     2t
                                        ≤ 2t2 L2 Eρ0t k∇Rλ (θ 0 )k + Vgrad           2
                                                                                             + L2 D
                                                                                                   β
                                                2 4
                                            1 4t L
                                        ≤               Hq (ρ0 ) + 2t2 L3 D + 2η 2 L2 Vgrad      2
                                                                                                       + tL2 D.
                                            β     α
In the last inequality, we use Lemma 10 in Vempala & Wibisono (2019) and β > 2. Thus we obtain
      d                3           8βt2 L4
        Hq (ρt ) ≤ − Jq (ρt ) +              Hq (ρ0 ) + 4βt2 L3 D + 2βtL2 D + (2βη 2 L2 + 2)Vgrad              2
     dt                4               α
                       3α             8βt2 L4
                 ≤ − Hq (ρt ) +                Hq (ρ0 ) + 6βtL2 D + 4βVgrad      2
                        2                 α
since the LSI (Eq. (5)) holds and tL ≤ ηL ≤ 1. Multiplying both sides by e3αt/2 and integrating
them from t = 0 to t = ηβ −1 , we get
                                       2(e3αη/2β − 1) 4βη 2 L4

       3αη/2β                                                                                  2           2
     e         Hq (ρη ) − Hq (ρ0 ) ≤                                   Hq (ρ0 ) + 6βηDL + 4βVgrad
                                              3α               α
                                            2 4
                                            8η L                         2          2
                                   ≤ 2η             Hq (ρ0 ) + 6ηDL + 4Vgrad ,
                                               α


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where we use the inequality ea ≤ 1 + 2a for a ∈ [0, 1] and 3αη/2β ≤ 1 (derived from the
assumption of η). Rearranging this inequality, we have
                                    16η 3 L4

        Hq (ρη ) ≤ e−3αη/2β 1 +               Hq (ρ0 ) + e−3αη/2β 12η 2 DL2 + 8Vgrad
                                                                                 2

                                                                                     η
                                       α
                  ≤ e−αη/β Hq (ρ0 ) + 12η 2 DL2 + 8ηVgrad
                                                      2
                                                          ,
                                                3   4
where the last inequality follows from 1 + 16ηα L ≤ 1 + 16β
                                                         αη         αη
                                                            2 ≤ 1 + 2β ≤ e
                                                                           αη/2β
                                                                                 . By replacing
ρ0 by ρk and ρη by ρk+1 , we get the conclusion.

proof of Proposition C.3. By Lemma C.7, it holds that
                                                          k
                                                          X        0
Hq (ρk ) ≤ e−αηk/β Hq (ρ0 ) + 12η 2 DL2 + 8ηVgrad
                                              2
                                                              e−αηk /β
                                               k0 =1
                                   2    2   2                                    2
                             12η DL + 8ηVgrad                     16βηDL2   32βVgrad
        ≤ e−αηk/β Hq (ρ0 ) +                  ≤ e −αηk/β
                                                         H (ρ
                                                          q 0 ) +         +          ,
                                 1 − e−αη/β                          α         3α
where, the last inequality follows from L > 1 (derived from Lemma C.5) and 1 − e−c ≥ 43 c for
c ∈ [0, 14 ] and αη   1      1
                 β < 4L2 < 4 . Thus we get the assertion.

                                                                               2
proof of Proposition 4.3. By the Otto-Villani theorem, it holds that W2 (ρk , q) ≤ α2 Hq (ρk ). There-
                                              β     2H (ρ )
fore, Proposition C.3 implies that after k ≥ αη log qδ 0 iteration, it holds that
                                              v                     !
                                                               2
                                              u
                                              u2         32βVgrad
                                W2 (ρk , q) ≤ t     δ+
                                                 α           3α

Then we obtain that

          E[Rλ (θ(k) )] − R∗λ ≤ E[Rλ (θ(k) )] − Eπ∞ [Rλ (θ)] + (Eπ∞ [Rλ (θ)] − R∗λ )
                                 v                     !
                                                   2
                                 u
                                              32βVgrad
                                 u2
                                                            D       eL bβ
                       ≤ C(λ + m)t      δ+               +     log         +1 ,
                                   α             3α         2β      M D

where we use Lemma E.1 and Lemma E.2 for the inequality. By specifying α, L, M and b by
applying Lemma C.4, Lemma C.5, and Lemma E.3, we get the conslusion.

D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.6
The objective of this section is to prove Theorem 4.6. First, by the noisy gradient descent, the
objective value decreases enough, and we can ensure that for each node of the teacher network,
there exists a node of the student network that is “close” to each other. Then we can prove the local
convergence property based on the strong convexity around the parameters of the teacher network.
The proof of the local convergence relies on that of Zhang et al. (2019). They consider the setting
where the parameters of the second layer are all positive, i.e., aj = a◦j = 1 for all j ∈ [m] and
provide the following proposition:
                                                                           Pm
Proposition D.1 (Theorem 4.2 of Zhang et al. (2019)). Let f ◦ : x 7→ j=1 σ(hwj◦ , xi) be a teacher
                             ◦         ◦     ◦         ◦       d×m
                    Qm W =m (w1 w2 · · · wm ) ∈ R n , κ = σ1 /σm is the condition number
network with parameters
of W ◦ , and σ = ( j=1 σj )/σm     . Assume the inputs (xi )i=1 are sampled from N (0, Id ), and the
             n
outputs (yi )i=1 are generated from the teacher network. Suppose that the initial estimator W (0)
satisfies kW (0) − W ◦ kF ≤ cσm /κ3 m2 , where c > 0 is a small enough absolute constant. Then
there exists absolute constants c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 , and c5 such that under
                                c1 κ10 m9 d

                                                       κmd
                                                              · kW ∗ k2F + v 2 ,

                           n≥                   log
                                     σm                 σm


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          1
the output of the gradient descent with step-size η ≤ c2 κm  2 satisfies

                               c3 η  k                      c4 σ 2 κ4 m5 d log n
    kW (k) − W ◦ k2F ≤ 1 −              kW (0) − W ◦ k2F +                       · kW ◦ k2F + v 2

                               σκ 2                                   n
with probability at least 1 − c5 d−10 .
Their proof can also be applied to the setting in this paper, i.e., aj , a◦j ∈ {±1} holds, and if a teacher
node j and a student node kj are close to each other, it holds that a◦j = akj . In Proposition 4.3, if it
holds that E[Rλ (θ(k) )] − R∗λ ≤ b 0 , we obtain that
                                          Rλ (θ(k) ) − R∗λ ≤  0                                      (8)
with probability at least 1 − b, by using the Markov inequality. In the rest of this section, we assume
that (8) is satisfied. In this case, if Proposition 4.4 is ensured, we can apply Proposition D.1 and
Theorem 4.6 is proved. We give its proof in the rest of this section.

proof of Proposition 4.4. Let θ ◦ = ((a◦1 , w1◦ ), . . . , (a◦m , wm◦
                                                                      )). Then by Rλ (θ) − Rλ (θ ◦ ) ≤
            ∗
Rλ (θ) − Rλ ≤  0 , it holds that
                                       m                                  m
   1 h                           2
                                   i  X                          2
                                                                         X                 2

     Ex (fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ)) + λ        |aj |2 + kwj k ≤ λ              |a◦j |2 + wj◦     +  0 ,
   2                                  j=1                                j=1
and therefore,
                                                      m
                 1 h                           2
                                                 i   X
                                                    0                   2

                   Ex (fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ)) ≤         |a◦j |2 + wj◦     +  0
                 2                                 m j=1
                                                              m
                                                            0 X
                                                                 1 + kW ◦ k2F +  0 ≤ 3 0 ,

                                                       ≤                                               (9)
                                                           m j=1
                                                    Pm             2                      2
where we use |a◦j |2 = 1 for all j ∈ [m] and           j=1   wj◦       = kW ◦ k2F ≤ mkW ◦ k2 ≤ m. Then we
move to evaluate the LHS. Since σ(u) = u+|u|2   for u ∈ R, it holds that
                            m                       m
                           X                     1X
                f (x; θ) =     aj σ(hwj , xi) =        aj (|hwj , xi| + hwj , xi),
                           j=1
                                                 2 j=1
                                      m                       m
                                      X                    1X ◦
                                                                 aj hwj◦ , xi + hwj◦ , xi

                  f   a◦ ,W ◦   (x) =     aj σ(hwj , xi) =
                                      j=1
                                                           2 j=1
Hence we have that
   1 h                            2
                                    i
     Ex (fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ))
   2                                                                        2 
                m                                m
      1       X                                X
                    a◦j hwj◦ , xi + hwj◦ , xi −

   = Ex                                           aj (|hwj , xi| + hwj , xi) 
                                                                                 
      8        j=1                              j=1
                                               2      *
             m                   m                            m             m
                                                                                        +2 
     1    X                    X                    1     X              X
    = Ex      a◦j hwj◦ , xi −     aj |hwj , xi|  + Ex       a◦j wj◦ −     aj wj , x ,
     8      j=1                 j=1
                                                      8      j=1           j=1

where the last equality follows from Ex [|hw1 , xi|hw2 , xi] = 0 for all w1 , w2 ∈ Rd , which follows
from the fact that the distribution PX is symmetric. Then Eq. (9) gives that
                                                                2 
                               Xm                  m
                                                   X
                                   a◦j hwj◦ , xi −   aj |hwj , xi|  ≤ 24 0 ,                    (10)
                                                                    
                        Ex 
                                     j=1               j=1
                              *                        +2 
                                Xm           m
                                             X
                           Ex     a◦j wj◦ −   aj wj , x  ≤ 24 0 .                                   (11)
                                     j=1         j=1



                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The analysis based on Eq. (10), the error analysis of student networks with the absolute value
activation, is conducted in Zhou et al. (2021). Here we import Lemma D.2 from their tech-
nique. They focus on the setting where a◦j = 1 for all j ∈ [m], but we can apply it here.
Then we get that for every j ∈ [m], there exists kj ∈ [m] and a constant C > 0 such that
                                       −5/3                                       −1
arccos |hwj◦ , wk i|/ wj◦ kwk k ≤ Cmσmin  1/3 and akj wkj − wj◦ ≤ poly(m, σmin

                                                                                     ) 3/8 .
We simply denote kj by j. Since Zhou et  al. (2021) uses the absolute value for the activation, it
may hold that arccos hwj◦ , wj i/ wj◦ kwj k > π/2 (i.e., wj◦ and wk have “opposite” directions).
From now on, we omit such cases by Eq. (11). Let a = (a1 , . . . , am ) = (a◦1 , . . . , a◦m ) and W∆ =
(w1◦ − w1 , . . . , wm
                     ◦
                       − wm ). And we denote the angle between wj◦ and wj by φj . Then, Eq. (11) can
be rewritten as
                                    Ex∼PX (aT W∆ x)2 ≤ 24 0 .


                                     2
Let x̃ ∼ N (0, Id ), since r2 := kx̃k and φ := x̃/kx̃k are random variables that independently follow
the Chi-squared distribution and the uniform distribution on Sd−1 respectively. Hence it holds that

                                                        Er∼N (0,kha,W∆ ik2 ) r2                2

          T          2
                         Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) (aT W∆ x̃)2                                  kha, W∆ ik
Ex∼PX (a W∆ x) =                                  2   =                          =               ≤ 24 0 .
                                Ex̃∼N (0,Id ) kx̃k                 d                     d
                             2
This implies kha, W∆ ik ≤ 24 0 d. Since wj◦ − wj = (1 − hwj◦ , wj i)wj◦ + (hwj◦ , wj iwj◦ − wj ) and
 hwj◦ , wj iwj◦ − wj = sin φj , we have that
                                                                    T
        ha, W∆ i = (1 − hw1◦ , w1 i)a1 , . . . , (1 − hwm
                                                        ◦
                                                          , wm i)am W ◦
                                                                                     T
                       + ha, W∆ i − (1 − hw1◦ , w1 i)a1 , . . . , (1 − hwm
                                                                         ◦
                                                                           , wm i)am W ◦
                                                                         T
                     = (1 − hw1◦ , w1 i)a1 , . . . , (1 − hwm
                                                            ◦
                                                              , wm i)am W ◦
                          D                                                      E
                        + a, hw1◦ , w1 iw1◦ − w1 , . . . , hwm  ◦        ◦
                                                                  , wm iwm − wm
                                            −5/3
and the second term is at most O(m3/2 σmin  1/3 ). As for the first term, it holds that it is at least
     Pm
σmin j=1 (1 − hwj◦ , wj i)2 . Hence, by letting   = o(d−1 m−3/2 σmin
                                                                 8
                                                                     ), it must hold that hwj◦ , wj i >
0, which gives the assertion.
Lemma D.2P  (Lemma 9 and Lemma 10 in Zhou et al. (2021)). Assume that x ∼ N (0, Id ) and
              m
f ◦ : x 7→               ◦
              j=1 |hwj , xi| is a teacher network with parameters w1◦ , . . . , wm
                                                                                 ◦
                                                                                   ∈ Rd satisfying
min arccos hwj◦1 , wj◦2 i/ wj◦1 wj◦2 ≥ ∆ for ∆ > 0 and 0 < wmin ≤ wj◦ ≤ wmax for all j ∈

j1 ,j2
[m]. Then there exists a threshold  0 = poly(∆, m−1 , wmax  −1
                                                                .wmin ) such that if a student network
         P m                             ◦    2
fb : x 7→ j=1 |hwj , xi| satisfies Ex [(f −fb) ] ≤   ≤  0 , it holds that for every j ∈ [m], there exists
                                                                                               −5/3
kj ∈ [m] and a constant C > 0 such that arccos |hwj◦ , wk i|/ wj◦ kwk k ≤ Cmwmax wmin  1/3


and akj wkj − wj◦ ≤ poly(m, ∆−1 , wmax ) 3/8 .

E        AUXILIARY LEMMAS
E.1      E VALUATION OF THE INVARIANT MEASURE

This subsection provides lemmas about the evaluation of the function value sampled from the in-
variant measure β. These are utilized in the proof of Proposition 4.3 (see Appendix C). First, we
introduce two results from Raginsky et al. (2017), and then we prove the dissipativity, which is
imposed as an assumption in these results.
Lemma E.1 (Proposition 11 in Raginsky et al. (2017)). Suppose that f : Θ → R satisfies the
following conditions:

          • f is L-smooth.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                             2
          • f is (M, b)-dissipative, i.e., it holds that hθ, ∇f (θ)i ≥ M kθk − b for any θ ∈ Θ.

Then, for any β ≥ 2/M , it holds that

                                                                       d      eL bβ
                              Eθ ∼π∞ [f (θ)] − min f (θ) ≤               log        +1
                                                      θ∈Θ             2β      M d
Lemma E.2 (Lemma 2 and Lemma 6 in Raginsky et al. (2017)). Let µ1 , µ2 be two probability
measures on Θ with finite second moments, and let f : Θ → R be a (M, b)-dissipative function
satisfying k∇f (0)k ≤ B for B ≥ 0. Then, it holds that
                         Z         Z
                            gdµ1 −    gdµ2 ≤ (M σ + B)W2 (µ1 , µ2 ),
                                        Θ             Θ
                                    2                 2
where σ 2 := max{ Θ kθk dµ1 , Θ kθk dµ2 }.
                        R                    R

Lemma E.3 (dissipativity). Rλ (·) is (M, b)-dissipative with M = 2λ and b = 8m2 R3 .

Proof. By a straightforward calculation, we have that
                       m
                       X                             m
                                                     X
 hθ, ∇Rλ (θ)i =              aj ∇aj Rλ (θ) +               hwj , ∇wj Rλ (θ)i
                       j=1                           j=1
                       m
                                  "m                                  m
                                                                                                              #
                       X           X                      dā j X ◦             ◦            dāj
                    =     aj       ā i I(w̄ i , w̄ j ) ·        −        ai I(wi , w̄ j ) ·       + 2λaj
                      j=1      i=1
                                                          daj        i=1
                                                                                             daj
                            m
                               *           m                                         m
                                                                                                                              +
                           X              X
                                                       ◦            ◦      dw̄j X                                 dw̄j
                        +        wj , −          āi aj J(w̄i , wj )            +         āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )        + 2λwj
                           j=1            i=1
                                                                           dwj      i=1
                                                                                                                  dwj
                                   m
                                           "m                                    m
                                                                                                                #
                             2
                                 X           X                           dāj X ◦               ◦          dāj
                    = 2λkθk +           aj           āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) ·      −       ai I(wi , w̄j ) ·
                                  j=1         i=1
                                                                         daj    i=1
                                                                                                           daj
                            m
                               *           m                                         m
                                                                                                                       +
                           X              X
                                                       ◦            ◦      dw̄j X                                 dw̄j
                        +        wj , −          āi aj J(w̄i , wj )            +         āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )         .
                           j=1            i=1
                                                                           dwj      i=1
                                                                                                                  dwj

As for the second term and the third term, since |I(w, v)| ≤ kwkkvk/2d and kJ(w, v)k ≤ kvk/2d
for any w, v ∈ Rd , we have that
                m
                      "m                                   m
                                                                                       #
               X       X                       dāj X ◦               ◦          dāj
                   aj      āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) ·       −         ai I(wi , w̄j ) ·
               j=1     i=1
                                               daj        i=1
                                                                                 daj
                        m
                                     "   m                         m
                                                                                       #
                      X         dāj X                            X
                    ≤       aj               āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) −      a◦i I(wi◦ , w̄j ) ≤ 4m2 R3 ,
                      j=1
                                daj i=1                           i=1

and
      m
            *         m                                      m
                                                                                                 +
      X               X                               dw̄j X                             dw̄j
             wj , −         āi a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ )         +     āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )
      j=1             i=1
                                                      dwj   i=1
                                                                                         dwj
          m
                *           m                                     m
                                                                                                        +
          X                 X                              dw̄j X                                dw̄j
      ≤          wj , −           āi a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ )        +     āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )                  ≤ 4m2 R3 .
          j=1               i=1
                                                           dwj   i=1
                                                                                                 dwj

Combining these inequality, we get that
                                                                         2
                                            hθ, ∇Rλ (θ)i ≥ 2λkθk − 8m2 R3 ,
which gives the conclusion.


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA C.4

In this subsection, we give a proof to Lemma C.4, the LSI for the invariant measure π∞ . The key
notion is that Rλ can be decomposed to the bounded term (L2 -distance) and the strongly convex
term (regularization term). Combining this fact with the following lemma, we can ensure the LSI.
Lemma E.4 (Holley & Stroock (1987); Nitanda et al. (2021b)). Let a probability measure on Θ
with a density function q satisfy the LSI with a constant α. For a function f : Θ → R that satisfies
|f (θ)| ≤ B for any θ ∈ Θ, a probability measure defined by
                                                          exp(f (θ))q(θ)
                                        Q(θ)dθ :=                            dθ
                                                         Eq [exp(f (θ))q(θ)]
satisfies the LSI with a constant α exp(−4B).

proof of Lemma C.4. First, we note that


                                        2
                                                  β h                           2 i
    exp(−βRλ (θ))dθ = exp −βλkθk · exp − Ex fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ̄)                 dθ.
                                                  2

                             2                                                           2
Since the function θ 7→ βλkθk is 2βλ-strongly convex, a measure with density exp −βλkθk dθ
satisfies the LSI with ah constant βλ Bakry & Émery     (1985). Moreover, by a straightforward calcu-
                                                  2 i
lation shows that β2 Ex fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ̄)      ≤ 2βm2 R4 , Lemma E.4 implies that π∞ satisfies

the LSI with a constant 2βλ exp −8βm2 R4 , which gives the conclusion.

E.3     P ROOF OF L EMMA C.5
                                                    h                            2 i                          2
In this subsection we write L(θ) := 21 Ex               fa◦ ,W ◦ (x) − f (x; θ̄) , i.e., Rλ (θ) := L(θ) + λkθk .
                    2
Since θ 7→ λkθk is 2λ-smooth, it is sufficient to show that L(·) is L0 -smooth with L0 = O(m2 R3 )
for proving Lemma C.5. To this end, let θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ. We consider the decomposition
                           v
                           um
                           uX
                                                             2                            2
       ∇L(θ) − ∇L(θ 0 ) = t          ∇aj L(θ) − ∇aj L(θ 0 ) + ∇wj L(θ) − ∇wj L(θ 0 )
                                        j=1
                                     m
                                     X
                                            ∇aj L(θ) − ∇aj L(θ 0 ) + ∇wj L(θ) − ∇wj L(θ 0 )

                                 ≤                                                                                 ,
                                     j=1

where
                                    m
                                                                                   dā0j

                             0
                                    X                dāj        0      0     0
  ∇aj L(θ) − ∇aj L(θ ) =        āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) ·         − āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) ·
                           i=1
                                                     daj                           daj
                                         m
                                                                                                   dā0j

                                       X
                                                ◦        ◦          dāj         ◦      ◦      0
                                   −           ai I(wi , w̄j ) ·          − ai I(wi , w̄j ) ·                  ,
                                        i=1
                                                                    daj                            daj
                              m
                                                                                                   dw̄j0

                             X                                dw̄j
  ∇wj L(θ) − ∇wj L(θ 0 ) = −        āi a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ )             − ā0i a◦j J(w̄i0 , wj◦ )
                             i=1
                                                              dwj                                  dwj
                                            m
                                                                                                                       dw̄j0

                                        1X                                  dw̄j
                                   +              āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )            − ā0i ā0j J(w̄i0 , w̄j0 )                 .
                                        2 i=1                               dwj                                        dwj
(see Eq. (3) and Eq. (4)). The following lemma gives an upper bound for each term.
Lemma E.5. For any θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ and j ∈ [m], it holds that
                                       3
                                            √ !                                      m
                                   5R      2   dR                                   X
   ∇aj L(θ) − ∇aj L(θ 0 ) ≤ m                         aj − a0j + wj − wj0 + 2R3         kw̄i − w̄i0 k

                                         +
                                     2        d                                     i=1
                                                                                m
                                   2R                                          X
  ∇wj L(θ) − ∇wj L(θ 0 ) ≤ m            + 2R3     aj − a0j + wj − wj0 + 2R3        (|ai − a0i | + kwi − wi0 k).

                                    d                                          i=1


                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. The proof is based on the straightforward calculation. As for the first inequality, for every
i ∈ [m], it holds that

                 dāj                          dā0j
āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) ·   − ā0i I(w̄i0 , w̄j0 ) ·
                 daj                           daj
                                              dāj                                               dāj
≤ (āi I(w̄i , w̄j ) − ā0i I(w̄i , w̄j )) ·         + ā0i I(w̄i , w̄j ) − ā0i I(w̄i , w̄j0 ) ·
                                              daj                                                 daj
                                                                                                    dā0j

                                                         dāj                              dāj
          + ā0i I(w̄i , w̄j0 ) − ā0i I(w̄i0 , w̄j0 ) ·       + ā0i I(w̄i0 , w̄j0 ) ·

                                                                                                  −
                                                         daj                               daj      daj
                kw̄i kkw̄j k                   dR2                    dR2        kw̄i kkw̄j k
≤ |āj − ā0j |              · 4R + w̄j − w̄j0     4R + kw̄i − w̄i0 k     4R + R              · |āj − âj |
                     2d                         2d                     2d             2d
      5R3
             aj − a0j + wj − wj0 + 2R3 kw̄i − w̄i0 k,

≤
       2

and

                                dāj                        dā0j
                a◦i I(wi◦ , w̄j ) ·  − a◦i I(wi◦ , w̄j0 ) ·
                                daj                         daj
                                                                                                  dā0j

                                                            dāj                           dāj
                ≤ a◦i I(wi◦ , w̄j ) − a◦i I(wi◦ , w̄j0 ) ·        + a◦i I(wi◦ , w̄j0 ) ·

                                                                                                −
                                                            daj                            daj    daj
                                           √                       √
                   1                         dR                   2 dR
                      wj − wj0 4R +                                        aj − a0j + wj − wj0 ,

                ≤                                 |āj − âj | ≤
                  2d                        2d                      d

where we use wj◦ ≤ kW o k ≤ 1 for any j ∈ [m]. Then the triangle inequality gives the first
assertion. As for the second inequality, for every i ∈ [m], it holds that

                      dw̄j                                  dw̄j0
 āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )      − ā0i ā0j J(w̄i0 , w̄j0 )
                      dwj                                   dwj
                                                    dw̄j                                                                dw̄j
 ≤ āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j ) − ā0i ā0j J(w̄i , w̄j )                + ā0i ā0j J(w̄i , w̄j ) − ā0i ā0j J(w̄i , w̄j0 )
                                                         dwj                                                             dwj
                                                                                                                         dw̄j0

                   0 0               0       0 0        0    0
                                                                  dw̄j              0 0       0       0         dw̄j
           + āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j ) − āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )                    + āi āj J(w̄i , w̄j )                  −
                                                                     dwj                                        dwj      dwj
               √                                          √                       √
                   dR       √                               dR       √                d                          √
 ≤ R aj − a0j            · 4 dR + R|ai − a0i |                    · 4 dR + R2            · wj − wj0 · 4 dR
                  2d
                  √                                        2d    √                 2d
               2 d                     0
                                              √                2 dR
           +R           · kwi − wi k · 4 dR + 2R                       · wj − wj0
                   2d                                              2d
 ≤ 2R3 aj − a0j + wj − wj0 + 2R3 (|ai − a0i | + kwi − wi0 k).



and

                      dw̄j                                  dw̄j0
  āi a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ )       − ā0i a◦j J(w̄i0 , wj◦ )
                      dwj                                   dwj
                                                         d w̄ j                                                        dw̄j
 ≤ āi a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ ) − ā0i a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ )                 + ā0i a◦j J(w̄i , wj◦ ) − ā0i a◦j J(w̄i0 , wj◦ )

                                                         dwj                                                           dwj
                                                            0
                                                        dw̄

                                           dw̄j             j
           + ā0i a◦j J(w̄i0 , wj◦ )               −
                                           dwj          dwj
    1                         1                           R                      2R
      aj − a0j 4R + R · wj − wj0 +                              · wj − wj0 =             aj − a0j + wj − wj0

 ≤
   2d                        2d                           2d                       d

Again by using the triangle inequality, we obtain the conclusion.


                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


proof of Lemma C.5. By using Lemma E.5,
   ∇L(θ) − ∇L(θ 0 )
        Xm
            ∇aj L(θ) − ∇aj L(θ 0 ) + ∇wj L(θ) − ∇wj L(θ 0 )

      ≤
          j=1
            "       √                            # m
            5R3    2 dR         2R 1               X
                            3            3     3
                                                       aj − a0j + wj − wj0

       ≤m        +      + 2R +     + · 2R + 2R
             2       d           d  2              j=1
          "         √                            #
            5R 3
                   2 dR         2R 1               √
       ≤m        +      + 2R3 +    + · 2R3 + 2R3 2m θ − θ 0 = L0 θ − θ 0
             2       d           d  2
                                                                                  2
holds with L0 = O(m2 R3 ). Combining this with the fact that the mapping θ 7→ λkθk is 2λ-smooth
and the triangle inequality, we obtain that Rλ (·) is L-smooth with L = O(m2 R3 + λ), which gives
the conclusion.


                                               29
