Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O PTIMAL M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE B OUNDS FOR
A DAPTIVE C OMPOSITION OF S AMPLED G AUSSIAN
M ECHANISMS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Given a trained model and a data sample, membership-inference (MI) attacks
             predict whether the sample was in the model’s training set. A common counter-
             measure against MI attacks is to utilize differential privacy (DP) during model
             training to mask the presence of individual examples. While this use of DP is
             a principled approach to limit the efficacy of MI attacks, there is a gap between
             the bounds provided by DP and the empirical performance of MI attacks. In this
             paper, we derive bounds for the advantage of an adversary mounting a MI attack,
             and demonstrate tightness for the widely-used Gaussian mechanism. Our analysis
             answers an open problem in the field of differential privacy, namely the fact that
             membership inference is not 100% successful even for relatively high budgets
             (  > 10). Finally, using our analysis, we provide MI metrics for models trained
             on CIFAR10 dataset. To the best of our knowledge, our analysis provides the
             state-of-the-art membership inference bounds.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The recent success of machine learning models makes them the go-to approach to solve a variety
of problems, ranging from computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to NLP (Sutskever et al.,
2014), including applications to sensitive data such as health records or chatbots. Access to a
trained machine learning model, be it a white-box published model or through a black-box API, can
leak traces of information (Dwork et al., 2015) from the training data. Researchers have tried to
measure this information leakage through metrics such as membership inference (Shokri et al., 2017).
Membership inference is the task of guessing, from a trained model, whether it includes a given
sample or not. This task is interesting in its own right, as the participation of an individual in a data
collection can be sensitive information. Furthermore, it also serves as the “most significant bit” of
information: if membership inference fails, attacks revealing more information such as reconstruction
attacks (Fredrikson et al., 2014; Carlini et al., 2020) will also fail. In other words, defending against
membership inference attacks also defends against more advanced attacks.
The standard approach to provably defeat these membership privacy attacks is differential pri-
vacy (Dwork et al., 2006). The traditional variant of differential privacy defines a class of algorithms
that apply on a database D and respect a privacy budget   and a probability of failure δ 1 . These pa-
rameters control the divergence between the distribution of outcome of the algorithm when applied on
two “neighboring” databases that only differ in one location. In particular, our mechanism of interest,
the Sampled Gaussian Mechanism (SGM), makes an arbitrary function f : X ∗ → Rd differentially
private by first sub-sampling a database of smaller size from the original database, using Poisson sam-
pling, and then calculating f on the sub-sampled database, and finally adding Gaussian noise to the
outcome. Increasing the amount of injected noise provides stronger privacy guarantees, and enables
to trade off between privacy and utility of the trained model. To measure the privacy of a given algo-
rithm, researchers have developed advanced mathematical tools and notions such as Renyi differential
privacy (Mironov, 2017; Abadi et al., 2016) and advanced composition theorems (Dwork et al., 2010;
Kairouz et al., 2015). These tools allow us to calculate ( , δ) values for carefully designed algorithms.

    1
        While intuitive, describing δ as the probability of failure is mathematically inaccurate .Meiser (2018)


                                                          1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                   29.93                  6.97     3.92           1.13     0.68                         3.10                  0.98     0.74           0.45     0.37
             1.0                                                                                  1.0
                            Humphries et al.                                                                    Humphries et al.
                            Ours (Pinsker)                                                                      Ours (Pinsker)
             0.8            Empirical                                                             0.8           Empirical
                            Our bound                                                                           Our bound
             0.6                                                                                  0.6

 Advantage


                                                                                      Advantage
             0.4                                                                                  0.4

             0.2                                                                                  0.2

             0.0 1                                                                                0.0 1
                10                      100                 101          102                         10                     100                 101          102
                                                 at =1e-5                                                                            at =1e-5
                           (a) Without subsampling (q = 1)                                                     (b) With subsampling (q = 0.01)


                     (c) False positive vs true positive rate                                                  (d) FP v.s. TP for small FP rates


Figure 1: Comparison of advantage bounds in a Gaussian setup. We run the sampled Gaussian
Mechanism in one dimension with 50 epochs, and either no subsampling (a) or subsampling with
q = 0.01 (b). Our attack compares likelihood of the observations under both hypothesis, and chooses
the most likely (see Appendix F.1 for details). We compute the empirical advantage by measuring the
percentage of time p the adversary guesses membership correctly, and report 2p − 1. In two bottom
figures (c and d) we compare upper bounds for true positive rate obtained from differential privacy
analysis versus our direct analysis (Details are provided in Appendix A).
Previous work has shown that any differentially private algorithm will provably bound the accuracy of
any membership inference adversary. Specifically, Yeom et al. (2018), Humphries et al. (2020), and
Thudi et al. (2022) prove that any model trained with ( , δ) differential privacy will induce an upper
bound on the accuracy of membership inference. These upper bounds help practitioners calibrate the
privacy budget   to defeat the adversary. As can be seen in Figure 1, there is a large gap between the
best existing upper bound and the performance of empirical attacks. In this work, we use a new proof
technique to bypass DP analysis and directly bound the advantage of MI attacks, and close the gap
between theoretical guarantees and empirical performance.
The most widely-used DP algorithm in machine learning applications is DP-SGD: it is a small change
of the classical stochastic gradient descent algorithm that only requires to clip per-sample gradients,
average them and add Gaussian noise. Each iteration of DP-SGD is an instance of the sampled
Gaussian mechanism, which chooses a fraction q of a dataset and outputs a noisy sum of the desired
quantity. DP-SGD has been shown to be more accurate than other differentially private training
algorithms in the case of linear and convex models (van der Maaten and Hannun, 2020). Our analysis
mirrors the recent shift in the field of empirical membership inference, from advantage (or accuracy)
metrics (Shokri et al., 2017; Yeom et al., 2018; Sablayrolles et al., 2019) to precision/recall (true
positive/false positive) measures (Watson et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2020). Our result shows that
no single parameter (either   or membership inference advantage) can explain the performance of
adversaries in different settings. in other words, the same value for   can lead to significantly different
membership inference advantages and vice versa. As shown in Figure 1.c and 1.d, this phenomenon
holds for the entire precision/recall curve; the precision of adversary at all given recall values cannot
be explained only with a   or advantage parameter.
Our contributions in this work are as follows:


                                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Our main theorem in Section 4 bounds the membership inference advantage of any adversary
         for the composition of an arbitrary set of sampled Gaussian mechanisms that could adaptively
         depend on each other. This bound is optimal as it reflects the membership inference
         advantage for a real adversary on a particular series of Gaussian mechanisms. 2 Additionally,
         we extend our bounds to the case where the prior knowledge of adversary is non-uniform
         (Appendix J). We also provide upper bounds on the true positive rate for any given false
         positive rate (Appendix A).
       • We propose a numerical way to calculate the total variation distance (and a generalization of
         it) between mixtures of Gaussians (Section 4.1). Our algorithm is computationally tractable,
         works in linear time with respect to the number of mechanisms and is independent from
         the dimension. We use our numerical approach to obtain concrete bounds for Gaussian
         mechanisms and compare our bounds to that of Humphries et al. (2020). We also use this
         algorithm to calculate upper bounds on true positive rate of adversary.
       • Finally, to understand the practical implication of our bound for mainstream datasets, we use
         DP-SGD to train models on CIFAR10 and MNIST and calculate the membership inference
         bounds using our techniques. Our approach allows us to achieve state-of-the-art provable
         membership inference privacy for any given accuracy.


2     BACKGROUND

In this section, we briefly recall the main properties of KL divergence and total variation (TV), as
well as differential privacy and membership inference.

2.1   T OTAL VARIATION , KL DIVERGENCE , AND P INSKER INEQUALITY

We consider a random variable X (resp. Y) with probability distribution µ (resp. ν) over a measurable
space Ω. With a slight abuse of notation, we consider quantities as function of either the random
variables X, Y or their probability distributions µ, ν. Here we recall the definition of total variation
(TV) distance and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence:
                                                                            Z
                                                                                      dµ
        TV(X, Y ) = sup Pr[X ∈ A] − Pr[Y ∈ A],              KL(X k Y ) =        log         dµ.      (1)
                        A                                                    Ω        dν

Post-processing.     Given a function g : E → F , applying g to X and Y can only decrease TV,
                                   TV(g(X), g(Y )) ≤ TV(X, Y ).
In particular, if g is a bijective transform, we have TV(g(X), g(Y )) = TV(X, Y ).

Pinsker’s Inequality. For any two random variables X and Y , Pinsker (1964)’s inequality states
                                             r
                                                KL(X k Y )
                                TV(X, Y ) ≤                 .                                (2)
                                                    2

2.2   D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY AND THE G AUSSIAN MECHANISM

Differential privacy. A randomized algorithm M satisfies ( , δ)-differential privacy if, for any two
datasets D and D0 that differ in at most one sample, and any subset R of the output space, we have:
                           Pr(M(D) ∈ R) ≤ exp( ) Pr(M(D0 ) ∈ R) + δ.                                    (3)
While the probability of failure δ is often chosen to be inversely proportional to the number of
samples, there is no clear consensus in the literature over desirable values of  .
   2
     After submission of this work we realized (thanks to Anonymous reviewers of ICLR 3) that Theorem 4.2 in
Dong et al. (2019) and its refinements in Zhu et al. (2022) implies our Theorem 6. However, since our proof
technique is different, and perhaps simpler, we still keep our proof in the paper.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DP-SGD with the subsampled Gaussian mechanism. DP-SGD ((Song et al., 2013)) is a modifi-
cation of Stochastic Gradient Descent that makes it differentially private. The core mechanism behind
it is the subsampled Gaussian mechanism. Given a function φ that operates on sets S with sensitivity
1 (i.e. kφ(S) − φ(S 0 )k2 ≤ 1), the subsampled Gaussian mechanism selects sets S at random and
adds noise to the output of φ. Note that the mechanism is differentially private even if all intermediate
steps of the training process are revealed.

2.3       M EMBERSHIP INFERENCE ATTACKS

Membership Inference is the task of predicting whether a given sample was in the training set of a
given model. Homer et al. (2008) showed the first proof of concept, and Shokri et al. (2017) showed
that a wide variety of machine learning models are vulnerable to such attacks. Shokri et al. (2017)
train neural networks to attack machine learning models, and measure the success of the attack by
the percentage of correctly predicted (train/test) samples, or equivalently the advantage (Yeom et al.,
2018). Later work showed that simple heuristics such as the loss (Yeom et al., 2018; Sablayrolles
et al., 2019; Choquette-Choo et al., 2021) provide a more accurate and robust measure of membership
inference. Membership inference attacks have also been used as an evaluation mechanism for
differentially private mechanisms (Jayaraman et al., 2020; Jayaraman and Evans, 2019).
Recent works (Watson et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2021; Rezaei and Liu, 2021) have proposed to
evaluate membership inference by the precision/recall trade-off (Watson et al., 2022) or the precision
at low levels of recall (Carlini et al., 2021). In particular, such works show that some setups which
were thought to be private because the membership accuracy is significantly less than 100% can
actually reveal membership of a small group of samples with very high precision. There is also a
line of work developed to design algorithms to specifically defend against membership inference
attacks (Nasr et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2021). While these works offer no theoretical
guarantees against attackers, the empirical defenses achieve better utility at the same membership
advantage than their differentially private equivalents. Finally, membership inference has been
studied in the context of differential identifiability (Bernau et al., 2021; Lee and Clifton, 2012) (see
Appendix F.1 for Gaussian experiments that correspond to differential identifiability techniques).

3       M EMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND TOTAL VARIATION
In this section, we define our security game for membership inference and show its connection to the
notion of total variation distance (or statistical distance) between probability distributions.

3.1       S ECURITY G AME

We adopt the classical assumptions of membership inference (Yeom et al., 2018; Sablayrolles et al.,
2019; Humphries et al., 2020). In particular, we assume that the datasets differ by adding/removing
one element. We define a security game between an Adversary (who wants to guess training set
membership) and a Challenger (who wants to hide training set membership).

          1. Adversary picks a datasets D = {z1 , . . . , zn } and a data point z 0
          2. Challenger samples a bit b uniformly at random and creates
                                                    D ∪ {z 0 } if b = 1

                                             0
                                           D =
                                                    D          if b = 0

          3. Challenger runs the learning algorithm L on D0 to train a model and sends a transcript of
             training θ to the adversary 3
          4. Adversary observes θ and guesses a bit b0 . Adversary wins if b0 = b.

We define the advantage of adversary A on learning algorithm L as Adv(L, A) = 2 · Pr[b = b0 ] − 1.
We also use Adv(L) = supA Adv(A, L) to denote the advantage of the worst-case adversary
against L.
    3
        The transcript can only include the final model or more information like the intermediate steps of training.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Remark 1 (Comparing with security game of Yeom et al. (2018)). The security game of Yeom et al.
(2018) for membership inference attacks (See Appendix H) is slightly weaker than ours. This means
that the upper bounds we prove in this work also apply to the security game of Yeom et al. (2018).
A curious reader might question if our security game is too strong; the worst-case advantage of
adversary might be lower in the security game of Yeom et al. (2018). In Appendix H we answer this
question negatively. Through experiments, we show that we cannot prove better upper bounds in the
alternative security game of Yeom et al. (2018), even if we assume the adversary does not control the
neighboring datasets and only sees the final model (and not the intermediate steps). This shows that
our bounds in Section 4 are tight even in the weaker security games.
Remark 2 (Non-uniform prior). One can define a similar security game where the selection of the bit
b is non-uniform. This security game captures settings that the adversary has some prior knowledge
about the inclusion of the example in the training set. This setting was studied by Thudi et al. (2022)
who provide some upper bounds for the advantage of the adversary in such a security game. In
Appendix J, we show that we can extend our analysis to this setting and provide optimal bounds.

Comparison to existing bounds. In the reminder of the paper we bound the membership inference
advantage for DP-SGD. We first recall the best existing upper bound that is proved and improved in
prior work (Jayaraman et al., 2020; Jayaraman and Evans, 2019; Humphries et al., 2020; Yeom et al.,
2018; Thudi et al., 2022).

Theorem 3 (Humphries et al. (2020)). For any ( , δ)-DP algorithm L we have Adv(L) ≤ e e−1+2δ  +1 .

Note that Theorem 3 applies to any DP algorithm and hence covers DP-SGD as well. Because of its
generality, the bound is loose for DP-SGD (see Figure 3(a)). To improve on this bound, we perform a
direct analysis of the advantage instead of using the DP tools and then converting to advantage.

Advantage. Let us first mathematically characterize the notion of advantage for a general learning
algorithm. For a fixed learning algorithm L and fixed neighboring datasets, let us define X := θ |
(b = 0) and Y := θ | (b = 1) to be the distributions of the output of the learning algorithm for two
cases of the security game. A deterministic adversary A defines a region A and predicts that θ is
sampled from µ if θ ∈ A and from ν if θ ∈  / A. We use µ(A) and ν(A) to denote Pr[X ∈ A] and
Pr[Y ∈ A]. For such an adversary we have
                     Adv(L, A) = Pr[X ∈ A] − Pr[Y ∈ A] = µ(A) − ν(A).

Note that with a simple averaging argument we can show that the best adversarial strategy in
membership security game is a deterministic strategy. Therefore, the advantage for the learning
algorithm L is then defined as
                           Adv(L) = sup µ(A) − ν(A) = TV(X, Y ),                                   (4)
                                         A

where TV is the total variation distance. Total variation distance thus gives us an upper bound on the
advantage of any adversary. Since we do not know the exact density function for X and Y it is not
clear how to calculate or approximate the total variation distance in general. In the next subsection
we discuss how Pinsker’s inequality upper bounds total variation distance.

3.2   B OUNDING MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE USING P INSKER ’ S INEQUALITY

Using Equation (4) and directly applying Pinsker’s inequality (2), we have:
                                            r                       r
                                               KL(X k Y )             Dα (X k Y )
                  Adv(L) ≤ TV(X, Y ) ≤                     = lim                                (5)
                                                    2         α→1           2
where Dα is the Rényi divergence at α. This bound enables us to use Rényi divergence, which is rou-
tinely calculated in DP-SGD (Mironov, 2017) to obtain numerical upper bounds on the membership
inference advantage of any adversary against adaptive composition of sampled Gaussian mechanisms.
To this end, we use RDP accounting to calculate the Dα for an α > 1. We know that for any α > 1,
Dα (X, Y ) is greater than KL(X k Y ) because Dα is increasing in α. This means that for any α > 1
Dα will be a valid upper bound on the membership inference advantage and the bound becomes
better as we decrease α.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In our evaluation (see Figures 3(a) and 5) we use this formulation to calculate numerical upper bounds
for membership inference for DP-SGD using typical parameters. We refer to this bound as the Pinsker
bound. The figure shows that it obtains better numerical values compared to the bound of Humphries
et al. (2020). However, there are two main limitations with Pinsker’s bound: 1) The bound is not
tight. 2) It is vacuous in cases where KL(X k Y ) > 2. In next section, we will optimally bound the
membership inference for composition of adaptive and sampled Gaussian mechanisms.

4       O PTIMAL BOUNDS FOR COMPOSITION OF SAMPLED G AUSSIAN
        MECHANISMS

In this section, we show a tighter upper-bound for the adversary’s advantage. In particular, we will
upper-bound the total variation between the transcripts of the (subsampled) Gaussian mechanism,
specifically the noisy gradients produced by the DP-SGD algorithm (Theorem 6).
As the first step of calculating our optimal bounds, we show that the adaptivity of Gaussian mecha-
nisms does not increase the membership advantage. In other words, for clipping threshold DP-SGD
with clipping threshold r, the entire process of DP-SGD can be replaced by a process where each step
is replaced by either N (0, σ 2 ) or N (r, σ 2 ) for the basic Gaussian mechanism, and replaced by either
N (0, σ 2 ) or (1 − q)N (0, σ 2 ) + qN (r, σ 2 ) for the sampled Gaussian mechanism, without decreasing
the total variation distance. Our analysis relies on a modified version of TV, that we denote by TVa .
Definition 4. For a > 0 define TVa (X, Y ) = 21 Ω |µ(x) − a · ν(x)|dx where µ and ν are the
                                                           R

probability density functions for X and Y respectively. 4
While we do not know an explicit form of the TVa divergence between Gaussians, we can still prove
that it increases with ku1 − u2 k2 , as formalized in the following lemma.
Lemma 5. Let X ≡ N (u1 , σ 2 · Id ) and Y ≡ N (u2 , σ 2 · Id ). Then, for any a ∈ R+ , TVa (X, Y )
is only a function of ku1 − u2 k2 and σ 2 . Moreover this function is monotonically increasing with
respect to ku1 − u2 k2 . That is, for any a ≥ ku1 − u2 k2 we have
                                  TVa (X, Y ) ≤ TVa (N (0, σ 2 ), N (a, σ 2 )).

The proof involves some careful but standard gradient calculations and is deferred to Appendix B.
Now we focus on stating an upper bound on the membership inference advantage of an adversary on
composition of Gaussian mechanisms. But before that, we state some useful notations. Notation. We
use θ = (s1 , . . . , sT ) to denote the transcript of the learning algorithm L that consists of T adaptive
steps. We use s≤t to denote the first t steps of the transcript of the random process. We use Si to
denote the union of the support set of the ith step of the mechanism M on all possible datasets. That
is Si = {si ; ∃D, si ∈ Supp(M (D)i )}. We also define S≤i = S1 × . . . , Si . We use B(q) to denote
a Bernoulli random variable that is equal to 1 with probability q and 0 with probability 1 − q. We use
0T (or 1T ) to denote the vector of dimension T that is 0 (or 1) in each coordinate. We use B(q)n to
denote an n dimensional random variable where each coordinate is independent and distributed as
B(q). For r ∈ R, we use r · B(q)n to denote the random variable that is sampled by the following
process: first sample from B(q)n and then multiply by r. We also use N (r · B(q)n , σ 2 ) to denote an
n dimensional random variable that is distributed according to a mixture of Gaussians which all have
standard deviation σ and centers are chosen at random from r · B(q)n .
Theorem 6 (Gaussian Composition with sub-sampling). Let M1 , . . . , MT be a series of adaptive
Gaussian Mechanisms with L2 sensitivity r and Gaussian noise with standard deviation σ and
sub-sampling rate q. The membership inference risk of the composition of Mi ’s is at most
                                     TV N (0T , σ 2 ), N (r · B(q)T , σ 2 )


Proof sketch. We first prove the proof for the case that there is no sub-sampling. Let M i (D) be the
mechanism that works on D (resp. D0 ) and consists of i Gaussians N (0, σ 2 ) (resp. N (r, σ 2 )) steps
followed by T − i steps of SGM applied to D (resp. D0 ).
Specifically, the mechanism M 0 corresponds to SGM, and M T to pure Gaussians. We will show in
this proof that
                      TV(M i (D), M i (D0 )) ≤ TV(M i+1 (D), M i+1 (D0 ))                  (6)
    4
        This notion is also used by the name of Hockey stick divergenceBalle et al. (2018).


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and hence
TV(X, Y ) = TV(M 0 (D), M 0 (D0 )) ≤ TV(M T (D), M T (D0 )) = TV(N (0, σ 2 IT ), N (r1T , σ 2 IT ).

To this end, we will first argue that the very final step of the mechanism M i can be replaced with a
Gaussian step without increasing the total variation distance. Then we can move this noise to the
start of the process without affecting the result, obtaining M i+1 .
                                       . . , sT ) be a transcript. Denoting X ∼ M i (D) and Y ∼ M i (D0 ),
Let us fix a step i and let s = (s1 , .P
we have (In the following, we use          instead of integral for better clarity and the steps can be replace
with integral.)
                                            X
       2TV(M i (D), M i (D0 )) =                   | Pr[X = s≤T ] − Pr[Y = s≤T ]|
                                       s≤T ∈S≤T
                                 X           X
                        =                           |Pr[X = s≤T ] − Pr[Y = s≤T ]|
                            s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1 sT ∈ST
                                 X           X
                        =                           |Pr[XT = sT | s≤T −1 ] · Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]
                            s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1 sT ∈ST

                                         − Pr[YT = sT | s≤T −1 ] Pr[Y≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]| .
                                 X                               X
                        =                 Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]        Pr[XT = sT | s≤T −1 ]
                            s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1                        sT ∈ST

                                                                   Pr[Y≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]
                                        − Pr[YT = sT | s≤T −1 ]                         .                 (7)
                                                                   Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]
We know that the last (T ’th) step of M i (D) (resp. M i (D0 )) has two isotropic Gaussian distributions
centered around two points u1 and u2 such that ku1 − u2 k2 ≤ r and with standard deviation σ. These
centers could be chosen adaptively according to the history of the mechanism. We use a(s≤T −1 ) to
        Pr[Y −1 =s≤T −1 ]
denote Pr[X≤T
            ≤T −1 =s≤T −1 ]
                            . By Lemma 5 we have
   X
          Pr[XT = sT | s≤T −1 ] − Pr[YT = sT | s≤T −1 ]a(s≤T −1 )
  sT ∈ST

                                                                ≤ 2TVa(s≤T −1 ) (N (0, σ 2 ), N (r, σ 2 )).

Denoting by N i the mechanism that coincides with M i for the first T − 1 steps and is replaced by a
Gaussian at the last (T ’th) step, we thus have, by following Equation (7) in the reverse direction
                         2TV(M i (D), M i (D0 )) ≤ 2TV(N i (D), N i (D0 )).                         (8)
Given that the last step of N i does not depend on the first T − 1 steps, we can permute to put it in
first position.
Now, we focus on the proof of the case we have sub-sampling. We defer the full proof of Theorem 6
to the Appendix E. However, we provide a high level idea behind the proof based on the proof of
the case where there is no sub-sampling. The first step is to characterize the TVa for sub-sampled
mechanisms and relate it to the TVa for the case without sub-sampling.
Lemma 7. Let X 0 ≡ (1 − q) · Y + q · X. Then we have TVa (X 0 , Y ) = qTV a+q−1 (X, Y ).
                                                                                          q

The proof of this lemma is provided in Appendix E. Now we use Lemma 7 to convert TVa of the
sub-sampled Gaussians to TVa of Gaussians and use Lemma 5 to upper bound them with TVa
of independent Gaussians. Then we use Lemma 7 again to convert the independent Gaussians to
independent sub-sampled Gaussians.

Optimality of our bound. We note that the bound of Theorem 6 is optimal. This is because
the bound is equal to the advantage of an adversary defined on sequence of independent Gaussian
mechanisms. However, one might wonder if our bound is tight in the context of classification with
DP-SGD. In Appendix H, we consider this question and show a learning problem for which our
bound is tight. We empirically verify that advantage the adversary can get close to our upper bounds.
Additionally, we show that for this learning task, an adversary who only observe the final model can
also get very close to our upper bounds.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Varying noise levels Theorem 6 could be simply extended to composition of Gaussian mechanisms
with varying noise levels, assuming the noise levels are not selected adaptively. We leave the
composition of Gaussians with adaptive noise selection as an open question.

Extending to other monotone mechanisms. Although Theorem 6 is stated only for Gaussian
mechanism, the theorem extends to any mechanism that satisfies monotonicity under TVa according
to some notion of sensitivity. For example, if one can show that TVa (L(0, σ), L(u, σ)) is monotoni-
cally increasing with respect to some norm of u, then Theorem 6 extends to composition of Laplace
mechanisms with bounded sensitivity according to that norm.

4.1   M ONTE C ARLO COMPUTATION

In order to numerically approximate the upper-bound, we write the total variation as
                                  Z
                    TV(X, Y ) =       (dµ(t) − dν(t)) 1 (dν(t) ≤ dµ(t))                            (9)
                                  ZΩ
                                            dν(t)
                                =       1−          1 (dν(t) ≤ dµ(t)) dµ(t)                      (10)
                                    Ω       dµ(t)

                                                dν(t)
                                = Et∼µ     1−           1 (dν(t) ≤ dµ(t)) .                      (11)
                                                dµ(t)
The expectation is over the distribution µ, so we can sample a dataset from µ and approximate this
expectation using empirical averaging (or Monte-Carlo sampling):
                                        m
                                     1 X         dν(ti )
                    TV(X, Y ) ≈              1−            1 (dν(ti ) ≤ dµ(ti )) ,           (12)
                                    m i=1        dµ(ti )
where ti ∼i.i.d. µ. The Monte-Carlo estimation of this quantity is very accurate, as it is bounded
between 0 and 1. Figures 3(a) and 5 show the upper bound using this Monte-Carlo simulation for
typical settings in DP-SGD. We also provide a detailed algorithm on how we this in Appendix D.
Following we provide a proposition on the accuracy of our Monte Carlo approximation which directly
follows by applying the Chernoff-Hoefding bound.
Proposition 8. Our Monte Carlo simulation (Algorithm 1 in Appendix D) returns a value η that
with high probability is close to the optimal membership inference bound η ∗ of Theorem 6, namely
                           2
Pr[|η − η ∗ | ≥ δ] ≤ e−m·δ /3 .

5 E VALUATION
In this section we perform experiments to calculate the concrete trade-off between accuracy and
membership inference on mainstream datasets. For our experiments, we use DP-SGD (Algorithm 2)
to train models and use Algorithm 1 to calculate the corresponding membership inference bounds.
Experiments on the MNIST and CIFAR datasets. We use the MNIST (LeCun) and CI-
FAR (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets to perform experiments with DP-SGD. Figures 2(a) and 2(b)
shows the result of our experiments. For MNIST, we used 3-layer convolutional neural networks
(CNN) and train it for 10 epochs with sampling rate q = 0.001 and learning rate 0.1 using the
cross-entropy loss function. We also choose the gradient clipping threshold to be 1.0 and change
the noise scale between [0.5, 1.5]. For the CIFAR-10 experiments, we use 5-layer CNNs and trained
them for 50 epochs with sampling rate 0.02 and learning rate 0.5 using the cross-entropy loss.
We set the gradient clipping threshold to 10.0 and the noise scale changed between [0.5, 2]. Our
experiments show that differentially private training using DP-SGD can obtain a significantly better
trade-off between accuracy and membership inference advantage than was previously thought. For
instance, on the MNIST dataset we obtain membership inference bounds that are close to 0.01 while
maintaining accuracy at around 93%.
Study of the role of noise scale and sampling rate. To understand the role of sub-sampling on
membership inference advantage we perform experiments with varying sub-sampling rates. In
Figure 5 we show the results of our experiments where we change the sampling rate between [0, 1] at
three different values of noise scale. Our experiments are done for 5 epochs of training. Note that
although the number of epochs are fixed, the number of iterations are different for different sampling


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Membership Inference v.s. Accuracy on CIFAR10. (b) Membership inference v.s. Accuracy on MNIST.


                         Figure 2: Empirical results on membership advantage


           (a) σ = 0.5                       (b) σ = 1.0                        (c) σ = 1.5


            Figure 3: Effect of sub-sampling rate at various noise scales with 5 epochs.
rates. One interesting observation is that our optimal bound is less dependent on very small sampling
rate. For instance at noise scale σ = 0.5, both the Pinsker and Humphries et al. (2020) bounds
become vacuous abruptly as the sampling rate grows but our optimal membership inference bound
remains meaningful. Another interesting phenomenon is the oscillations that happens at certain
locations for the optimal and Pinsker bounds. These oscillations happen independently for both the
Pinsker and optimal bound. As these two bounds are calculated using completely different techniques,
we believe this phenomenon is not due to numerical issues.
Monte Carlo error for the experiments. In our experiments for optimal membership bounds we
use Monte Carlo simulation (see Section 4.1 and in Algorithm 1), with m = 5e5 samples. Via Propo-
sition 8, we guarantee that with probability at least 99.999% that the bound has error less than 0.01.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we directly analyzed membership inference bounds for adaptive composition of sampled
Gaussian mechanisms. Our analysis enables us to obtain bounds that are better than bounds from
prior analyses of differential privacy. Our analysis shows that although differential privacy guarantees
might sometimes lead to large/vacuous membership inference guarantees, the mechanisms that obtain
differential privacy can be in fact much more secure against membership inference attacks. Previously,
this phenomenon was observed for DP-SGD and here, for the first time, we prove it.
Our analysis is the first to directly analyze membership inference bounds. We limited our study
to membership inference attacks against sampled Gaussian mechanisms as DP-SGD, the most
widely used differentially private learning algorithm. Direct study of membership inference could be
potentially done for other mechanisms and algorithms as well. We leave this for future work.
We also note that the hyper-parameters for DP-SGD that achieve optimal membership privacy versus
utility might be different than that of differential privacy. Our new analysis opens up the possibility
of a systematic search for the hyper-parameters and architectures (using recent advancements in
privacy-preserving hyperparameter tuning and architecture search (Papernot et al., 2020; Papernot
and Steinke, 2021; Chaudhuri and Vinterbo, 2013)) that obtain optimal utility for a given upper bound
on membership inference.
Last, while our paper closes the gap between theoretical and empirical measures of an adversary’s
advantage, the bounds apply to the subsampled Gaussian mechanism. We leave the tightness of
advantage measure on other mechanisms for future work.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In CCS, 2016.
Borja Balle, Gilles Barthe, and Marco Gaboardi. Privacy amplification by subsampling: Tight
  analyses via couplings and divergences. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.
Daniel Bernau, Günther Eibl, Philip W Grassal, Hannah Keller, and Florian Kerschbaum. Quanti-
  fying identifiability to choose and audit   in differentially private deep learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.02913, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07805, 2020.
Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramer.
  Membership inference attacks from first principles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03570, 2021.
Kamalika Chaudhuri and Staal A Vinterbo. A stability-based validation procedure for differentially
  private machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Florian Tramer, Nicholas Carlini, and Nicolas Papernot. Label-
  only membership inference attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
 1964–1974. PMLR, 2021.
Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, and Weijie J Su. Gaussian differential privacy. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1905.02383, 2019.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference, pages 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Guy N Rothblum, and Salil Vadhan. Boosting and differential privacy. In 2010 IEEE
  51st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 51–60. IEEE, 2010.
Cynthia Dwork, Adam Smith, Thomas Steinke, Jonathan Ullman, and Salil Vadhan. Robust trace-
  ability from trace amounts. In 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
  Science, pages 650–669. IEEE, 2015.
Matthew Fredrikson, Eric Lantz, Somesh Jha, Simon Lin, David Page, and Thomas Ristenpart.
 Privacy in pharmacogenetics: An end-to-end case study of personalized warfarin dosing. In 23rd
 USENIX Security Symposium, pages 17–32, 2014.
Nils Homer, Szabolcs Szelinger, Margot Redman, David Duggan, Waibhav Tembe, Jill Muehling,
  John V Pearson, Dietrich A Stephan, Stanley F Nelson, and David W Craig. Resolving individuals
  contributing trace amounts of DNA to highly complex mixtures using high-density SNP genotyping
  microarrays. PLoS genetics, 4(8):e1000167, 2008.
Thomas Humphries, Matthew Rafuse, Lindsey Tulloch, Simon Oya, Ian Goldberg, Urs Hengartner,
  and Florian Kerschbaum. Differentially private learning does not bound membership inference.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12112, 2020.
Bargav Jayaraman and David Evans. Evaluating differentially private machine learning in practice.
  In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19), pages 1895–1912, 2019.
Bargav Jayaraman, Lingxiao Wang, David Evans, and Quanquan Gu. Revisiting membership
  inference under realistic assumptions. arXiv:2005.10881, 2020.
Jinyuan Jia, Ahmed Salem, Michael Backes, Yang Zhang, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Memguard: De-
   fending against black-box membership inference attacks via adversarial examples. In Proceedings
   of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security, pages 259–274,
   2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. The composition theorem for differential
  privacy. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1376–1385. PMLR, 2015.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/.
Jaewoo Lee and Chris Clifton. Differential identifiability. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD
  international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1041–1049, 2012.
Sebastian Meiser. Approximate and probabilistic differential privacy definitions. Cryptology ePrint
  Archive, 2018.
Ilya Mironov. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th Computer Security Foundations
   Symposium (CSF), pages 263–275. IEEE, 2017.
Milad Nasr, Reza Shokri, and Amir Houmansadr. Machine learning with membership privacy using
 adversarial regularization. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and
 communications security, pages 634–646, 2018.
Milad Nasr, Shuang Songi, Abhradeep Thakurta, Nicolas Papemoti, and Nicholas Carlin. Adversary
 instantiation: Lower bounds for differentially private machine learning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
 on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 866–882. IEEE, 2021.
Opacus. Opacus PyTorch library. Available from opacus.ai.
Nicolas Papernot and Thomas Steinke. Hyperparameter tuning with renyi differential privacy. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2110.03620, 2021.
Nicolas Papernot, Abhradeep Thakurta, Shuang Song, Steve Chien, and Ulfar Erlingsson. Tempered
  sigmoid activations for deep learning with differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14191,
  page 10, 2020.
Mark S Pinsker. Information and information stability of random variables and processes. Holden-
 Day, 1964.
Shahbaz Rezaei and Xin Liu. On the difficulty of membership inference attacks. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7892–7900, 2021.
Alexandre Sablayrolles, Matthijs Douze, Cordelia Schmid, Yann Ollivier, and Hervé Jégou. White-
  box vs black-box: Bayes optimal strategies for membership inference. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pages 5558–5567. PMLR, 2019.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks
  against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages
  3–18. IEEE, 2017.
Shuang Song, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Anand D Sarwate. Stochastic gradient descent with differ-
  entially private updates. In 2013 IEEE global conference on signal and information processing,
  pages 245–248. IEEE, 2013.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Xinyu Tang, Saeed Mahloujifar, Liwei Song, Virat Shejwalkar, Milad Nasr, Amir Houmansadr,
  and Prateek Mittal. Mitigating membership inference attacks by self-distillation through a novel
  ensemble architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08324, 2021.
Anvith Thudi, Ilia Shumailov, Franziska Boenisch, and Nicolas Papernot. Bounding membership
  inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12232, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Laurens van der Maaten and Awni Hannun. The trade-offs of private prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.05089, 2020.
Lauren Watson, Chuan Guo, Graham Cormode, and Alexandre Sablayrolles. On the importance of
  difficulty calibration in membership inference attacks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Samuel Yeom, Irene Giacomelli, Matt Fredrikson, and Somesh Jha. Privacy risk in machine learning:
  Analyzing the connection to overfitting. In 2018 IEEE 31st Computer Security Foundations
  Symposium (CSF), pages 268–282. IEEE, 2018.
Yuqing Zhu, Jinshuo Dong, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Optimal accounting of differential privacy via
  characteristic function. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
  4782–4817. PMLR, 2022.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     B OUNDING TRUE POSITIVE RATE
As argued in introduction, membership inference alone should not be used as a single measure of
privacy. Here we first show how one can use T Va to draw the false positive. Let X, Y be two
distributions and consider a set Sa = {x; Pr[Y = x] > Pr[X=x]
                                                         a    }.
Proposition 9. For all sets S with Pr[X ∈ S] ≤ Pr[X ∈ Sa ] we have Pr[Y ∈ S] ≤ Pr[Y ∈ Sa ].

Proof. We have
                   Pr[Y ∈ Sa ] − Pr[Y ∈ S] = Pr[Y ∈ Sa \ S] − Pr[Y ∈ S \ Sa ]
. We also have,
                                               Pr[Y = x]                 Pr[X ∈ S \ Sa ]
             Pr[Y ∈ S \ Sa ] = Ex←X                      I(x ∈ S \ Sa ) ≤
                                               Pr[X = x]                       a
and
                                              Pr[Y = x]                Pr[X ∈ Sa \ S]
             Pr[Y ∈ Sa \ S] = Ex←X                      I(x ∈ Sa \ S) ≥               .
                                              Pr[X = x]                      a

By the condition of the proposition we have
Pr[X ∈ Sa ] = Pr[X ∈ Sa \S]+Pr[X ∈ Sa ∪S] > Pr[X ∈ S\Sa ]+Pr[X ∈ Sa ∪S] = Pr[X ∈ S]
. Therefore we know that Pr[X ∈ Sa \ S] ≥ Pr[E[X ∈ S \ Sa ] which finishes the proof.
Proposition 10. We have
                                            2TVa (X, Y ) + 2 Pr[X ∈ Sa ] + a − 1
                            Pr[Y ∈ Sa ] =                                        .
                                                             2a

Proof.
                  Z
2TVa (X, Y ) =            |dµ − adν|
                    Ω
                      Z
               =2           (adν − dµ)I(adν > dµ) + 1 − a = 2a Pr[Y ∈ Sa ] − 2 Pr[X ∈ Sa ] + 1 − a.
                        Ω


Propositions 9 and 10 give us a way to argue about the true positive rates at any given false positive
rate as follows.
Corollary 11. Let X and Y be the distribution induced by applying composition of subsam-
pled Gaussian mechanisms on two neighboring datasets. Also let A be an adversary that
given an output decides whether the output was sampled from X or Y . Let F P and T P be
the false positive and true positive rates of this adversary, i.e. F P = Pr[A(X) = 1] and
T P = Pr[A(Y ) = 1]. Let a be such that Pr x ← X[Pr[Y = x] > Pr[X=x]    a  ] = F P Then we
             2F P +2TVa N (0T ,σ 2 ),N (r·B(q)T ,σ 2 ) )+a−1
have T P ≤                        2a                         .

Proof. This directly follows from Theorem 6 and Propositions 9 and 10.

B     P ROOF OF L EMMA 5
Proof. The first part follows by the symmetry of isotropic Gaussian. For the second part (monotonic-
ity) we use the definition of TVa . Without loss of generality we can assume a ∈ [0, 1] as otherwise
we can work with TVa (P, Q)/a = TV1/a (Q, P ). Let r = ku1 − u2 k2 . We can show that the
derivative of the integral is always positive. In the following calculations, we use c1 , c2 , c3 and c4 to
denote positive constants that are independent of r.


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       2    2                                                          x2             (x−r)2
First note that x∗ = r −2σ2r ln(a) is a middle point where e− 2σ2 − ae− 2σ2 goes from positive to
negative as x increases. By our assumption that a ∈ [0, 1], we have that x∗ > 0. Recalling that
              Rz                                                            R0
erf(z) = √2π 0 exp(−t2 )dt, and that erf(∞) = 1 so that (by symmetry) √2π −∞ exp(−t2 )dt = 1,
we can write
                          Z ∞
                                       x2        (x−r)2
       TVa (P, Q) = c1             e− 2σ2 − ae− 2σ2 dx
                                −∞
                     By breaking the integral in an intermediate point we have
                            Z x∗                          Z ∞                       !
                                       x2        (x−r)2            (x−r)2       x2
                                    − 2σ        − 2σ2            − 2σ2       − 2σ
                     = c1         e      2
                                           − ae         +     ae          −e      2

                                   −∞                                         x∗

                   By replacing the integrals with the CDF of Gaussian distribution we have
                                        √                          √
                    = c1 1 + erf x∗ / 2σ − aerf((x∗ − r)/ 2σ)
                                                √                         √
                     + a(1 − erf (x∗ − r)/ 2σ + (1 − erf x∗ / 2σ
                             2
                                r − ln(a)σ 2
                                                               2
                                                                 −r − ln(a)σ 2

                    = c2 erf         √            + 1 − aerf          √             −a .
                                    2 2σr                            2 2σr
                       2        2

                                                           −r 2 −ln(a)σ 2
Now, let f1 (r) = erf r −ln(a)σ
                           √
                         2 2σr
                                    and f 2 (r) = −aerf         √
                                                              2 2σr
                                                                           . Taking the derivative with
respect to r we have
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                       r 2 −ln(a)σ 2

                            ∂f1                      1  ln(a)σ                      −       √
                                = c3                √ + √                       e          2 2σr

                            ∂r                     2 2σ 2 2r2
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                         −r 2 −ln(a)σ 2

                           ∂f2                       1  ln(a)σ                   −            √
                               = c3 a               √ − √                       e            2 2σr

                           ∂r                      2 2σ 2 2r2
                                                    2                                         2
                                   r 2 −ln(a)σ 2                            −r 2 −ln(a)σ 2
                           −            √                           −            √
                                       2 2σr             1/2                    2 2σr
Now note that we have e                                 =a     ·e           . Therefore, we have

                                        −r 2 −ln(a)σ 2
                                                        2            √        √
                     ∂TVa            −       √                   1 + a ln(a) ( a − 1) σ
                c4        =e                2 2σr
                                                             ·     √   +      √           .
                      ∂r                                          2 2σ      2 2r2
                                             √                               √        √
                                                                                ln(a)( a−1)σ
Now since a ∈ [0, 1], we have ln(a) ≤ 0 and a−1 < 0, which means the term 1+
                                                                           √ a+
                                                                          2 2σ
                                                                                     √
                                                                                    2 2r 2
is positive. This implies that the whole gradient is positive.



C    E STIMATING KL WITH R ÉNYI DIVERGENCE
For two probability distributions µ and ν, the Rényi divergence of order α > 1 is
                                                                     α
                                              1              dµ
                            Dα (µ k ν) ,         log Et∼ν       (t) ,                                          (13)
                                            α−1              dν
Rényi divergence is non-decreasing in α, and limα→1 Dα (P k Q) = KL(P k Q).

RDP accounting for DP-SGD. (Abadi et al., 2016; Mironov, 2017) propose methods to account
for RDP for the Gaussian mechanism. Implementations of DP-SGD such as Opacus make use of
these accounting procedures. This is important as we use these accounting methods to calculate the
bound in Equation 13. Specifically, we calculate the Dα for α = 1 + τ for a very small τ , using the
Opacus implementation of Rényi accounting.

D    A LGORITHMS


                                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Optimal MI
Require: sample rate vector q, number of iterations T , learning rate vector η, noise scale
    vector σ, gradient norm clip vector r, sample size m
 1: for all j ∈ [m] do
 2:   ηj ← 0
 3: for i ∈ [T ] do
 4:   for j ∈ [m] do
 5:       sample ti,j ∼ N (0, σ[i]2 · r[i]2 · I)
                                  2ti,j /r[i]−1

 6:       ηj ← ηj +ln 1+q[i](e 2σ[i]2 −1)
 7:   η←0
 8: for j ∈ [m] do
 9:   ηj = max(ηj , 0).
                     ηj
10:   η ← η + 1−e   m
11: return η


Algorithm 2 DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016)
Require: training dataset D, sample rate vector q, number of iterations T , learning rate
    vector η, noise scale vector σ, gradient norm clip vector r, loss function L
 1: Initiate θ randomly
 2: for i ∈ {T } do
 3:    Bi ← Sample batch via Poisson sampling with rate q[i]
 4:    ∇[t] ← ~0
 5:    for all (x, y) ∈ Bt do
 6:       ∇(x,y) ← gradient of L(x, y)
                                   (x,y)
                              (∇      )
 7:      ∇(x,y) ← r[t] · max(r[t],k∇(x,y) )k )
                                            2

 8:      ∇[t] ← ∇[t] + ∇(x,y)
 9:   ∇[t] ← ∇[t] + N (0, σ[t]2 r[t]2 I)
       g
10:   θ ← θ − η ∇[t].
                g
11: return θ


E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
Proof of Lemma 7. We have
                                      Z                    Z
                 2TVa (X 0 , Y ) =         |dµ0 − adν| =           |qdµ − (q + a − 1)dν|
                                       Ω                     Ω
                                                                    (q + a − 1)
                                                               Z
                                                        =q           dµ −       dν
                                                            Ω            q
                                                        = 2qTV a+q−1 (X, Y ).
                                                                        q


Proof of Theorem 6. The proof steps are similar to there is no sub-sampling. First, we have

                     X
2TV(X, Y ) =                     Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]·
                s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1
                                                                                              !
                     X                                                Pr[Y≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]
                        Pr[XT = sT | s≤T −1 ] − Pr[YT = sT | s≤T −1 ]
                     sT
                                                                      Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]
                       X
             =2              Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]TVa(s≤T −1 ) (XT | s≤T −1 , YT | s≤T −1 ).
                  s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1



                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


But since XT and YT are subsampled Gaussian mechanisms we have XT ≡ (1 − q)YT + qXT0 where
Y and X 0 are mixtures of Gaussians. Therefore, by Lemma 5 and Lemma 7 we have
TV(X, Y )
       X
 =                       Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ∈ S≤T −1 ]qTV a(s≤T −1 )+q−1 (XT0 | s≤T −1 , YT | s≤T −1 ) (By Lemma 7)
                                                                    q
        s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1
             X
    ≤                    Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ∈ S≤T −1 ]qTV a(s≤T −1 )+q−1 (N (0, σ), N (r, σ)) (By Lemma 5)
                                                                    q
        s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1
             X
    =                    Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]TVa(s≤T −1 ) (N (0, σ), (1 − q)N (0, σ) + qN (r, σ)) (By Lemma 7)
        s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1
             X
    =                    Pr[X≤T −1 = s≤T −1 ]TVa(s≤T −1 ) (N (0, σ), N (r · B(q), σ)).
        s≤T −1 ∈S≤T −1


Therefore, we can replace XT with a mixture of two Gaussians centered at 0 and r and YT with a
single Gaussian centered at 0. Now we can use the same technique used in the proof of the case
without sub-sampling and move XT and YT to the first round and repeat this process. At the end, Y
is replaced by a n-dimensional Gaussian centered at 0 and standard deviation σ, and X by a mixture
of Gaussians with center randomly selected according to a n-dimensional Bernoulli distribution with
probability q. That is, the advantage is bounded by
                                       TV(N (0T , σ), N (rB(q)T , σ)).



F       E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
F.1      G AUSSIAN EXPERIMENT

The simple Gaussian experiment is aimed at stripping away parts of the machine learning pipeline
that can interfere with privacy / membership inference, such as the particularities of neural networks
or optimization algorithms.
In this setup, D = {0, 0, . . . , 0} and D0 = D ∪ {1}. The (clean) summed gradient, before noise
addition, is therefore either 0 (on D or on D0 if the batch does not contain 1) or 1 (if the batch
contains 1). The adversary observes the noisy sums and infers whether they come from D or D0 .
Given that the adversary knows the distribution is either N (0, σ 2 ) or (1 − q)N (0, σ 2 ) + qN (1, σ 2 ),
they can perform a simple likelihood test to determine whether the noisy sums come from D or D0 ,
and predict the more likely dataset. We report the advantage of this adversary in the “empirical"
curve of Figure 5.

G       M EMBERSHIP INFERENCE PRECISION
In this section, we refine the analysis of Sablayrolles et al. (2019) for the accuracy of a membership
attack.

Upper-bound on precision. Let us first derive a bound on the precision of membership inference.
We assume that there are two datasets D and D0 and that a differentially-private mechanism M trains
a model represented by θ.
With probability (1 − δ) over the choice of θ, we have:

                                             Pr(M (D) = θ)
                                −  ≤ log                       ≤                                      (14)
                                             Pr(M (D0 ) = θ)

Given that there is a balanced prior Pr(D) = Pr(D0 ), using Bayes rule, we have:
                                                Pr(M (D) = θ) Pr(D)
                     Pr(D | θ) =                                                                      (15)
                                     Pr(M (D) = θ) Pr(D) + Pr(M (D0 ) = θ) Pr(D0 )

                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       Pr(M (D) = θ)
                              =                                                                    (16)
                                Pr(M (D) = θ) + Pr(M (D0 ) = θ)

                                       Pr(M (D) = θ)
                              = σ log                     ,                                        (17)
                                       Pr(M (D0 ) = θ)
with σ(u) = 1/(1 + exp(−u)) the sigmoid function.
Hence the precision Pr(D | θ) is bounded between σ(− ) and σ( ), as σ(·) is non decreasing.

Upper-bound on attack accuracy. The accuracy of the Bayes classifier is
                                Acc = max(Pr(D | θ), 1 − Pr(D | θ)),                               (18)

and thus
                                        Acc ≤ max(σ( ), σ(− ))                                     (19)
                                            = σ( )                                                 (20)

This means that the attack accuracy is bounded by σ( ) with probability 1 − δ. Empirically, we
see that the sigmoid function closely matches the bound given by Humphries et al. (2020). Simply
stated, this derivation shows that the bound proven by Humphries et al. (2020) actually holds with
probability 1 − δ instead of on average.


                                     1
                               Acc =   (Pr(X ∈ A) + Pr(Y ∈ Ac ))
                                     2
                                     1
                                    = (Pr(X ∈ A) + 1 − Pr(Y ∈ A))
                                     2
                                     1
                                    = (1 + Adv)
                                     2

H     C OMPARING S ECURITY G AMES
In what follows, we write multiple variants of security games specifically defined for DP-SGD. Then
we proceed to compare the security games based on an example. We perform experiments on this
examples by running an attack and show that our upper bounds are tight even for the weaker security
games.

H.1   O UR SECURITY GAME WITH ALL INTERMEDIATE GRADIENTS (OIG)
      1. Adversary picks a datasets D = {z1 , . . . , zn } and a pair of data points z00 , z10 .
      2. Challenger samples a bit b uniformly at random and creates
                                                 D ∪ {z10 } if b = 1

                                         0
                                      D =
                                                 D ∪ {z00 } if b = 0

      3. Challenger runs DP-SGD on D0 to train a model and sends a transcript of training, including
         all intermediate gradients, θ (The transcript could only include the final model or more
         information like the intermediate steps of training) to the adversary.
      4. Adversary observes θ and and guesses a bit b0 . Adversary wins if b0 = b.
Remark 12. In this paper we are interested in analyzing the membership inference advantage for
algorithms that could be stated as adaptive composition of sampled Gaussian mechanisms. DP-SGD
(Algorithm 2) is a widely used example of such algorithm. Note that we assume that the output of
DP-SGD includes all the intermediate gradients that are used to train the model. In other words, the
parameter θ in the security game contains all the intermediate gradients (not only the final model).
However, in what follows we still define the security game for the case that the adversary only sees
the final model. We define these more restricted security game so as to experimentally compare it
with our security game.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Remark 13 (Replacing vs addition/removal). We also note that in this section we define the notion
of advantage for neighboring datasets where one dataset replaces a single example with another
example (i.e. the replacement game). The reason for this choice is that the security game of Yeom et.
al. is based on replacement and we want to make a fair comparison.
In the main body, we use the addition/removal definition of neighboring datasets because it is stronger.
Namely, we can convert an upper bound on addition/removal security game to an upper bound for
the replacement security game.
Remark 14 (Alternative notion of inference in Humphries et al. (2020)). Humphries et al. (2020),
propose a new definition for inference attacks. This definition (They call it "Experiment with Data
Dependencies".) is distinct from the previously known notions of membership inference and deals
with the ability of an adversary in distinguishing samples from two different distributions. As this
notion is a model of distributional inference, the power of adversary in this model is not bounded
by differential privacy. The only way to bound this notion of privacy with DP is to pay the cost of
group privacy for groups that are almost the same size as of the entire dataset. Hence, we do not
study this model in this work.

H.2   O UR SECURITY GAME WITH FINAL MODEL (OFM)
      1. Adversary picks a datasets D = {z1 , . . . , zn } and a pair of data points z00 , z10 .
      2. Challenger samples a bit b uniformly at random and creates
                                                 D ∪ {z10 } if b = 1

                                      D0 =
                                                 D ∪ {z00 } if b = 0

      3. Challenger runs DP-SGD on D0 to train a model and sends the final model θ (The transcript
         could only include the final model or more information like the intermediate steps of training)
         to the adversary.
      4. Adversary observes θ and and guesses a bit b0 . Adversary wins if b0 = b.

H.3   YOEM ET. AL’ S SECURITY GAME WITH FINAL MODEL (YFM)
      1. Challenger samples a dataset D = {z1 , . . . , zn+1 } from a distribution D .
      2. Challenger runs DP-SGD on D to train a model and sends a the final model θ to the
         adversary.
      3. Challenger samples a bit b uniformly at random and creates

                                                 z ← D if b = 1
                                        z0 =
                                                 z ← D if b = 0

      4. Adversary observes (θ, z 0 ) and and guesses a bit b0 . Adversary wins if b0 = b.

H.4   YOEM ET. AL’ S SECURITY GAME WITH ALL INTERMEDIATE GRADIENTS (YIG)
      1. Challenger samples a dataset D = {z1 , . . . , zn+1 } from a distribution D .
      2. Challenger runs DP-SGD on D to train a model and sends a transcript of training θ, including
         all intermediate gradients, to the adversary.
      3. Challenger samples a bit b uniformly at random and creates

                                                  z ← D if b = 1
                                          z0 =
                                                  z ← D if b = 0

      4. Adversary observes (θ, z 0 ) and and guesses a bit b0 . Adversary wins if b0 = b.

Notation. For a security model T we use T (L, n, D) to denote the advantage of strongest adversary
in that threat model with learning algorithm L, dataset size n and data distribution D (our threat
models do not use this parameter but we include it for symmetry).
Proposition 15. For any learning algorithm L, any n ∈ N and data distribution D we have
OFM(L, n, D) ≤ OIG(L, n, D) and YFM(L, n, D) ≤ YIG(L, n, D).


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 16 (Proved in Humphries et al. (2020)). For any learning algorithm L, any n ∈ N and
data distribution D we have YIG(L, n, D) ≤ OIG(L, n, D) and YFM(L, n, D) ≤ YIG(L, n, D).
Corollary 17. Any upper bound on the advantage of adversaries in security game OIG is also an
upper bound on the advantage of adversaries in the security games YIG, YFM and OFM.

Our analysis above shows that upper bounds for our security model are valid upper bounds for the
security game of Yoem et al and Shokri et al as well. Now, to analyze the tightness of our upper
bound we perform experiments with attacks in these threat models. We argue that one cannot get
a better upper bound on membership inference, unless they make extra assumptions on the data
distribution. In what follows, we experimentally verify this.

I     E XPERIMENTS ON THE OPT IMA LITY OF OUR BOUND
In this section, we construct a data distribution and study logistic regression on this distribution.
Definition 18. We define Hd be the uniform distribution over the hamming ball of radius 1 and
centered at zero. Thus, the samples from Hd have the form, (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) with only one of
the coordinates being 1 and other being 0. For an arbitrary Boolean function f : {−1, 1}d → {0, 1}
we also define Hdf to be the distribution of samples from H that are labled w.r.t. f , namely, Hdf =
(Hd , f (Hd )).

 Experiment setup: We run experiments for membership inference on DP-SGD when trying to
learn Hdf , using logistic regression, and for an arbitrary function f . We set the learning rate to 0.001,
the clipping threshold to .1 and vary the sub-sampling rate and noise multiplier. We run the models
for either 5 or 50 epochs.

Attacks. We implement a simple attack that only looks at the final model. This adversary looks
at the final model θ and the target instance x in hand which is equal to 1 in coordinate i and zero
everywhere else. If the ith coordinate of θ is larger than T qc/2 + mT qc/d (T is the number of
iterations, q is sub-sampling rate, n is the number of examples in the training set, and c is the clipping
threshold) then the attack predicts b0 = 1 otherwise it predicts b0 = 0. We call this attack the “final
model attack” (FMA). We also implement another attack that looks at all the intermediate models.
This attack basically performs the FMA attack at each iteration and takes majority vote at the end.
We call this attack the “Intermediate models attack” (IMA).

Evaluation. We evaluate our FMA attack in the threat models of Yoem et al. and Shokri et al. in
the setting where the adversary only sees the final model. We also evaluate this attack in our threat
model, in the setting that the adversary only sees the final model. We also report the accuracy of the
stronger IMA attack.

I.1   R ESULTS

We now summarize our findings in our experiments

Increasing d reduces the gap between threat models. We instantiate our data distribution Hdf
with a random function f and select the dimension from {2000, 10000, 10000}. We set the sample
size to 1000, set the sub-sampling rate to .1 and vary the noise multiplier to obtain the attack curve.
We run the models for 5 epochs and report the attack in various threat models. Our results in Figure
I.1 show that by increasing the dimension, the gap between the performance of all attacks and our
upper bound shrinks to almost 0. This verifies the optimality of our bound. It also shows that there is
no fundamental gap between the threat models and we cannot hope to achieve stronger upper bounds
in the weaker threat models, unless we make further assumptions.

Small sub-sampling rate results in a small gap between the performance of FMA and IMA.
We instantiate our data distribution Hdf with a random function f and set dimension to 2000 while
keeping the number of instances at 1000. We set the sub-sampling rate to .01 and the number of
epochs to 50. We vary the noise multiplier to obtain the attack curve. Our results in Figure I.1 show


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          (a) d = 2000


                                         (b) d = 10000


                                        (c) d = 100000
Figure 4: Decreasing d results in smaller gap between all threat models and the upper bound. This
shows the optimality of our bound in all threat models.


                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Without subsampling (d = 2000, m = 1000, q = 0.01)


Figure 5: Small sampling rate can produce a gap between FMA and IMA, but this gap tightens as
we increase the noise.

that small sub-sampling rate can create a gap between the performance of two attacks. This gap
shrinks as we increase the noise multiplier.
Remark 19. Our experiments in this section are verification of the observation made in Nasr et al.
(2021) that an adversary with enough capabilities (e.g. poisoning the dataset and observing the
models in different iterations) can achieve high membership inference advantage. Our result in this
section show that if we allow the adversary to pick the classification problem (the data distribution
and the architecture), it can achieve high advantages that are close to theoretical upper bounds, even
without seeing the intermediate models or poisoning the data.

J   S ECURITY GAME WITH NON - UNIFORM PRIOR
Here, we extend our result to the setting where the prior distribution for the bit b in the security game
for membership inference is non-uniform. This setting is recently studied in the work of .
Definition 20 (Non-uniform membership inference.). We define a security game between an Adver-
sary (who wants to guess training set membership) and a Challenger (who wants to hide training set
membership).

      1. Adversary picks a datasets D = {z1 , . . . , zn } and a data point z 0
      2. Challenger samples a bit b from a bernouli distribution with probability p and creates
                                               D ∪ {z 0 } if b = 1

                                        0
                                       D =
                                               D            if b = 0

      3. Challenger runs the a learning algorithm L on D0 to train a model and sends a transcript
         of training θ (The transcript could only include the final model or more information like the
         intermediate steps of training) to the adversary.
      4. Adversary observes θ and guesses a bit b0 . Adversary wins if b0 = b.

We define the advantage of adversary A on learning algorithm L as Adv(L, A, p) = 2 · Pr[b =
b0 ] − 2 max(p, 1 − p). We also use Adv(L, p) = supA Adv(A, L, p) to denote the advantage of
any adversary against L.
Note that similar to the uniform setting, with a simple averaging argument we can show that the
best adversarial strategy in the non-uniform membership security game is a deterministic strategy.
Therefore, assuming p < 0.5, the advantage for the learning algorithm L is then defined as

     Adv(L, p)
               = sup µ(A) · p + (1 − ν(A)) · (1 − p) − (1 − p)                                      (21)
        2         A


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        p
                = sup(1 − p) ν(A) −         µ(A)                                              (22)
                   A                  1−p

                                        p                           p
                = sup(1 − p) ν(A) −         µ(A) − (1 − p) ν(Ā) −     µ(Ā)                  (23)
                   A                  1−p                          1−p

                                      p
                  + (1 − p) ν(Ā) −       µ(Ā)                                               (24)
                                    1−p
                                                     Adv(L, p)
                               p (X, Y ) + (1 − 2p −
                = 2(1 − p)TV 1−p                               ).                             (25)
                                                        2
Therefore we have


                                                 p (X, Y ) + 1 − 2p
                         Adv(L, p) = 2(1 − p)TV 1−p                                           (26)

Now using this, we can prove the following Theorem.
Theorem 21 (Non-uniform gaussian Composition with sub-sampling). Let M1 , . . . , MT be a series
of adaptive Gaussian Mechanisms with L2 sensitivity r and Gaussian noise with standard deviation
σ and sub-sampling rate q. The non-uniform membership inference risk of the composition of Mi ’s is
at most
                                      N (0T , σ), N (r · B(q)T , σ) + 1 − 2p

                    2(1 − p)TV 1−p p


where p < 0.5 is the probability of sampling of the additional example in the non-uniform security
game.

Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 6 except that we use Equation 26 instead of
Equation 4.


                                                22
