Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P LANNING G OALS FOR E XPLORATION
 Edward S. Hu     Richard Chang         Oleh Rybkin       Dinesh Jayaraman
 GRASP Lab, Department of CIS, University of Pennsylvania
 {hued, huangkun, oleh, dineshj}@seas.upenn.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Dropped into an unknown environment, what should an agent do to quickly learn
         about the environment and how to accomplish diverse tasks within it? We address
         this question within the goal-conditioned reinforcement learning paradigm, by iden-
         tifying how the agent should set its goals at training time to maximize exploration.
         We propose “Planning Exploratory Goals” (PEG), a method that sets goals for each
         training episode to directly optimize an intrinsic exploration reward. PEG first
         chooses goal commands such that the agent’s goal-conditioned policy, at its current
         level of training, will end up in states with high exploration potential. It then
         launches an exploration policy starting at those promising states. To enable this di-
         rect optimization, PEG learns world models and adapts sampling-based planning al-
         gorithms to “plan goal commands”. In challenging simulated robotics environments
         including a multi-legged ant robot in a maze, and a robot arm on a cluttered tabletop,
         PEG exploration enables more efficient and effective training of goal-conditioned
         policies relative to baselines and ablations. Our ant successfully navigates a long
         maze, and the robot arm successfully builds a stack of three blocks upon command.
         Website:https://sites.google.com/view/exploratory-goals


1    I NTRODUCTION

Complex real-world environments such as kitchens and offices afford a large number of configurations.
These may be represented, for example, through the positions, orientations, and articulation states of
various objects, or indeed of an agent within the environment. Such configurations could plausibly
represent desirable goal states for various tasks. Given this context, we seek to develop intelligent
autonomous agents that, having first spent some time exploring an environment, can afterwards
configure it to match commanded goal states.
The goal-conditioned reinforcement learning paradigm (GCRL) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) offers
a natural framework to train such goal-conditioned agent policies on the exploration data. Within
this framework, we seek to address the central problem: how should a GCRL agent explore its
environment during training time so that it can achieve diverse goals revealed to it only at test
time? This requires efficient unsupervised exploration of the environment.
Exploration in the GCRL setting can naturally be reduced to the problem of setting goals for the
agent during training time; the current GCRL policy, commanded to the right goals, will generate
exploratory data to improve itself (Ecoffet et al., 2021; Nair et al., 2018b). Our question now reduces
to the goal-directed exploration problem: how should we choose exploration-inducing goals at
training time?
Prior works start by observing that the final GCRL policy will be most capable of reaching familiar
states, encountered many times during training. Thus, the most direct approach to exploration is
to set goals in sparsely visited parts of the state space, to directly expand the set of these familiar
states (Ecoffet et al., 2021; Pong et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020). While straightforward, this approach
suffers from several issues in practice. First, the GCRL policy during training is not yet proficient
at reaching arbitrary goals, and regularly fails to reach commanded goals, often in uninteresting
ways that have low exploration value. For example, a novice agent commanded to an unseen portion
of a maze environment might respond by instead reaching a previously explored part of the maze,
encountering no novel states. To address this, prior works (Pitis et al., 2020; Bharadhwaj et al.,
2021) set up additional mechanisms to filter out unreachable goals, typically requiring additional


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


hyperparameters. Second, recent works (Ecoffet et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Pitis et al., 2020) have
observed improved exploration in long-horizon tasks by extending training episodes. Specifically,
rather than resetting immediately after deploying the GCRL policy to a goal, these methods launch
a new exploration phase right afterwards, such as by selecting random actions (Pitis et al., 2020;
Kamienny et al., 2022) or by maximizing an intrinsic motivation reward (Guo et al., 2020). In this
context, even successfully reaching a rare state through the GCRL policy might be suboptimal; many
such states might be poor launchpads for the exploration phase that follows. For example, the GCRL
policy might end up in a novel dead end in the maze, from which all exploration is doomed to fail.
To avoid these shortcomings and focus exploration on
the most promising parts of the environment, we pro-
pose to leverage planning with world models in a new
goal-directed exploration algorithm, PEG (short for
"Planning Exploratory Goals"). Our key idea is to
optimize directly for goal commands that would
induce high exploration value trajectories, cog-
nizant of current shortcomings in the GCRL policy,
and of the exploration phase during training. Note        Figure 1: PEG exploration in a U-maze.
that this does not mean merely commanding the agent       Brown background dots: explored states, ?:
to novel or rarely observed states. Instead, PEG com-     commanded goals, colored lines: resulting
mands might be to a previously observed state, or         paths. (Left) PEG optimizes directly for
indeed, even to a physically implausible state (see       exploration, even setting unseen goals, and
Figure 1). PEG only cares that the command will           achieving farther paths. (Right) Setting goals
induce the chained GCRL and exploration phases            at the frontier of the seen state distribution
together to generate interesting training trajectories,   yields less exploration.
valuable for policy improvement.
Our key contributions are as follows. We propose a novel paradigm for goal-directed exploration
by directly optimizing goal selection to generate trajectories with high exploration value. Next, we
show how learned world models permit an effective implementation of goal command planning, by
adapting planning algorithms that are often used for low-level action sequence planning. We validate
our approach, PEG, on challenging simulated robotics settings including a multi-legged ant robot in a
maze, and a robot arm on a cluttered tabletop. In each environment, PEG exploration enables more
efficient and effective training of generalist GCRL policies relative to baselines and ablations. Our
ant successfully navigates a long maze, and the robot arm successfully builds a stack of three blocks.


2    P ROBLEM S ETUP AND BACKGROUND

We wish to build agents that can efficiently explore an environment to autonomously acquire diverse
environment-relevant capabilities. Specifically, in our problem setting, the agent is dropped into an
unknown environment with no specification of the tasks that might be of interest afterwards. Over
episodes of unsupervised exploration, it must learn about its environment, the various “tasks” that it
affords to the agent, and also how to perform those tasks effectively. We focus on goal state-reaching
tasks. After this exploration, a successful agent would be able to reach diverse previously unknown
goal states in the environment upon command.
To achieve this, our method, planning exploratory goals (PEG), focuses on improving unsupervised
exploration within the goal-conditioned reinforcement learning framework. We set up notation and
preliminaries below, before discussing our approach in section 3.
Preliminaries. We formalize the unsupervised exploration stage within a goal-conditioned Markov
decision process, defined by the tuple (S, A, T , G). The unsupervised goal-conditioned MDP does
not contain the test-time goal distribution, nor a reward function. At each time t, a goal-conditioned
policy π G (· | st , g) in the current state st ∈ S, under goal command g ∈ G, selects an action at ∈ A,
and transitions to the next state st+1 with probability T (st+1 |st , at ). To enable handling of the most
broadly expressive goal-reaching tasks, we set the goal space to be identical to the state space: G = S,
i.e., every state maps to a plausible goal-reaching command.
In our setting, an agent must learn a goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) policy π G (· |
s, g) as well as collect exploratory data to train this policy on. Thus, as motivated in section 1, it


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is critical to pick good goal commands during training because doing so generates useful data to
improve the policy’s ability to achieve diverse goals.
Critical to our method’s design is the specific mechanism through which goal commands influence
the exploration data. We follow the recently popular “Go-explore” procedure (Ecoffet et al., 2021;
Pislar et al., 2022; Tuyls et al., 2022) for exploration-intensive long-term GCRL settings. Every
training episode starts with the selection of a goal command g. Then, a goal-directed "Go-phase"
starts, where the GCRL policy π G is executed, conditioned on g, producing a final state sT after T
steps. Immediately, an “Explore-phase” commences, with an undirected exploration policy π E (· | s)
taking over for the remaining TE timesteps. For example, π E (· | s) could be an RL policy trained
to maximize an intrinsic exploration reward rE (Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda
et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020). See Appendix D.1 for detailed pseudocode. This structure of
training episodes has been shown to result in richer exploration (Pislar et al., 2022). Intuitively,
the goal-conditioned policy efficiently brings an agent to an interesting goal, and the undirected
exploration policy efficiently explores around the goal. However, Go-explore prescribes no general
way to select goals that induce exploration.
In this paper, we propose PEG , a general goal command selection objective for Go-Explore-style un-
supervised exploration. PEG uses a learned world model, making it natural to implement it alongside
model-based RL approaches that already train such a model. We implement PEG exploration for
“latent explorer achiever” (LEXA) (Mendonca et al., 2021), a goal-conditioned MBRL framework.
We briefly summarize the LEXA framework below and refer the reader to Appendix D for details.
LEXA learns the following components:

           World model:             Tbθ (st |st−1 , at−1 )
           Exploration policy: πθE (at |st )                 Goal Reaching policy: πθG (at |st , g)            (1)
           Exploration value:       VθE (st )                Goal Reaching value:        VθG (st , g)


The world model is trained as a variational recurrent state Algorithm 1 LEXA Training Loop
space model following Hafner et al. (2020). The explorer 1: Input: πG , πE , world model Tb , rewards rG , rE
and goal reaching policies are trained with the model- 2: D ← {} Initialize buffer.
based on-policy actor-critic Dreamer algorithm (Hafner 3: for Episode i = 1 to Ntrain do
                                                             4:    τ ← GoalDirectedExploration(. . .)
et al., 2021). Both policies are trained purely in imagina- 5: D ← D ∪ τ
tion through world model “rollouts”, i.e., the world model   6:    Update model Tb with (st , at , st+1 ) ∼ D
acts as a learned simulator in which to run entire training  7:    Update π G in imagination with Tb to maximize rG
                                                             8:    Update π E in imagination with Tb to maximize rE
episodes for training these policies. The explorer reward
is the Plan2Explore (Sekar et al., 2020) disagreement objective, which incentivizes reaching states
that cause an ensemble of world models to disagree amongst themselves. The goal reaching reward
rG is the self-supervised temporal distance objective (Mendonca et al., 2021), which rewards the
policy for minimizing the number of actions between the current state and a goal state.
See Algorithm 1 for high level pseudocode of the training Algorithm 2 LEXA Goal Sampling
process. Highlighted in red is the goal-directed exploration 1: function G OAL D IRECTED E XPLORATION (. . .)
strategy (Algorithm 2). LEXA explores by sampling ran- 2: if episode i % 2 = 0 then
                                                             3:         Sample random goal g from buffer.
dom goals to reach or by running the exploration policy. 4:             Collect trajectory τ with π G (· | ·, g)
As we will see in the next section, PEG serves as a drop-in  5:     else
replacement for LEXA’s random goal sampling by sam- 6:                  Collect trajectory τ with π E
                                                             7: return τ
pling goals optimized for Go-explore exploration.


3    P LANNING G OALS FOR E XPLORATION

Having set up the preliminaries, we return to the core question of this paper: how should we pick
exploration-inducing goals to help acquire diverse skills? We have argued above that the answer is
not to pick goals at the frontier of previously explored states, as in prior work (Yamauchi, 1998; Pitis
et al., 2020; Bharadhwaj et al., 2021). Instead, at the beginning of each training episode, we propose
to optimize directly for goals that would lead to the highest exploration rewards during the episode’s


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Explore-phase:
                                       max EpπG (·|·,g) (sT ) V E (sT ) ,

                                                                                                                                                                       (2)
                                        g
                                                                   " T +T             #
                                                                      XE
                                       where V E (sT ) = EπE              γ t−T −1 rtE ,                                                                               (3)
                                                                                     t=T +1

and where pπG (·|·,g) (sT ) is the distribution of terminal states generated when π G runs for T steps
conditioned on goal g. V E , which we call exploration value, is the expected discounted intrinsic
motivation return of the exploration policy, when launched from state sT . Please refer to Figure 2 for
a detailed visualization.



                                              *0 $                                                                                                         / ) (% |*∗$)
                                                     a
                                                     *0 $
                                                                     " " $# # = &$! ∑(%&                    " " $# # = &$! ∑(%&
                                   )


                                                                                 =(         +         )/2            =(      +     )/2
                                  ,*
                                  |(
                                 ("


          Seen states
                                                                                 =                                   =
                              Τ%(


                                        *0 $ ~ $̂ "! % %,   ((# )                                                                                   / * (% | %, !∗ )
          Current state
                                        *0 $ ~ $̂ "! % %,   ((# )                    ! $ (" |(' ! )         +! = 1        +! = 0

1. Sample goals {       … }     2. Predict ! ! " ", $ trajectories       3. Choose $∗ by computing expected exploration                  4. Explore in real world by
                                with world model Τ  %(( " |(, *)         for each goal.                                                  running ! ! (" | ", $∗ ) & ! $


Figure 2: PEG proposes goals for Go-explore style exploration. 1) We start by sampling goal
candidates g1 . . . gN . 2) For each goal g, we execute the goal-conditioned policy π G in the world
model Tb to generate trajectories. 3) We score each goal by seeing how useful their trajectories are for
launching an exploration policy. 4) Explore using the best g.

Importantly, this objective involves computing the expected exploration value of terminal states sT .
The exploration value measures how interesting will the Explore-phase be as measured by intrinsic
motivation rewards. Next, note that the expectation in Equation (2) is over the terminal states induced
by the current GCRL policy. This way, it accounts for the capabilities of the current GCRL policy,
regardless of whether it is a novice or an expert at achieving the selected goal g. If we had instead
sought to optimize for goals g with high exploratory value, in similar spirit to prior works (Pong et al.,
2019; Pitis et al., 2020; Ecoffet et al., 2021), the objective of Equation (2) would instead be replaced
by V E (g), the exploration value of the goal, which is naively agnostic to the capabilities of the GCRL
policy. As we have argued above, this would then require additional mechanisms to account for
reachability of the specified goal etc., bringing new hyperparameters and related overheads. Instead,
PEG offers a unified and compact solution. In plain English, “first command goals that lead the goal
policy to states that have high future exploration potential, then explore.”
The objective in Equation (2) is not straightforward to compute, because it relies on the terminal
state distribution induced by the goal-conditioned policy pπG (·|·,g) (sT ). This distribution can change
rapidly throughout training, as the policy evolves. To explore well, it is important to use an up-to-date
estimate. We leverage the learned world model Tb to achieve this: p̂πG (·|·,g) (τ ) can be represented as
the product of the transition and goal-conditioned policy distributions.
                                              "T                                             #
                                               Y
                   p̂πG (·|·,g) (τ ) = p(s0 )    Tb (st | st−1 , at−1 )π G (at−1 | st−1 , g)           (4)
                                                              t=1


Now, we may approximate the expectation over the marginal pπG (·|·,g) (sT ) in the objective Equa-
tion (2) by sampling trajectories τ from the learned world model and using the last state sT :
                                                1 X E k
              Ep̂πG (·|·,g) (sT ) [V E (sT )] ≈    Vθ (sT )  where skT ∼ p̂πG (·|·,g) (τ )     (5)
                                                K
                                                                     k

This permits on-the-fly generation of an up-to-date estimate of our objective from Equation (2),
using a recent goal-conditioned RL policy. Then, we can optimize over goals g using sample-based


                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


optimization. Following Equation (5), to evaluate a goal g, we condition the goal-conditioned
policy on g, and roll it out for K trajectories τk within the learned world model. We then estimate
the terminal state exploration value for each trajectory with the learned exploration value function
VθE (skT ) (Equation (1)), and average the estimates.
For optimizing the goal variable g, we use model predictive path integral control (Williams et al., 2015)
(MPPI, see Appendix E for details). In Appendix E, we show that the specific choice of optimizer
is not critical and other optimizers like cross entropy method (CEM) (De Boer et al., 2005) also
work well. More broadly, while these sampling-based optimizers are popular for optimizing action
trajectories with dynamics models (Nagabandi et al., 2019; Chua et al., 2018; Ebert et al., 2018; Hafner
et al., 2020), PEG uses them instead for optimizing goal commands; this lower-dimensional search
space enables easy optimization, independent of the task horizon, permitting handling long-term tasks.
Equipped with this goal setting procedure, we can now Algorithm 3 PEG Goal Sampling
train a goal-conditioned policy by replacing the LEXA          1: function G OAL D IRECTED E XPLORATION (. . .)
goal sampling highlighted in red in Algorithm 1 with           2:     g ← Optimize Equation (5) with MPPI
                                                                      τ ← GO-EXPLORE(g, π G , π E )
our proposed PEG goals and Go-explore episodes. Al- 3:         4: return τ
gorithm 3 shows PEG pseudocode.

Implementation Details. We implement PEG on top of authors’ code from DreamerV2 (Hafner
et al., 2021), LEXA (Mendonca et al., 2021), and MPPI implementation from Rybkin et al. (2021).
We used the default hyperparameters for training the world model, policies, value functions, and
temporal reward functions. For PEG, we tried various values of K for simulating trajectories of π G
for each goal and found K = 1 to be sufficient. We use the same Go-explore mechanism across
all goal-setting methods: the Go and Explore phases’ time limits are set to half of the maximum
episode length for all environments, while non-Go-explore baselines use the full episode length for
exploration. See Appendix E for details on hyperparameters, runtime, and resource usage.


4       E XPERIMENTS
Our experiments evaluate goal-reaching tasks that require non-trivial exploration and skill acquisition
to solve. We aim to answer: (1) Does PEG result in better exploration and downstream goal-reaching
behavior? (2) What qualitatively distinguishes PEG goals and exploration from previous goal-directed
exploration methods? (3) What components of PEG contribute to its success?

4.1       S ETUP

We evaluate PEG and other goal-conditioned RL agents on four different continuous-control environ-
ments, described below. For each environment, we define an evaluation set of goals — as a general
principle, we pick evaluation goals in each environment that require extensive exploration in order
for the agent to learn a successful evaluation goal reaching policy. These goals are very relevant in
long-horizon tasks, as long-horizon goals tend to require extensive exploration to gather the necessary
data for training. Recall that we assume the fully unsupervised exploration setting; the agent does not
have access to the evaluation set during training time. So, for all the agent knows at training time,
any environment state could plausibly be a test goal. During evaluation, we run 10 goal-reaching
episodes to account for environmental noise1 for each goal, and report the mean success rate and
standard error for each environment. All methods are run with 10 seeds. The success metric d(s, g)
used for evaluation is an indicator function checking if any state in the episode is within   distance of
the goal state. See Figure 3 for images of each environment, and Appendix C for more details.
• Point Maze: The agent, a 2D point, is noisily initialized in the bottom left. At test time, we
evaluate it on reaching the right corner. The 2-D state and action space correspond to the planar
position and velocity respectively. The episode length is 50 steps. The top right corner is the hardest
to reach, so we set this to be the test-time goal.
• Walker: In this environment from Tassa et al. (2018), a 2D 2-legged robot moves on a flat plane.
The state space is 9-D and contains the walker’s XZ position and joint angles. The action space is
6-D and represents joint torques. The episode length is 150 steps. To evaluate the ability to learn
    1
        Our environments have deterministic transitions with noise in the initial state distribution.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: We evaluate PEG across four diverse environments, selecting evaluation tasks to stress-test
exploration. From left to right: Point Maze requires the agent to move from the bottom left to top
right. Walker evaluates if the agent can walk to different positions on the plane. In Ant Maze, the ant
is required to move to the farthest end of the maze. Finally, in 3-Block Stack, the robot must stack
the blocks into the goal configuration (colored orbs).


different locomotion behaviors of varied difficulty, the test goal commands are standing states that
are placed ±7, and ±12 meters from the initial pose.
• Ant Maze: We increased exploration difficulty in the Ant Maze environment from MEGA (Pitis
et al., 2020) by placing one additional turn in the maze. Further, we set the GCRL goal space to the
full 29-D ant state space, rather than reduce it to 2-D xy position as in MEGA. The ant robot must
learn complex 4-legged locomotion behavior and navigate around the hallways (see Figure 3). The
episode length is 500 steps. We evaluate the ant on reaching 4 hard goals that are placed in the top
left room, the furthest area from the start, and 4 intermediate goals in the middle hallway.
• 3-Block Stacking: Here, a robot arm with a two-fingered gripper operates on a tabletop with 3
blocks and boundary walls. The state space is the gripper pose and object xyz positions (14-D), and
the action space is the gripper velocity and force (4-D). At evaluation time, the robot is commanded
to stack three blocks into a tower configuration. To achieve this, the agent will need to have learned
pushing, picking, and stacking, and discovered 3-block stacks as a possible configuration of the
environment. The episode length is 150 timesteps. Note that 3+block stacking is a classic and
open exploration challenge in robot RL; to our knowledge, all prior solutions assume expensive
forms of supervision or computational resources to overcome the exploration challenge, such as
demonstrations, curriculum learning, or billions of simulator samples (Ecoffet et al., 2021; Nair et al.,
2018a; Lanier et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020), highlighting task difficulty.

4.2   BASELINES

PEG aims to improve goal-directed exploration by improving goal selection during GCRL. To
specifically evaluate exploration, we implemented all baselines on top of LEXA (Mendonca et al.,
2021), the backbone goal-conditioned MBRL framework by replacing the LEXA exploration logic
(line 4 in Algorithm 1) with each method’s proposed exploration strategy. See Appendix D for a
detailed comparison between baselines.
Our first two baselines, Skewfit and MEGA, are alternative goal setting approaches: both follow
Algorithm 1 and replace the LEXA exploration with their own goal sampling strategy for Go-Explore
style exploration (see Algorithm 7 and Algorithm 8 for pseudocode). Skewfit (Pong et al., 2019)
estimates state densities, and chooses goals from the replay buffer inversely proportional to their
density, resulting in uniform state sampling. MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020) similarly uses kernel density
estimates (KDE) of state densities, and chooses low density goals from the replay buffer. MEGA
is close to the original Go-explore approach (Ecoffet et al., 2021); rather than Go-explore’s hand-
designed pseudocount metric, MEGA uses KDE to choose goals. MEGA relies on a heuristic
Q-function threshold to prune unachievable low density goals since many rare states may not be
achievable by π G . This requires tuning and prior knowledge of the test goal to set.
We also run vanilla LEXA itself as a baseline. LEXA does not perform Go-explore style exploration,
instead using an exploration policy for some exploration episodes and the goal-conditioned policy
conditioned on random goals for others. In addition, we evaluate against a variant of LEXA that
only collects data with the exploration policy. We denote this baseline Plan2Explore (P2E) after the
intrinsic motivation policy it uses (Sekar et al., 2020). P2E trains an exploration policy to maximize


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


disagreement among an ensemble of world models. Notably, PEG and our other Go-Explore baselines
all use the same P2E exploration algorithm during Explore-phase, which isolates the differences in
exploration to the proposed goals of each method. See Appendix D for additional details including
a side-by-side algorithm comparison, and where we verify that our MBRL versions of MEGA and
Skewfit are sound and in fact better than the original model-free versions in Pitis et al. (2020).


Figure 4: Performance of agents with different goal setting strategies. All methods are run with 10
seeds. PEG outperforms all baselines, and its performance gain increases with environment difficulty.


4.3   R ESULTS

Test task success rates. Figure 4 shows the evaluation performance across training time. PEG com-
pares favorably to baselines both in final success rate and learning speed. PEG reaches near-optimal
behavior earlier than any other baseline. PEG outperforms goal-setting baselines (MEGA and Skewfit)
across all tasks, which shows that PEG goal setting is superior to alternative goal-setting strategies.
On the hardest task, block stacking, PEG is the only method to achieve any significant non-zero task
performance: PEG achieves about 30% success rate on this challenging exploration task, all other
baselines are close to 0%.
Recall that MEGA picks minimum density goals from the replay buffer. As we have seen in Figure 1,
picking goals from the replay buffer may result in suboptimal goals for exploration as there could
exist goals outside the data that result in more exploration. Furthermore, the MEGA objective does
not reason about temporally extended exploration that begins after the goal state is reached. Skewfit,
which samples goal states uniformly by their density, may often sample uninteresting goals, thus
slowing down exploration. In our upcoming qualitative analysis of goal selection behavior, we see
these conceptual differences manifest in suboptimal goal picking in comparison to PEG .
Next, P2E has no Go-phase, and thus no goal-directed exploration, which limits its exploration
horizon. Even so, it can sometimes perform better than MEGA and Skewfit (see Walker), both
methods that employ the same exploration algorithm as P2E, just after a Go-phase. In other words,
Go-explore by itself doesn’t always improve exploration, and suboptimal goal-setting during “Go-
phase" can in fact deteriorate exploration. LEXA performs worse than simple P2E, indicating that
sampling random goals from the replay buffer does not improve exploration or training.

Goal selection behaviors. Next, Figure 5 visualizes the goal-picking and exploration behaviors for
PEG and baselines. A trend across tasks is that PEG consistently picks goals (red points) beyond
the frontier of seen data. In Point Maze, the middle right region forms a natural barrier for the
exploration policy to overcome. The policy must find a rather tortuous path from the bottom left
through the middle right hallways in order to reach the top right corner. As a result, top right states
beyond the middle right region are very sparsely represented. With similar states in the replay buffer
(blue dots), we find that PEG generates many more goals in the top right region than MEGA, thus
accelerating exploration. Similarly, in Walker, PEG selects goals to the far left and right of the
walker, where data support is the sparsest. MEGA fails to pick goals to the left.
In Ant Maze (Figure 5), we see that PEG explores the most deeply into the maze of all methods, at
this halfway point. Counting the total number of state visitations in the farthest top-left reaches of
the maze for each method, we find that PEG has ∼68K states whereas MEGA, the closest baseline,
only has ∼3K. Looking at Figure 5, MEGA does pick a few “rare” goals in the top left, but π G has
not visited the top left area, either because π G is not capable of reaching the rare goals and/or the


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: We plot the achieved states (blue / green dots) and goals (red dots) for PEG and baselines
in the Point Maze (top left), Walker (top right), and Ant Maze (bottom) halfway through training.
PEG picks goals in areas (orange boxes) that lead to more exploration whereas baselines do not.
Walker and Ant states are high dimensional so we just plot their central xz or xy positions.

        20%                 40%                  60%                  80%                  100%


Figure 6: The evolution of achieved states (colored dots) and goals (red dots) of PEG throughout
training in the Ant Maze. Lighter states are more recent. PEG samples goals to maximize exploration,
sometimes picking goals that are outside the seen data or even physically implausible.


frontier. Skewfit samples no goals in the top left region, because it does not prioritize rare states. We
further examine the training evolution of PEG goals in Ant Maze to analyze how they contribute
to exploration. We plot the achieved states and goals proposed by PEG periodically throughout
its training in Figure 6. PEG goals, optimized to induce the goal-conditioned policy to visit high-
exploration value states, are not always predictable. PEG commonly chooses goals outside of the
data distribution. For example, PEG chooses goals near the top wall for the entire training duration.
We can also see it choosing physically impossible goals in the middle wall at 20%, but these goals
disappear as the goal-conditioned policy and world model are updated over time.
In the 3-Block Stack environment, as discussed above, PEG is the only method to train any meaning-
ful policy for 3-block stacking. The space of configurations of the three blocks and the robot in this
setting is extremely large. While all methods are able to explore and discover simpler skills such as
picking and 2-block stacking, only PEG’s exploration is comprehensive enough to also explore more
“useful” and hard-to-reach behaviors such as 3-block stacking. See Appendix F.4 for success curves
on intermediate goals like picking and 2-block stacking, and the website2 for videos.
Ablation Analysis. What components of PEG are important to its performance? We run ab-
lation studies in Ant Maze. First, we ablate PEG’s goal sampling: Rand-Goal PEG replaces
PEG’s goal sampling with randomly sampled goals. In Seen-Goal PEG, we forego optimiz-
ing the goal with MPPI and simply choose goals from the replay buffer that score highly ac-
cording to Equation (5). Go-Value PEG chooses to optimize the exploration rewards achieved
during the imagined Go-phase instead of during the Explore-phase, by replacing V E (sT ) in
                   PT      E
Equation (5) with     t=1 rt — note that this still runs Explore after Go in the environment.
   2
       https://sites.google.com/view/exploratory-goals


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, we ablate PEG’s Go-explore mechanism itself, by
replacing the explorer policy with a random action pol-
icy (Rand-Explore PEG), and removing Explore-phase
completely (No-Explore PEG).
Figure 7 shows the results. PEG is clearly better than all
ablations, suggesting that all components of the method
contribute to performance. Explore-phase is particularly
important; No-Explore PEG achieves 0% success. Rand-
Explore PEG performs poorly, showing the need for a                 Figure 7: PEG ablations.
learned Explore-phase policy like P2E. Next, Rand-Goal
PEG, Seen-Goal PEG, and Go-Value PEG all perform worse than PEG; the specifics of the objective
function for goal sampling defined in Equation (5), and its optimization procedure, are important.

5    OTHER R ELATED W ORK
PEG is most closely related to the subfield of unsupervised exploration in RL, where no tasks are
pre-specified during training. In this setting, a common approach is to define an intrinsic motivation
reward correlated with exploration for RL (Schmidhuber, 2010; Pathak et al., 2017). Common forms
of intrinsic reward incentivize visiting rare states with count-based methods (Poupart et al., 2006;
Bellemare et al., 2016; Burda et al., 2019) or finding states that maximize prediction error (Oudeyer
et al., 2007; Pathak et al., 2017; Henaff, 2019; Shyam et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020). Within PEG,
we leverage an intrinsic motivation policy for the Explore-phase.
More specifically related to PEG, goal-directed exploration is a special class of unsupervised explo-
ration, applicable in the challenging goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) setting. To develop generalist
GCRL policies, these methods command the goal-conditioned policy towards exploratory goals at
training time. Broadly, the idea is to pick goals that are difficult for the current policy, but not com-
pletely out of reach, i.e., within the “zone of proximal development.” Within that broad framework,
however, prior works propose many different metrics for goal choosing, such as learning progress
(Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013; Veeriah et al., 2018), goal difficulty (Florensa et al., 2018), “sibling
rivalry” (Trott et al., 2019), or value function disagreement (Zhang et al., 2020). Within this family,
we have already discussed and compared against the most closely relevant methods MEGA and
Skew-Fit (Pong et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020) (see Section 4.2 and Section 4.3) which command the
agent to rarely seen states to increase the number of seen and familiar states, reasoning that this will
enable broader expertise in the trained GCRL policies.
Closely related to unsupervised goal-directed exploration is unsupervised skill discovery, which aims
to train a skill-conditioned policy Eysenbach et al. (2019); Sharma et al. (2019). Skill discovery
objectives do not necessarily encourage exploration, and can even fall into local minima where the
agent is penalized for exploration (Strouse et al., 2021; Campos et al., 2020). As such, these are
usually weak baselines for exploration; for example, our goal-directed exploration baselines, LEXA
and MEGA, both report clearly favorable results against such methods (Eysenbach et al., 2019;
Hartikainen et al., 2020). See Appendix A for an extended discussion of related work.

6    C ONCLUSIONS
We have presented PEG, an approach that sets goals to achieve unsupervised exploration in goal-
conditioned reinforcement learning agents. PEG plans these exploratory goals through a world
model, directly optimizing for the estimated exploration value of the training trajectory. While PEG
performs better in our experiments than prior approaches across various environments, exploration for
long-horizon tasks remains challenging, and PEG’s explicit dependence on world model rollouts may
be a particular weakness in such settings. Likewise, complex environments may permit extremely
large goal spaces, where purely unsupervised exploration approaches like PEG are unlikely to succeed
within reasonable time, and some information about the target task space may be required. We believe
that the PEG principle of optimizing for goals predicted to induce highly exploratory policy behaviors
will prove useful towards future efforts to overcome these longstanding exploration challenges.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by ONR grant number N00014-22-1-2677 and gift funding from
NEC Laboratories. The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive
feedback, as well as Yecheng Jason Ma and the other members of the Perception, Action, and
Learning (PAL) research group at UPenn for useful discussions and general support.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, we will release the codebase that contains our method, baselines, and
environments. The supplementary contains details about hyperparameters, baselines, and architecture
(see Appendix D and Appendix E). In addition, we have also provided pseudocode in Algorithm 3.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5048–5058, 2017.
Adrien Baranes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Active learning of inverse models with intrinsi-
  cally motivated goal exploration in robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1):49–73,
  2013. ISSN 0921-8890. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2012.05.008. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889012000644.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, volume 29, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
 2016/file/afda332245e2af431fb7b672a68b659d-Paper.pdf.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Animesh Garg, and Florian Shkurti. LEAF: latent exploration along the
  frontier. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2021, Xi’an, China,
 May 30 - June 5, 2021, pp. 677–684. IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9560922. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9560922.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym.
Victor Campos, Alexander Trott, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, Xavier Giró-i-Nieto, and Jordi
  Torres. Explore, discover and learn: Unsupervised discovery of state-covering skills. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2020. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/campos20a.html.
Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with
  imagined subgoals. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1430–1440. PMLR,
  2021.
Richard Y. Chen, Szymon Sidor, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. UCB EXPLORATION VIA
  q-ENSEMBLES, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1cKvl-Rb.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 4759–4770,
  Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc.
Irene Cogliati Dezza, Angela J Yu, Axel Cleeremans, and William Alexander. Learning the value
   of information and reward over time when solving exploration-exploitation problems. Scientific
   reports, 7(1):16919, 2017.
Pieter-Tjerk De Boer, Dirk P Kroese, Shie Mannor, and Reuven Y Rubinstein. A tutorial on the
  cross-entropy method. Annals of operations research, 134(1):19–67, 2005.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.00568, 2018.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return then
  explore. Nature, 590 7847:580–586, 2021.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you
  need: Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJx63jRqFm.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
  reinforcement learning agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Yijie Guo, Jongwook Choi, Marcin Moczulski, Shengyu Feng, Samy Bengio, Mohammad Norouzi,
  and Honglak Lee. Memory based trajectory-conditioned policies for learning from sparse rewards.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1lOTC4tDS.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=0oabwyZbOu.
Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from
  pixels, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04114.
Kristian Hartikainen, Xinyang Geng, Tuomas Haarnoja, and Sergey Levine. Dynamical distance learn-
  ing for semi-supervised and unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1lmhaVtvr.
Mikael Henaff. Explicit explore-exploit algorithms in continuous state spaces. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
 cc/paper/2019/file/03b264c595403666634ac75d828439bc-Paper.pdf.
Dinesh Jayaraman, Frederik Ebert, Alexei A Efros, and Sergey Levine. Time-agnostic prediction:
  Predicting predictable video frames. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Jean Tarbouriech, Alessandro Lazaric, and Ludovic Denoyer. Direct
  then diffuse: Incremental unsupervised skill discovery for state covering and goal reaching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=25kzAhUB1lz.
John B. Lanier, Stephen McAleer, and Pierre Baldi. Curiosity-driven multi-criteria hindsight experi-
  ence replay. CoRR, abs/1906.03710, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03710.
Richard Li, Allan Jabri, Trevor Darrell, and Pulkit Agrawal. Towards practical multi-object manipu-
  lation using relational reinforcement learning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation, pp. 4051–4058. IEEE, 2020.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discovering
  and achieving goals with world models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample-efficient world models.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=vhFu1Acb0xb.
Anusha Nagabandi, Kurt Konolige, Sergey Levine, and Vikash Kumar. Deep dynamics models for
  learning dexterous manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, 2019. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/nagabandi20a.
  html.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcom-
  ing exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In IEEE International Conference
  on Robotics and Automation, pp. 6292–6299, 2018a.
Ashvin Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 9209–9220, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018b.
  Curran Associates Inc.
Alexander Neitz, Giambattista Parascandolo, Stefan Bauer, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Adaptive skip
  intervals: Temporal abstraction for recurrent dynamical models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/
  file/0f0ee3310223fe38a989b2c818709393-Paper.pdf.
Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, Daniel J. Russo, and Zheng Wen. Deep exploration via randomized
  value functions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(124):1–62, 2019. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v20/18-339.html.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V. Hafner. Intrinsic motivation systems for au-
  tonomous mental development. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 11(2):265–286,
  2007. doi: 10.1109/TEVC.2006.890271.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
  self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Karl Pertsch, Oleh Rybkin, Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine.
  Long-horizon visual planning with goal-conditioned hierarchical predictors. In Proceedings of the
 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook,
  NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Miruna Pislar, David Szepesvari, Georg Ostrovski, Diana L Borsa, and Tom Schaul. When should
 agents explore? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=dEwfxt14bca.
Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, Stephen Zhao, Bradly Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum entropy gain
   exploration for long horizon multi-goal reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7750–7761. PMLR, 2020.
Vitchyr H Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-fit:
  State-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03698, 2019.
Pascal Poupart, Nikos Vlassis, Jesse Hoey, and Kevin Regan. An analytic solution to discrete bayesian
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML ’06, pp. 697–704, New York, NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery.
  ISBN 1595933832. doi: 10.1145/1143844.1143932. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  1143844.1143932.
Oleh Rybkin, Chuning Zhu, Anusha Nagabandi, Kostas Daniilidis, Igor Mordatch, and Sergey Levine.
  Model-based reinforcement learning via latent-space collocation. International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2021.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). Au-
  tonomous Mental Development, IEEE Transactions on, 2:230 – 247, 10 2010. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.
  2010.2056368.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01657, 2019.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 5779–5788. PMLR, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Isaac J Sledge and José C Príncipe. Balancing exploration and exploitation in reinforcement learning
   using a value of information criterion. In 2017 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
   and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 2816–2820. IEEE, 2017.
RL Stratonovich and BA Grishanin. Value of information when an estimated random variable is
  hidden. Izvestiya of USSR Academy of Sciences, Technical Cybernetics, 6(1):3–15, 1966.
DJ Strouse, Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Vlad Mnih, and Steven Hansen. Learning more skills
  through optimistic exploration, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.14226.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Keeping your distance:
  Solving sparse reward tasks using self-balancing shaped rewards. CoRR, abs/1911.01417, 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01417.
Jens Tuyls, Shunyu Yao, Sham M. Kakade, and Karthik R Narasimhan. Multi-stage episodic control
  for strategic exploration in text games. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ek7PSN7Y77z.
Vivek Veeriah, Junhyuk Oh, and Satinder Singh. Many-goals reinforcement learning. ArXiv,
  abs/1806.09605, 2018.
Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control
  using covariance variable importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01149, 2015.
Brian Yamauchi. Frontier-based exploration using multiple robots. In Proceedings of the Second
  International Conference on Autonomous Agents, AGENTS ’98, pp. 47–53, New York, NY, USA,
  1998. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 0897919831. doi: 10.1145/280765.280773.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/280765.280773.
Tianpei Yang, Hongyao Tang, Chenjia Bai, Jinyi Liu, Jianye Hao, Zhaopeng Meng, Peng Liu, and
  Zhen Wang. Exploration in deep reinforcement learning: a comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.06668, 2021.
Zhao Yang, Thomas M. Moerland, Mike Preuss, and Aske Plaat. When to go, and when to explore:
  The benefit of post-exploration in intrinsic motivation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2203.16311.
Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Automatic curriculum learning through value
  disagreement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7648–7659, 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Extended Related Work                                                                      14

      B Extended Limitations and Future Work                                                       15

      C Environments                                                                               16
        C.1 Point Maze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
        C.2 Walker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
        C.3 Ant Maze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
        C.4 3-Block Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17

      D Baselines                                                                                  17
        D.1 Go-Explore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
        D.2 LEXA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
        D.3 Original MEGA codebase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
        D.4 Model-based MEGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
        D.5 Model-based Skewfit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
        D.6 Plan2Explore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18

      E Implementation Details                                                                     19
        E.1 MPPI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
        E.2 Runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
        E.3 Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20

      F Additional Experiments                                                                     20
        F.1 PEG with other exploration methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
        F.2 MPPI vs CEM for Goal Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
        F.3 Does conditioning on PEG goals maximize exploration? . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
        F.4 More goals for 3-Block Stacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22


A    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Exploration is a very broad field, and we encourage readers to read surveys such as Yang et al. (2021).
Below, we summarize various subfields of exploration and reinforcement learning relevant to PEG.

Task-directed exploration. PEG reasons about the intrinsic motivation / exploration rewards to be
gained by commanding a goal-conditioned task policy to various goals in an unsupervised RL setting.
Related at a high level, supervised exploration approaches reason about task reward gains during
exploration. (Chen et al., 2019; Osband et al., 2019) leverage uncertainty estimates about the reward
to prioritize states for task-directed exploration. (Stratonovich & Grishanin, 1966) proposes "value
of information" (VoI) to measure exploration from an information-theoretic perspective. The VoI
describes the improvement in supervised task rewards of the current optimal action policy operating
under a specified limit on state information. An RL agent may modulate exploration-vs-exploitation
in supervised RL settings, by tuning this information limit: a higher limit leads to lower exploration
and greater exploitation (Sledge & Príncipe, 2017; Cogliati Dezza et al., 2017).


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Unsupervised Exploration. In unsupervised exploration, no information about the task (e.g. re-
ward function or demonstrations) is known during training time. In this setting, a common approach
is to define an intrinsic motivation reward correlated with exploration for RL (Schmidhuber, 2010;
Pathak et al., 2017). Common forms of intrinsic reward incentivize visiting rare states with count-
based methods Poupart et al. (2006); Bellemare et al. (2016); Burda et al. (2019) or finding states that
maximize prediction error (Oudeyer et al., 2007; Pathak et al., 2017; Henaff, 2019; Shyam et al., 2019;
Sekar et al., 2020). Within PEG, we leverage an intrinsic motivation policy for the Explore-phase.

Goal-conditioned RL. Goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) extends RL to the multitask setting where
the policy is conditioned on a goal and is expected to achieve it. The goal space is commonly chosen
to be the state space, although other options like desired returns or language inputs are possible.
GCRL is challenging since the policy is required to learn the correct behavior for achieving each goal.
This introduces two challenges - optimizing a goal-conditioned policy, and getting adequate data to
support the optimization process.
Many GCRL methods focus on improving goal-conditioned policy optimization. Hindsight Experi-
ence Replay Andrychowicz et al. (2017) boosts training efficiency by relabeling failure trajectories
as successful trajectories, and Chane-Sane et al. (2021) uses imagined subgoals to guide the policy
search process. However, such methods are only useful if the data distribution is diverse enough to
cover the space of desired behaviors and goals, and will still suffer in hard exploration environments.
Therefore, GCRL is still predominantly constrained by exploration.

Goal-directed Exploration. Goal-directed exploration, which sets exploratory goals for the goal-
conditioned policy to achieve, is often the exploration mechanism of choice for GCRL as it naturally
reuses the goal-conditioned policy. It is important to note that GDE is not inherently tied to GCRL,
and can be used in conventional RL to solve hard exploration tasks (Ecoffet et al., 2021; Guo et al.,
2020; Hafner et al., 2022). In such cases, goals are usually picked through some combination of
reward and novelty terms.
Prior works propose many different metrics for goal choosing, such as frontier-based (Yamauchi,
1998), learning progress (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013; Veeriah et al., 2018), goal difficulty (Florensa
et al., 2018), “sibling rivalry” (Trott et al., 2019), or value function disagreement (Zhang et al., 2020).
Within this family, we have already discussed and compared against the most closely relevant methods
MEGA and Skew-Fit (Pong et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020) (see Section 4.2 and Section 4.3) which
command the agent to rarely seen states to increase the number of seen and familiar states, reasoning
that this will enable broader expertise in the trained GCRL policies.

Go-Explore. The Go-Explore framework from (Ecoffet et al., 2021) performs goal-directed explo-
ration by first rolling out the goal-conditioned policy (Go-phase) and then rolling out the exploration
policy from the terminal state of the goal-conditioned phase (Explore-phase). Go-Explore does not
prescribe a general goal setting method, instead opting for a hand-engineered novelty bonus for each
task. GDE methods like MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020) use the Go-Explore mechanism to further boost
exploration efficiency, but do not consider Go-Explore when designing their goal-setting objective.
This results in suboptimal performance - MEGA goals chooses low density goals, but this may
not necessarily mean they are good states to start the exploration phase from (e.g. dead-ends in a
maze). PEG ’s objective already takes the Go-Explore mechanism into account, choosing goals that
maximize the exploration of the Explore phase and resulting in superior exploration.

B    E XTENDED L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
Model-based RL vs. Model-free RL. PEG is a model-based RL agent, which is more sample-
efficient and computationally expensive than model-free counterparts. MBRL agents require more
computation time and resources since they learn a world model. PEG trains a world model to train
policies and value functions with imagined trajectories, as well as generate goals for exploration. A
model-free version of PEG should be computationally and conceptually simpler, and we leave this
for future work.

Better world models. PEG depends on a learned world model to plan goals, and may suffer in
prediction performance and computation time for longer prediction horizons. An interesting direction


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


would be to combine PEG with temporally abstracted world models (Neitz et al., 2018; Jayaraman
et al., 2019; Pertsch et al., 2020) to handle such cases. Furthermore, PEG should benefit with
improved world model architectures such as Transformers (Micheli et al., 2023), and thus improving
world modelling offers a straightforward path for extending PEG .

Exploration beyond state novelty. Further, while empirically PEG produces performant goal-
conditioned policies, it only explores by maximizing novelty. In harder tasks it might be necessary to
explicitly consider also exploring with "practice goals" that best improve the goal-conditioned policy.
Next, Pislar et al. (2022) suggests that generalizing the Go-Explore paradigm itself is beneficial. In
Go-Explore, we assume the agent first performs a "Go-phase" for the first half of the episode, and
then the "Explore-phase" for the remaining half. However, we can allow the agent to switch between
the "Go-phase" and "Explore-phase" multiple times in an episode, and decide the phase lengths.

Scaling PEG to harder tasks. While we focus on purely unsupervised exploration, in practice
some knowledge about the task is always available. For example, a human may give some rewards, a
few demonstrations, or some background knowledge about the task. Leveraging such priors to focus
exploration on the space of tasks preferred by the user would make GCRL and PEG more practical,
especially in real world applications like robotics.
PEG currently is only evaluated in state space, and a potential extension would be to handle image
observations by optimizing goals in a compact latent space. Such an extension should only require
minor edits in the PEG code because PEG is extended from LEXA, an image-based RL agent that
already learns such a latent space.

C     E NVIRONMENTS
C.1   P OINT M AZE

The agent, a 2D point spawned on the bottom left of the maze, is evaluated on reaching the top right
corner within 50 timesteps. The two-dimensional state and action space correspond to the planar
position and velocity respectively. Success is based upon the L2 distance between the position of the
agent and the goal being less than 0.15. The entire maze is approximately 10 x 10. This environment
is taken directly from Pitis et al. (2020) with no modifications.

C.2   WALKER

Next, the walker environment tests the locomotion behavior of a 2D walker robot on a flat plane.
The agent is evaluated on its ability to achieve four different standing poses that are placed ±7,
and ±12 meters in the x axis away from the initial pose. For success, we check if the agent’s x
position is within a small threshold from the goal pose’s x position. The state and goal space is 9
dimensional, containing the walker’s xz positions and joint angles. The environment code was taken
from Mendonca et al. (2021).

C.3   A NT M AZE

A high-dimensional ant robot needs to move through hallways from the bottom left to top left (see
Fig. 3). This environment is a long-horizon challenge due to the long episode length (500 timesteps)
and traversal distance. We evaluate the ant on reaching 4 hard goals at the top left room, and 4
intermediate goals in the middle hallway. Ant Maze has the highest dimensional state and goal
spaces: 29 dimensions that correspond to the ant’s position, joint angles, and joint velocities. The
first three dimensions of the state and goal space represent the xyz position. The next 12 dimensions
represent the joint angles for each of the ant’s four limbs. The remaining 14 dimensions represent the
velocities of the ant in the x-y direction and the velocities of each of the joints. Ant Maze also has
an 8 dimensional action space. The 8 dimensions correspond to the hip and ankle actuators of each
limb of the ant. Success is based upon the L2 distance between the xy position of the ant and the
goal being less than 1.0 meters, which is approximately the width of a cell. The dimensions of the
entire maze is approximately 6 x 8 meters. This environment is a modification from the Ant Maze
environment in Pitis et al. (2020). We modified the environment so that the state and goal space now


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


includes the ant’s xyz positions along with the joint positions and velocities instead of just the xy
positions. We also added an additional room in the top left in order to evaluate against a harder goal.


C.4    3-B LOCK S TACK

A robot has to stack three blocks into a tower configuration. The state and goal space for this
environment is 14 dimensional. The first five dimensions represent the gripper state and the other nine
dimensions represent the xyz positions of each block. The action space is 4 dimensional where the
first three dimensions represent the xyz movement of the gripper and the last dimension represents the
movement of the gripper finger. Success is based upon the L2 distance between the xyz position of
all of object and the goal position of the corresponding object being less than 3cm. This environment
is a modification from the FetchStack3 environment in Pitis et al. (2020).


D     BASELINES
                                                        Algorithm 4 MBRL Training
                                                           1: Input: goal / expl. policies π G , π E , world model Tb , rewards
Here, we first present pseudocode for all meth-      rG , rE
ods. We start by defining a generic MBRL train- 2: D ← {} Initialize buffer.
ing loop in Algorithm 4 that alternates between   3: for Episode i = 1 to Ntrain do
                                                  4:     τ ← GoalDirectedExploration(. . .)
data collection (instantiated by specific meth- 5:       D ←D∪τ
ods) and policy and world model updates. Next, 6:        Update model Tb with (st , at , st+1 ) ∼ D
we define the pseudocode for PEG and all base- 7:        Update π G in imagination with Tb to maximize rG
lines below. To run a method, we simply drop in   8:     Update π E in imagination with Tb to maximize rE
the data collection logic specified by the method
into the MBRL training loop. For exploration, LEXA and P2E do not use Go-explore, while PEG,
MEGA, and Skewfit do.


D.1    G O -E XPLORE
                                                        Algorithm 5 Go-explore
Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021) proposes to
                                                        function GO-EXPLORE(g, π G , π E )
switch between a goal-directed policy and ex- 1:     2:    s0 ← env.reset()
ploration policy in a single episode to tackle       3:    τ ← {s0 }
exploration-intensive environments. Go-explore       4:    for Step t = 1 . . . TGo do
first stores states of “interest" as future goal     5:        st ← env.step(π G (st−1 , g))
                                                     6:        τ ← τ ∪ {st }
states. Then, in a new episode, Go-explore
                                                     7:    for Step t = 1 . . . TExplore do
chooses a goal g, and directs a goal-directed pol-
                                                     8:        st ← env.step(π E (st−1 , g))
icy π G to achieve the goal (or upon timeout TGo ). 9:         τ ← τ ∪ {st }
Then, for the rest of the episode, an exploration 10: return τ
policy π E is used. Intuitively, this results in
frontier-reaching exploration (Yamauchi, 1998)
where the goal-directed policy efficiently traverses to the “frontier” of known states before doing
exploratory behavior. Of particular importance to Go-Explore is how goal states are chosen - Ecoffet
et al. (2021) does not prescribe a general approach for choosing goals. Instead, they choose goals by
using task-specific psuedocount tables.


D.2    LEXA
                                                        Algorithm 6 LEXA Goal Sampling
LEXA (Mendonca et al., 2021) trains a goal-
                                                    1: function G OAL D IRECTED E XPLORATION (. . .)
conditioned policy with model-based RL. It          2:     if i%2 = 0 then
trains two policies, an exploration policy and a    3:         Sample random goal g from buffer.
goal-conditioned “achiever” policy. The original    4:         Collect trajectory τ with π G (· | ·, g)
LEXA codebase was designed for image-based          5:     else
                                                    6:         Collect trajectory τ with π E
environments, so we implemented a state-based       7: return τ
LEXA agent by modifying DreamerV2 (Hafner
et al., 2021). To do so, we added the π G and π E
policies, goal-conditioning logic, and the temporal distance reward network.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3    O RIGINAL MEGA CODEBASE

We used the original MEGA codebase to train a MEGA and a Skewfit agent (Pitis et al., 2020;
Pong et al., 2019) for 1 million environmental steps to solve the Pointmaze, Ant Maze, and 3-Block
Stack tasks mentioned in Section 6. We used the original MEGA implementation with the same
hyperparameters except for their goal-conditioned policy training scheme.
MEGA proposes Rfaab, a custom goal relabeling strategy to train the goal-conditioned policy. By
default Rfaab relabels transitions with test time goals to train the goal-conditioned policy, which is not
possible in our unsupervised exploration setup. Therefore, we changed the Rfaab hyperparameters to
rfaab_0_4_0_5_1, which no longer grants access to test goals.
We find that both MEGA and Skewfit agent fail to scale to the harder environments (Ant Maze and
3-Block Stack) as seen in Figure 8. One reason could be that the MEGA codebase uses model-free
RL, which is more sample inefficient. Therefore, we reimplemented MEGA and Skewfit with LEXA,
the backbone MBRL agent that PEG uses as well.


                                                      MEGA        Skewfit
                                    Point Maze         90%          0%
                                     Ant Maze           0%          0%
                                   3-Block Stack        0%          0%

                         Figure 8: Success Rate of MEGA and Skewfit Agent



D.4    M ODEL - BASED MEGA

For model-based MEGA, we simply port over
MEGA’s KDE model. Conveniently, LEXA al-
ready trains a goal-conditioned value function,        Algorithm 7 MEGA Goal Sampling
which we use for filtering out goals by reachabil-      1: function G OAL D IRECTED E XPLORATION (. . .)
ity. We use the same KDE hyperparameters as             2:     g ← ming∈D pb(g)
the original MEGA paper. As seen in in Figure 4,        3:     τ ← GO-EXPLORE(g, π G , π E )
                                                        4: return τ
our MEGA implementation gets non-trivial suc-
cess rates, improving over the original MEGA
baseline.


D.5    M ODEL - BASED S KEWFIT
                                                       Algorithm 8 Skewfit Goal Sampling
For Skewfit, we port over the Skewfit base-
                                                   1: function G OAL D IRECTED E XPLORATION (. . .)
line in MEGA’s codebase. The implementation        2:     g ∼ g · pb(g)−1 | g ∈ D
is straightforward and similar to model-based      3:     τ ← GO-EXPLORE(g, π G , π E )
MEGA. Instead of picking the minimum density       4: return τ
goal, Skewfit picks goals inversely proportional
to their density. As seen in in Figure 4, our
Skewfit implementation gets non-trivial success rates.


D.6    P LAN 2E XPLORE
                                                       Algorithm 9 Plan2Explore
Our Plan2Explore baseline uses a Plan2Explore
                                                     1: function G OAL D IRECTED E XPLORATION (. . .)
exploration policy to gather data for the world      2:     Collect trajectory τ with π E
model and trains a goal-conditioned policy in        3: return τ
imagination. Our LEXA implementation al-
ready uses Plan2Explore, so this variant simply
requires us to only rollout the exploration policy in the real world.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

E.1   MPPI

MPPI is a popular optimizer for planning actions with dynamics models (Williams et al., 2015;
Nagabandi et al., 2019). Instead of planning sequences of actions, which grows linearly with horizon,
PEG only needs to “plan” with a goal variable, making the search space independent of the horizon.
First, we present a high-level summary of MPPI, and refer interested readers to Nagabandi et al.
(2019) for a more detailed look at MPPI.
The process begins by randomly sampling N goal candidates g from an initial distribution (see
below for more details). These candidates are then evaluated as described in Figure 2 - we generate
goal-conditioned trajectories for each goal gk through the world model, and compute the expected
exploration value Vk for each goal. This exploration value acts as the “score” for the goal candidate.
Once we have scores for each goal candidate, a Gaussian distribution is fit according to the rule:
                                               PN      γ·Vk
                                                k=0 (e      )(gk )
                                        µt =    PN                                                    (6)
                                                         γ·Vk )
                                                  k=0 (e


where γ is the reward weight hyperparameter. We then sample candidates from the computed
Gaussian, and repeat the process for multiple iterations.


MPPI initial distribution Throughout our paper, we initialize the MPPI optimizer with goal
vectors sampled uniformly at random from the full goal space. One alternative would have been
to restrict the initial candidates to lie in the agent’s replay buffer, but we found in practice that this
restriction made no difference and it was more convenient for implementation reasons to simply
sample uniformly at random from the unrestricted goal space (same as the state space), e.g. using the
joint limits of the various robot joints.


Figure 9: Performance of state space sampling variants on the Ant Maze. Removing state space
sampling (PEG-Restricted) does not degrade PEG performance, and adding state space sampling
(MEGA-Unrestricted) does not boost performance.


In Figure 9, we show results of running PEG with MPPI initialization from the replay buffer (“PEG-
Restricted”), in the Ant Maze environment. Its performance is virtually indistinguishable from the
original PEG method. This is to be expected, and is a sign that the optimizer is working well.
Could other methods benefit from sampling outside the replay buffer? In Figure 9 we allowed our
strongest baseline MEGA to also sample goals from outside the replay buffer (“MEGA-Unrestricted").
However, these methods rely on heuristic objectives for selecting goals (like “low density” of the
visited state distribution) which only approximate the correct goal-setting objective for states close to
the replay buffer. Therefore, “MEGA-Unrestricted” is unable to sample effective goals outside the
replay buffer, and fares very poorly. In contrast, PEG directly optimizes the exploration value of goal
states, and permits choosing meaningful goals even in this unrestricted setting. This is an advantage,
since it permits optimizing over a larger space of goal candidates, which leads to better goals.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2    RUNTIME

                    Total Runtime (Hours)     Episodes    Episode Length      Seconds per Episode
     Point Maze              16                12000            50                    4.8
       Walker                16                5000            150                  11.52
      AntMaze                48                2000            500                   86.4
    3-Block Stack            48                6666            150                   25.9

                               Figure 10: Runtimes per experiment.


The runtime and resource usage between methods did not differ significantly, as everything is
implemented on top of the backbone LEXA model-based RL agent. Note that model-free agents tend
to run significantly faster than model-based agents, but fail to explore and optimize good policies.
See Appendix D where we found model-free variants of MEGA and Skewfit failed to learn at all.
Runtime is dominated by neural network updates of the policies and world model, not the goal
selection routine defined by each method. Each seed was run on 1 GPU (Nvidia 2080ti or Nvidia
3090) and 4 CPUs, and required 11GB of GPU memory. See Figure 10 for training time.

                                               Seconds / Episode
                                    PEG:             0.51
                                   MEGA:             0.48
                                   SkewFit:          0.46

                               Figure 11: Runtime for goal selection.


Next, we benchmarked the goal selection procedure for PEG and the other goal selection baselines in
the block stacking environment and recorded the average wall clock time in Figure 11.
We can see that there is little difference in speed between methods, and the overhead introduced
by PEG goal selection is minimal to LEXA, and competitive with other goal selection baselines.
Because LEXA does not select goals, it finishes up to an hour earlier than goal setting methods in our
experiments. As a sidenote, the times reported above are amortized over episodes, since we compute
a set of 50 goals every 50 episodes for all methods, rather than computing 1 goal per episode.

E.3    H YPERPARAMETERS

For parameter tuning, we used the default hyperparameters of the LEXA backbone MBRL agent
(e.g. learning rate, MLP size, etc.) and kept them constant across all baselines. PEG only has 1
hyperparameter that requires tuning - the reward weight, which affects the MPPI update distribution.
The higher the weight, the more we update the goal sampling distribution towards high-reward
trajectories. For each experiment, we tried weight values of (1, 2, 10) by running 1-2 seeds of PEG
for each value. We used a weight of 1, 2, 2, 10 for the 4 experiments respectively . PEG uses
MPPI, a sample-based optimizer, to optimize the objective. While MPPI has hyperparameters such
as the number of samples and number of iteration rounds, these are easy to tune, since optimizer
performance increases with the amount of samples and iterations. We therefore just choose as many
samples (2000 candidates) and rounds (5 optimization rounds) as we can while keeping training time
reasonable.

F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

F.1    PEG WITH OTHER EXPLORATION METHODS

While we chose to train our exploration policy and value function with Plan2Explore, PEG can
work with any exploration method as long as it provides an exploration reward and policy. Random
Network Distillation (RND) is another powerful exploration method that rewards discovering new


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Figure 12: P2E vs. RND


states. We run both variants with 5 seeds in the Ant environment Figure 12. We find that the RND
variant still explores the environment, albeit not as well as P2E. We hypothesize P2E exploration is
particularly synergistic with our model-based RL framework, since the P2E explorer explicitly seeks
transitions (s, a, s0 ) that improve the model. As the model accuracy increases, so does the quality of
the goals generated by PEG .

F.2   MPPI VS CEM FOR G OAL O PTIMIZATION


                                     Figure 13: MPPI vs. CEM

We investigate the impact of the goal optimizer on PEG . We choose two popular optimizers, MPPI
and CEM, to optimize our objective, and run 5 seeds of each variant in the stacking environment. As
seen in Fig. 13, the two agents perform similarly, showing that the PEG objective is robust to the
choice of optimizer.

F.3   D OES CONDITIONING ON PEG GOALS MAXIMIZE EXPLORATION ?


Figure 14: PEG exploration in a U-maze. Brown background dots: explored states, commanded goals:
?, resulting paths: colored lines. (Left) PEG optimizes directly for exploration, even setting unseen
goals, and achieving farther paths. (Right) Setting goals at the frontier of the seen state distribution
yields less exploration.

We assess the importance of accounting for the goal-conditioned policy’s capabilities. To do so, we
evaluate if states coming from a policy conditioned on PEG goals are more novel than states coming


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


from the same policy conditioned on other goal strategies. In Figure 14, we take a partially trained
agent and its replay buffer, and plot the proposed goals and resulting trajectories for PEG and MEGA
(called Frontier in the figure). We find that PEG goals lead the ant to the top left more often. This
figure is also used in the intro for exposition.

F.4   M ORE GOALS FOR 3-B LOCK S TACKING


Figure 15: Performance of agents evaluated on different types of goals in the 3-Block environment.All
methods are run with 10 seeds. Easy goals require picking up one block, medium goals require
stacking two blocks, and hard goals require stacking all 3 blocks.


We have defined three types of goals of increasing difficulty - picking up a single block (“Easy”),
stacking two blocks (“Medium”), and stacking three blocks (“Hard”). For each goal type, we set
specific evaluation goals by varying the location of the pick / stack as well as the choice and ordering
of the blocks. In this way, we create 3 distinct Easy goals, 6 Medium goals, and 6 Hard goals.
First, PEG remains clearly the strongest at 3-block stacking (Hard) as seen in Figure 15. The
difficulty-based task grouping permits more interesting analysis: PEG performs competitively with
the best approaches on the Easy goals, and its gains over baselines are larger for Medium and Hard
goals where exploration is most required. On these harder categories of tasks, PEG is both quickest
to achieve non-trivial performance (indicating the onset of exploration) and also achieves the highest
peak performance.
An interesting side note here is that better exploration tends to create greater challenges for multi-task
goal-conditioned policy function approximation with a fixed capacity policy network. Around the
0.5M steps mark, when PEG starts to achieve Hard goals, it grows marginally weaker on Easy
and Medium goals. This kind of “forgetting” is well-studied in the continual learning literature;
addressing this well may require expanding policy network capacity over time, as in progressive
networks.


                                                   22
