Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B EYOND CALIBRATION : ESTIMATING THE GROUPING
LOSS OF MODERN NEURAL NETWORKS

 Alexandre Perez-Lebel, Marine Le Morvan, Gaël Varoquaux
 Soda project team, Inria Saclay, Palaiseau, France
 {alexandre.perez,marine.le-morvan,gael.varoquaux}@inria.fr



                                              A BSTRACT

         The ability to ensure that a classifier gives reliable confidence scores is essential
         to ensure informed decision-making. To this end, recent work has focused on
         miscalibration, i.e., the over or under confidence of model scores. Yet calibration
         is not enough: even a perfectly calibrated classifier with the best possible accuracy
         can have confidence scores that are far from the true posterior probabilities. This
         is due to the grouping loss, created by samples with the same confidence scores
         but different true posterior probabilities. Proper scoring rule theory shows that
         given the calibration loss, the missing piece to characterize individual errors is
         the grouping loss. While there are many estimators of the calibration loss, none
         exists for the grouping loss in standard settings. Here, we propose an estimator to
         approximate the grouping loss. We show that modern neural network architectures
         in vision and NLP exhibit grouping loss, notably in distribution shifts settings,
         which highlights the importance of pre-production validation.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Validating the compliance of a model to a predefined set of specifications is important to control
operational risks related to performance but also trustworthiness, fairness or robustness to varying
operating conditions. It often requires that probability estimates capture the actual uncertainty of the
prediction, i.e. are close to the true posterior probabilities. Indeed, many situations call for probability
estimates rather than just a discriminant classifier. Probability estimates are needed when the decision
is left to a human decision maker, when the model needs to avoid making decisions if they are too
uncertain, when the context of model deployment is unknown at training time, etc.
To evaluate probabilistic predictions, statistics and decision theory have put forward proper scoring
rules (Dawid, 1986; Gneiting et al., 2007), such as the Brier or the log-loss. Strictly proper scoring
rules are minimized when a model produces the true posterior probabilities, which make them a valu-
able tool for comparing models and selecting those with the best estimated probabilities (e.g. Dawid
& Musio, 2014). What they do not provide though is a means of validating whether the best estimated
probabilities are good enough to be put into production, or whether further effort is needed to improve
the model. Indeed, proper scores compound the irreducible loss –due to the inherent randomness
of a problem, i.e. the aleatoric uncertainty– and the epistemic loss –which measures how far a model
is from the best possible one. For example, a classifier with a Brier score of 0.15 could have optimal
estimated probabilities (irreducible loss close to 0.15) or poor ones (irreducible loss close to 0).
Calibration errors are another tool to evaluate probabilistic predictions, and measuring them is an
active research topic in the machine learning community. (Kumar et al., 2019; Minderer et al., 2021;
Roelofs et al., 2022). The calibration error is in fact a component of proper scoring rules (Bröcker,
2009; Kull & Flach, 2015): it measures whether among all samples to which a calibrated classifier
gave the same confidence score, on average, a fraction equal to the confidence score is positive. Impor-
tantly, the calibration error can be evaluated efficiently as it does not require access to the ground truth
probabilities, but solely to their calibrated version. Calibration is however an incomplete characteriza-
tion of predictive uncertainty. It measures an aggregated error that is blind to potential individual errors
compensating each other. For example, among a group of individuals to which a calibrated cancer-risk
classifier assigns a probability of 0.6, a fraction of 60% actually has cancer. But a subgroup of them
could be composed of 100% cancer patients while another would only contain 20% of cancer patients.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In general, estimating the true posterior probabilities or obtaining individual guarantees is impossible
(Vovk et al., 2005; Barber, 2020). Recent works have thus attempted to refine guarantees on
uncertainty estimates at an intermediary subgroup level. In particular, Hébert-Johnson et al. (2018)
has introduced the notion of multicalibration, generalizing the notion of calibration within groups
studied in fairness (Kleinberg et al., 2016) to every efficiently-identifiable subgroup. Barber et al.
(2019); Barber (2020) defines subgroups-based coverage guarantees which lie in between the coarse
marginal coverage and the impossible conditional coverage guarantees. In a similar vein, we study
the remaining term measuring the discrepancy between the calibrated probabilities and the unknown
true posterior probabilities (Kull & Flach, 2015), i.e. the grouping loss, for which no estimation
procedure exists to date. In particular:
• We provide a new decomposition of the grouping loss into explained and residual components,
  together with a debiased estimator of the explained component as a lower bound (Section 4).
• We demonstrate on simulations that the proposed estimator can provide tight lower-bounds on the
  grouping loss (Section 5.1).
• We evidence for the first time the presence of grouping loss on pre-trained vision and language
  architectures, notably in distribution shifts settings (Section 5.2).


2    C ALIBRATION IS NOT ENOUGH

Calibration can be understood with a broad conceptual meaning of alignment of measures and
statistical estimates (Osborne, 1991). However, in the context of decision theory or classifiers, the
following definitions are used (Foster & Vohra, 1998; Gneiting et al., 2007; Kull & Flach, 2015):
True posterior probabilities: Q := P (Y = 1|X),
Confidence scores: S := f (X) score output by a classifier,
Calibrated scores: C := P (Y = 1|S) = E[Q | S], average true posterior probabilities for a score S.

Confusion about calibration A common confusion is to mistake confidence scores of a calibrated
classifier with true posterior probabilities and think that a calibrated classifier outputs true posterior
probabilities, which is false. We identified three main sources of confusion in the literature –see
Appendix A for specific quotes. First, the vocabulary used sometimes leaves room for ambiguity, e.g.,
posterior probabilities may refer to confidence scores or to the true posterior probabilities without
further specifications. Second, plain-English definitions of calibration are sometimes incorrect,
defining calibrated scores as the true posterior probabilities. Lastly, even when everything is correctly
defined, it is sometimes implicitly supposed that true posterior probabilities are close to the calibrated
scores. While it may be true in some cases, equating the two induces misconceptions.

Calibration with good accuracy does not imply good individual confidences It is tempt-
ing to think that a calibrated classifier with optimal accuracy should provide confidence scores
close to the true posterior probabilities. However, caution is
                                                                       1.0
necessary: Figure 1 shows a simple counterexample. The classi-                   S(X)           Q(X)
fier presented gives an optimal accuracy as its confidence scores                                    0.8
are always on the same side of the decision threshold as the                                         0.7
                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                  Output


true posterior probabilities. It is moreover calibrated, as for a
given score s (either 0.2 or 0.7 here), the expectation of Q over      0.5      decision threshold
the region where the confidence score is s is actually equal to         0.3
s. Yet, the confidence scores are not equal to Q as Q displays          0.2
variance over regions of constant scores. This variance can be          0.1
made as large as desired as long as both Q and S stay on the           0.0
same side of the decision threshold to preserve accuracy. The               1 X U([ 1, 1]) 1
flaws of a perfectly calibrated classifier that always predicts the Figure 1: A calibrated binary classi-
same score are typically due to variations of the true posterior fier with optimal accuracy and con-
probabilities over constant confidence scores. As we formalize fidence scores S(X) everywhere
below, such variations are captured by the grouping loss (Kull different from the true posterior
& Flach, 2015). Appendix B provides a more realistic variant probabilities Q(X).
of this example based on the output of a neural network.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     T HEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Notations Let (X, Y ) ∈ X × Y be jointly distributed random variables describing the features and
labels of a K-class classification task. Let ek be the one-hot vector of size K with its k th entry equal
to one. The label space Y = {e1 , . . . , eK } is the set of all one-hot vectors of size K. We assume that
labels are drawn according to the true posterior distribution Q    n = (Q1 , . . . , QK ) ∈ ∆K P
                                                                                               where Qk :=
                                                                                                         o
                                                                                            K
P (Y = ek |X) and ∆K is the probability simplex ∆K = (p1 , . . . , pK ) ∈ [0, 1] : k pk = 1 .
We consider a probabilistic classifier f giving scores S = f (X) with S = (S1 , . . . , SK ) ∈ ∆K .
Note that S and Q are random vectors since they depend on X. This section introduces the formal
definition of the grouping loss, which uses the concepts of calibrated scores as well as scoring rules.

3.1   C ALIBRATION IN A MULTI - CLASS SETTING

In multi-class settings various definitions of calibration give different trade offs between control
stringency and practical utility (Vaicenavicius et al., 2019; Kull et al., 2019). The strongest definition
controls the proportion of positives for groups of samples with the same vector of scores S.
Definition 3.1. A probabilistic classifier giving scores s = (s1 , . . . , sk ) is jointly calibrated if among
all instances getting score s, the class probabilities are actually equal to s:
Calibration                       P (Y = ek |S = s) = sk for k = 1, . . . , K.                              (1)
The score S being a vector of size K the number of classes, estimating the probability of Y
conditioned on S is a difficult task that requires many samples. A weaker notion of multi-class
calibration, introduced in Zadrozny & Elkan (2002), requires calibration for each class marginally:
Definition 3.2. A probabilistic classifier giving scores s = (s1 , . . . , sk ) is classwise-calibrated if
among all instances getting score sk , the probability of class k is actually equal to sk :
Classwise calibration               P (Y = ek |Sk = sk ) = sk for k = 1, . . . , K.                   (2)
As classwise calibration can still be challenging to estimate when the number of samples per class is
too small, an even weaker definition is used in the machine learning community (Guo et al., 2017).
Definition 3.3. A probabilistic classifier giving scores s = (s1 , . . . , sk ) is top-label-calibrated if
among all instances for which the confidence score of the predicted class is s, the probability that the
predicted class is the correct one is s:

Top-label calibration                    P Y = eargmax(s) | max(S) = s = s.                            (3)
Top-label calibration simplifies the problem by reducing it to a binary problem. However, it has
an important limitation (Vaicenavicius et al., 2019): as it only accounts for the confidence of the
predicted class, it does not tell whether smaller probabilities are also calibrated.

3.2   P ROPER SCORING RULES AND THEIR DECOMPOSITION

Scoring rules Scoring rules measure how well an estimated probability vector S explains the
observed labels Y . The two most widely used scoring rules are the log-loss and Brier score:
                             XK                                              XK
                                                                                             2
Log-loss : ϕLL (S, Y ) := −      Yk log Sk Brier score : ϕBS (S, Y ) :=          (Sk − Yk )    (4)
                                 k=1                                                  k=1
Scoring rules are defined per sample, and the score over a dataset is obtained by averaging over
samples. More generally, the expected score for rule ϕ of the estimated probability vector S
with regards to the class label Y drawn according to Q is given by sϕ (S, Q) := EY ∼Q [ϕ(S, Y )].
Proper scoring rules decompositions have been introduced in terms of their divergences rather than
their scores. The divergence between probability vectors S and Q is then defined as dϕ (S, Q) :=
sϕ (S, Q) − sϕ (Q, Q). The divergences for the Brier score and the log-loss read:
                               K
                               X                                                     K
                                                                                     X
                                              Qk                                                        2
Log-loss :    dLL (S, Q) :=          Qk log         Brier score :    dBS (S, Q) :=         (Sk − Qk )       (5)
                                              Sk
                               k=1                                                   k=1
Minimizing the Brier score in expectation thus amounts to minimizing the mean squared error
between S and the unknown Q. A scoring rule is said strictly proper if its divergence is non-negative
and dϕ (S, Q) = 0 implies S = Q. Both the log-loss and Brier score are strictly proper.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Scoring rules decomposition Let C be the calibrated scores in the sense of Definition 3.1, the
strongest one i.e., Ck = P (Y = ek |S = s) for k = 1, . . . , K. The divergence of strictly proper
scoring rules can be decomposed as (Kull & Flach, 2015):
                   E [dϕ (S, Y )] = E [dϕ (S, C)] + E [dϕ (C, Q)] + E [dϕ (Q, Y )]                     (6)
                                    |    {z     } |       {z    } |       {z     }
                                      Calibration: CL       Grouping: GL   Irreducible: IL

where the expectation is taken over Y ∼ Q and X. CL is the calibration loss. IL is the irreducible
loss which stems from the fact that one point may not have a deterministic label, making perfect
predictions impossible. GL is the grouping loss. Intuitively, while the calibration loss captures the
deviation of the expected score in a bin vs the expected posterior probabilities, the grouping loss
captures variations of the true posterior probabilities around their expectation. Together calibration
and grouping form the epistemic loss, capturing intrinsic the randomness of the best possible predictor.
The scoring rule decomposition (6) holds for top-label calibration (Definition 3.3) as it can be reduced
to a binary problem. In the case of classwise calibration, the extension is not straightforward in the
general case but we prove in Proposition C.3 that it holds for the Brier score and the log-loss.

4     C HARACTERIZATION OF THE GROUPING LOSS
In this section, we focus for simplicity on all settings where the calibrated scores can be expressed as
Ck = E [Yk |S], which includes binary classification as well as the multi-class setting with joint or
top-label calibration. For classwise calibration, Appendix C.9 shows that all the results presented in
this section also hold for the Brier score and log-loss.

4.1   R EWRITING THE GROUPING LOSS AS A FORM OF VARIANCE

To shed light on the grouping loss, we rewrite it using f -variances:
Definition 4.1 (f -variance). Let U, V : Ω → Rd be two random variables defined on the same
probability space, and function f : Rd → R. Assuming the required expectations exist, the f -variance
of U given V is:
                              Vf [U | V ] := E[f (U ) | V ] − f (E[U | V ]).

The f -variance corresponds to the Jensen gap. It is positive by Jensen’s inequality when f is convex.
Beyond positivity, it can be seen as an extension of the variance as using the square function for f
recovers the traditional notion of variance.
Lemma 4.1 (The grouping loss as an h-variance). Let h be the negative entropy of the scoring rule ϕ,
i.e. h : p 7→ −sϕ (p, p). The grouping loss GL of the classifier S with calibrated scores C = E[Q | S]
and scoring rule ϕ writes:
                                     E[dϕ (C, Q)] = E[Vh [Q | S]]                                  (7)
                                     |    {z    }
                                         GL(S)

The proof is given in Appendix C.1. In other words, the grouping loss associated to a scoring rule ϕ is
an h-variance of the true posterior probability Q around the average scores C on groups of same level
confidence S (Equation 7). In particular for the Brier score, the h-variance is a classical variance.
                                                                                                      It
measures discrepancy between Q and C with a squared norm: Vh [Q | S] = E ∥Q − C∥2 S . For
the log-loss, it is a Kullback-Leibler divergence: Vh [Q | S] = E[DKL (Q ∥ C) | S]. These expressions
highlight two challenges in estimating the grouping loss. First, it relies on the true posterior probabili-
ties Q, which we do not have access to. Second, it involves a conditioning on the confidence scores
S, which are difficult to estimate for continuous scores.

4.2   G ROUPING LOSS DECOMPOSITION AND LOWER - BOUND

As an h-variance of Q given S, evaluating the grouping loss requires access to Q(X) for any point
X. Unfortunately Q(X) is difficult to estimate, except in special settings – e.g. multiple labels per
sample as in Mimori et al. (2021). In fact, the scores S of a classifier are generally one’s best estimate
of Q, and the whole point of the grouping loss is to quantify how far this best estimate is from the
unknown oracle Q. We show that it is nevertheless possible to estimate a lower bound on the grouping
loss. On the level set where a classifier score is S, it is indeed possible to estimate the average of Q


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                 0.9
                                                                      X             E[Q|S, R2 ] = 0.8
Figure 2: Intuition. In the feature space X , the level set
of confidence S = 0.7 displays E[Q | S] = 0.7, which                  E[Q|S] = 0.7
we expect from a calibrated classifier. However, a par-                                  R2
tition of the level set into 2 regions R1 and R2 reveals                                                         Q
that E[Q | S, R1 ] = 0.6 while E[Q | S, R2 ] = 0.8, sug-                               R1
gesting a high grouping loss. Intra-region variances
                                                                                       E[Q|S, R1 ] = 0.6
Vh [Q | S, R1 ] and Vh [Q | S, R2 ] remain uncaptured.
                                                                                            Level set S = 0.7
                                                                                                                 0.5

on regions of the feature space. Since by definition Q is non-constant on the level set of a classifier
with non-zero grouping loss, it allows to capture part of the grouping loss (Figure 2). Intra-region
variance remains uncaptured but can be reduced by choosing smarter and more numerous regions in
the partition of the feature space. Theorem 4.1 formalizes this intuition:
Theorem 4.1 (Grouping loss decomposition). Let R : X → N be a partition of the feature space. It
holds that:
                          GL(S) = E[Vh [E[Q | S, R] | S]] + E[Vh [Q | S, R]]                        (8)
                                     |       {z         }    |      {z     }
                                           GLexplained (S)            GLresidual (S)

Moreover if the scoring rule is proper, then:                GL(S) ≥ GLexplained (S) ≥ 0.                        (9)

Appendix C.2 gives the proof by showing that the law of total variance is also valid for the h-variance,
which allows to decompose the grouping loss into explained and residual terms. GLexplained quantifies
the h-variance captured through the partition R, i.e. coarse-grained h-variance reflecting between-
region variations of Q, while GLresidual captures the remaining intra-region h-variance. Due to the
positivity of GLresidual , GLexplained is a lower-bound of the grouping loss that ranges between 0 and GL
depending on how much h-variance the partition captures. Importantly, while Vh [Q | S, R] cannot be
estimated because the oracle Q is unknown, it is possible to estimate E[Q | S, R] and thus GLexplained .

4.3     C ONTROLLING THE GROUPING LOSS INDUCED BY BINNING CLASSIFIER SCORES S

The grouping loss as well as GLexplained involve a conditioning on the confidence scores S, which
cannot be estimated by mere counting when the scores are continuous. To overcome this difficulty,
standard practice in calibration approximates the conditional expectation using a binning strategy:
the classifier scores are binned into a finite number of values (Definition 4.2).
Definition 4.2 (Binned classifier). Let S : X → ∆K be a classifier. Let                 1
                                                                                                  Bin edge
B := {Bj }1≤j≤J be a partition of ∆K . The binned version of S outputs                            GLinduced
the average of S on each bin:                                                                     C
          X →S                                                                                    CB
 SB :                                                                        (10)                 SB
          x 7→ E[S|S ∈ Bj ]     where Bj is the bin S(x) falls into.
The binned calibrated scores are defined by:                                     0
   CB := P (Y = 1|SB ) = E[Q | SB ] = E[C | SB ].                                  0         S          1
This is the approach taken by the popular Expected Calibration Error Figure 3: Binning in-
(ECE) (Naeini et al., 2015). However, the loss estimated for a binned flates the grouping loss.
classifier deviates from that of the original one. In particular, binning
biases the calibration loss downwards (Kumar et al., 2019). Here we show that on the contrary it
creates an upwards bias for the grouping loss. Binning a classifier S into SB boils down to merging
the level sets S into a finite number of larger level sets of confidence score SB . For example in
Figure 3, all level sets with S ∈ [0.5, 1] are merged into one level set of confidence SB = 0.75,
which artificially inflates the variance of Q in each bin. This intuition is formalized in Proposition 4.1
Proposition 4.1 (Binning-induced grouping loss). The grouping loss of the binned classifier GL(SB )
deviates from that of the original classifier GL(S) by an induced grouping loss GLinduced (S, SB ):
                           E[Vh [Q | SB ]] = E[Vh [Q | S]] + E[Vh [C | SB ]]                                    (11)
                           |     {z     }    | {z }          |     {z     }
                               GL(SB )              GL(S)          GLinduced (S,SB )

Moreover, if the scoring rule is proper:               GLinduced (S, SB ) ≥ 0.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix C.3 gives the proof. Proposition 4.1 shows that the difference between the grouping loss of
the binned and original classifier is given by the h-variance of the original calibrated scores in a bin.
This result provides an expression for GLinduced which can then be estimated as shown in Section 4.4.
Remark 1. Interestingly, the binning-induced grouping and calibration losses partly compensate
each other (Corollary C.1 in Appendix C.8).

Applying the decomposition of Theorem 4.1 to the binned classifier SB and accounting for binning
using Proposition 4.1, we obtain a new decomposition of the grouping loss:
Proposition 4.2 (Explained grouping loss accounting for binning).
                    GL(S) = GLexplained (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB ) + GLresidual (SB )                      (12)

If the scoring rule is proper, then:            GL(S) ≥ GLexplained (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB ) .           (13)
                                                        |                 {z                }
                                                                       GLLB (S,SB )


The proof is given in Appendix C.4. Importantly, contrary to the grouping loss, both terms in the
lower-bound (Equation 13) can be estimated. In the remainder of this paper, we will be interested in
the estimation and optimization of the lower bound GLLB (S, SB ).

4.4      G ROUPING LOSS ESTIMATION

We now derive a grouping-loss estimation procedure by focusing on each of its components in turn:
GLexplained (SB ) and GLinduced (S, SB ).

A debiased estimator for the explained grouping loss GLexplained (SB ) The most natural estimator
for the explained grouping loss is a plugin estimator, replacing E[Q | S, R] by the empirical means
of Y over each region. It is nonetheless generally biased. We show below that in the case of the
Brier scoring rule, a direct empirical estimation of GLexplained on the partition is biased upwards (cf
Appendix C.6), and propose a debiased estimator.
Proposition 4.3 (Debiased estimator for the Brier score). For all class k ∈ {1, . . . , K} and bin
                           (s,k)
s ∈ S, let n(s,k) (resp. nj ) be the number of samples belonging to level set R(s) (resp. region
  (s)
Rj ). We define the empirical average of Y over these regions as:
              (s,k)      1      X          (i)                  1                    X          (i)
            µ̂j     := (s,k)             Yk    and ĉ(s,k) = (s,k)                             Yk
                      n                                       n
                            j        (s)
                                  i:X (i) ∈Rj                                  i:X (i) ∈R(s)
                                                                           K X (s,k)
                                                                           X
                                                     c explained (SB ) =      n            c
                                                                                                (s,k)
      The debiased estimator of GLexplained is:      GL                                    GLexplained (SB )
                                                                                      n
                                                                           k=1 s∈S

with:
      (s,k)           X J  (s,k)
                          nj                          2   X J  (s,k) (s,k)
                                                              nj
                                                                                 (s,k)
                                                                     µ̂j (1 − µ̂j ) ĉ(s,k) (1 − ĉ(s,k) )

c explained (SB ) =                  (s,k)     (s,k)
GL                                 µ̂j     − ĉ         −                              −
                      j=1
                          n(s,k)                          j=1
                                                              n(s,k)    nj
                                                                          (s,k)
                                                                                −1       n(s,k) − 1
                      |              {z               }   |                      {z                      }
                         plugin estimator GL
                                          c plugin                           bias estimation GL
                                                                                             c bias

Appendix C.5 gives the proof, with a debiasing logic similar to Bröcker (2012). The leftmost term
corresponds to the plugin estimate: the estimator of the explained grouping loss (Theorem 4.1) with
sample estimators for the quantities of interest. The two rightmost terms represent the finite-sample
variance in estimating expectations over regions. They correct the upwards bias of the plugin estimate.

Estimation of the grouping loss induced by binning classifier scores. GLinduced (S, SB ) involves
the h-variance of the calibrated scores C inside each bin, thus its estimation requires C. A solution is
to estimate a continous calibration curve Ĉ, which amounts to a one-dimensional problem for which
various methods are available. In our experiments, we use a kernel-based method (e.g. LOWESS). It
is then easy to compute the h-variance of Ĉ inside each bin by evaluating Ĉ for all available samples.
The resulting expression of the estimator GLc induced is given in Appendix C.7.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A partition to minimize GLresidual In order to achieve the best possible lower-bound, we choose
partitions in Theorem 4.1 to minimize GLresidual . We use a decision tree with a loss corresponding to
the scoring rule –squared loss for Brier score– on the labels Y to define regions that minimize the
loss on a given level set of S. As this approach relies on Y , a train-test split is used to control for
overfitting: a partitioning of the feature space is defined using the leaves of the tree fitted on one part,
then the empirical means used in GL  c explained are estimated on the other part given this partitioning. In
the experiments of Section 5.2, we work in the output space of the penultimate layer of the networks.

5       E XPERIMENTAL STUDY
5.1     S IMULATIONS : FINER PARTITIONS GIVE A TIGHT GROUPING - LOSS LOWER BOUND

Here we investigate the behavior of our estimation procedure with respect to the number of bins and
number of regions on simulated data with known grouping loss. The importance of both corrections
- the binning-induced grouping loss (Proposition C.1) and the debiasing (Proposition 4.3) - is also
evaluated. For this, data Y ∈ {0, 1} is drawn according to a known true posterior probability Q
and we consider a calibrated logistic regression classifier for the scores S (details in Appendix B.2
and Figure 11). The estimation procedures are then applied according to two different scenarios.
First we vary the number of samples per region (e.g. region ratio) while the number of bins is fixed
(Figure 4a.). Then we vary the number of bins while the region ratio is fixed (Figure 4b.).
                a.                    b.
0.010
                                                         True GL     Figure 4: Simulation: estimat-
                                                         c plugin    ing the grouping loss lower bound
                                                         GL           c LB on a simulated problem (Ap-
                                                                     GL
0.005                                                    c bias
                                                         GL          pendix B.2, Figure 11). Right has a
                                                         c induced
                                                         GL          fixed ratio ## samples
                                                                                    regions = 30 per bin.
                                                         c LB        Bins are equal-width. Averaged
                                                         GL          curves are plotted with a ±1 stan-
0.000
           25   50    75       5      15      25                     dard deviation envelop.
         # samples                  # bins
         # regions per bin
For a fine-enough partition (a large number of regions, and hence a small region ratio), GL       c LB
provides a tight lower bound to the true grouping loss GL. If the average number of samples per
region becomes too small, some regions have less than two samples, which breaks the estimate (grayed
                                                                c plugin substantially overestimates the
out area in Figure 4a.). Conversely, the naive plugin estimate GL
                                                           c induced and GL
true grouping loss as it does not include the corrections GL              c bias . Figure 4b. shows that
to control the GLinduced due to binning, a reasonably large number of bins is needed, e.g. 15 as typical
to compute ECE. Given these bins, we suggest to use a tree to divide them in as many regions as
possible while controlling the probability of regions ending up with less than two samples, typically
targeting a region ratio of a dozen, to obtain the best possible lower bound GLc LB .

5.2     M ODERN NEURAL NETWORKS DISPLAY GROUPING LOSS

The grouping diagram: visualization of the grouping loss In a binary setting, calibration curves
display the calibrated scores C versus the confidence scores S of the positive class. To visualize the
heterogeneity among region scores in a level set, we add to this representation the estimated region
scores µ̂j , i.e. the fraction of positives in each region obtained from the partitioning of level sets
(Figure 5). The further apart the region scores are, the greater the grouping loss.

Vision We evaluate 15 vision models (listed on Figure 7) from PyTorch pre-trained on ImageNet-
1K (Deng et al., 2009). Here we report evaluation on ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021), an
ImageNet variant with 15 different renditions: paintings, toys, tattoos, origami... The dataset contains
30 000 images and 200 ImageNet classes. Appendix D reports evaluation on the validation set of
ImageNet-1K and ImageNet-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019), an ImageNet variant with corrupted
versions of ImageNet images. As often with many classes, the small number of samples per class
(50) does not allow to study the classwise calibration and grouping loss. Hence, following common
practice, we consider top-label versions (Definition 3.3). Appendix D gives experimental details.


                                                     7
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           100                                                        Figure 5: Grouping diagram. Calibration curve of a binned
                           (%)                        Sizes (s)
                                                        50            n (s)           binary classifier augmented with the estimated region scores µ̂j

                          Fraction of positives
                                                        320 j                         for a partitioning of each level set into 2 regions. Region sample
                                                        500                           sizes are plotted as a gradient color. The classifier is binned
                                                                                      into 10 equal-width bins whose sample sizes n(s) are given as an
                                                                       c(s)
                                                                                      histogram. A Clopper-Pearson 95% confidence interval is plotted
                                                                                      on the region scores. Regions for which the calibrated score ĉ(s)
                                     0
                                                                  s                   lie within this interval are grayed out.
                                                  0     Confidence score        1


       We find substantial grouping loss inside level sets for most networks on ImageNet-R (ConvNeXt Tiny
       and ViT L-16 in Figure 6, others in Appendix D.1), even after post-hoc recalibration (Figure 6 right).
       For instance, while ConvNext + Isotonic is calibrated (third graph), it is strongly over-confident in
       one part of the feature space and under-confident in the other, creating a high grouping loss.
       Figure 7 shows that the grouping loss varies across architectures, even with comparable accuracy.
       For example, ViT has a slightly better accuracy than ConvNeXt, but a lower estimated grouping
       loss. Post-hoc recalibration does not affect the grouping loss (Figure 6 right and Figure 7 right),
       leading to the same conclusions (see Appendix C.10 for the analytical impact of recalibration on the
       grouping loss). We observe the same effects on ImageNet-C (Appendix D.2), but little or none on
       ImageNet-1K (Appendix D.3). This suggests that stronger grouping loss arises in out-of-distribution
       settings. Visual inspection of the images suggests that the partitions capture heterogeneity coming
       from how realistic an image is, or the different rendition types (Appendix D.1).


                                                      a. ConvNeXt                       b. ViT                    c. ConvNeXt                                  d. ViT
                      100
Correct predictions (%)


                                                  Sizes                             Sizes                       Sizes                                  Sizes
                                                    33                               20                          333                                    94
                          75                        600                              750                         1000                                   750
                                                    979                              1241                        1577                                   1460
                          50

                          25                                                                                                        with                                 with
                                                                                                                                isotonic                             isotonic
                                                                                                                           recalibration                        recalibration
                             0
                                      0                     0.5               1 0           0.5         1   0              0.5                 1 0              0.5                          1
                                                  Confidence score                  Confidence score            Confidence score                       Confidence score

       Figure 6: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class (maxk Sk )
       for ConvNeXt Tiny and ViT L-16 on ImageNet-R, without post-hoc recalibration (a. and b.) and with
       isotonic recalibration (c. and d.). In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2
       regions with a decision stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.

                                                                                                                            No recalibration Isotonic
       Figure 7: Evaluating vision models: a de-                                                          ViT B-16                                                           30.1
       biased estimate of the grouping loss lower                                                 ConvNeXt Tiny                                                              29.0
                c LB (Equation 13) and an estimate                                                        Inception                                                          27.3
       bound GL                                                                                   Wide ResNet-50                                                             25.9
                                                                                                                                                                                    Accuracy↑ (%)


                                c both accounting
       of the calibration loss CL,                                                                     ResNeXt-50                                                            25.1
                                                                                                   EfficientNet-B0                                                           24.1
       for binning, evaluated on ImageNet-R and                                                     DenseNet-121                                                             23.9
       sorted by model accuracy. Partitions R are                                                       GoogLeNet                                                            23.3
                                                                                                  RegNet y 400mf                                                             20.9
       obtained from a decision tree partitioning                                                        ResNet-18                                                           20.4
       constrained to create at most # samples in bin/30                                            MobileNet V2                                                             18.9
                                                                                                    MNASNet 0.5                                                              15.9
       regions in each bin. Isotonic regression is                                                         VGG-11                                      c LB
                                                                                                                                                       GL                    15.8
       used for post-hoc recalibration of the models                                                ShuffleNet 0.5                                     c
                                                                                                                                                       CL
                                                                                                                                                                             14.6
                                                                                                           AlexNet                                                           12.6
       (right). Table 1 gives the raw values.                                                                       0.00         0.05   0.10    0.15    0.20 0.00     0.05
                                                                                                                                   c LB + CL
                                                                                                                                   GL     c


                                                                                                    8
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     a. In-distribution    b. Out-of-distribution          c. In-distribution       d. Out-of-distribution
                        100
Fraction of positives (%)            Sizes
                                      725
                                                                Sizes
                                                                 1352
                                                                                           Sizes
                                                                                            198
                                                                                                                       Sizes
                                                                                                                        151
                            75        10000                      2500                       12000                       7500
                                      15411                      3951                       22048                       14294
                            50

                            25
                                                                                                    with isotonic               with isotonic
                                                                                                    recalibration               recalibration
                             0
                                 0            0.5         1 0           0.5        1   0            0.5         1 0             0.5         1
                                     Confidence score           Confidence score           Confidence score            Confidence score

        Figure 8: NLP: Fraction of positives versus confidence score of the positive class of fine-tuned BART
        for zero-shot classification on the test set of Yahoo Answers Topics without post-hoc recalibration (a.
        and b.) and with isotonic recalibration (c. and d.). The test set is either restricted to the 5 topics on
        which the network was trained (in-distribution) or to 5 unseen topics (out-of-distribution). In each
        level set clusters are built with a balanced decision stump and a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


       NLP We evaluate the grouping loss on BART Large (Lewis et al., 2019) from HuggingFace
       pre-trained on the Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference dataset (Williams et al., 2018). We
       consider zero-shot topic classification on the Yahoo Answers Topics dataset, composed of questions
       and topic labels. There are 60 000 test samples and 10 topics. The model is fine-tuned on 5 out of the
       10 topics of the training set, totaling 700 000 samples. Given a question title and a hypothesis (e.g.
       “This text is about Science & Mathematics”), the model outputs its confidence in the hypothesis to be
       true. The classification being zero-shot, the hypothesis can be about an unseen topic. We evaluate the
       model separately on the 5 unseen topics and the 5 seen topics of the test set. Both results in a binary
       classification task on whether the hypothesis is correct or not. Appendix E gives experimental details.
        The partitioning reveals grouping loss in the out-of-distribution setting both before and after recali-
        bration (Figure 8b. and d.). However, we found no evidence of grouping loss in the in-distribution
        setting. As in vision, this suggests that out-of-distribution settings lead to stronger grouping loss.

         6                   D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
        A working estimator of grouping loss While calibrated scores can be estimated by solving a one-
        dimensional problem, the grouping loss is much harder to estimate: it measures the discrepancy to the
        true posterior probabilities, which are unknown. We show that combining debiased partition-based
        estimators with an optimized partition captures the grouping loss well. This procedure allows us to
        characterize the grouping loss of popular neural networks for the first time. We find that in vision and
        NLP, models can be calibrated –if needed via post-hoc recalibration– but significant heterogeneity of
        errors remains, e.g. ConvNeXt has larger grouping loss than calibration loss.
        Several avenues could be explored to better capture the grouping loss. Complex level sets may not be
        approximated well with the partitioning defined by a tree, leaving a large residual in th. 4.1. In this case,
        the estimated grouping loss may only be a rather loose lower bound. Such a lower bound is neverthe-
        less useful to reject models with high grouping loss. In addition, we apply the tree on the penultimate
        layer of neural networks, where class boundaries are simplified. Finally, complementing the proposed
        lower bound with an upper bound would also allow to identify models without grouping loss.

      We need to talk about grouping loss Model should be evaluated not only on aggregate measures,
      but also on their individual predictions, using grouping loss. The presence of grouping loss means that
      the model is systematically under-confident for certain groups of individuals and over-confident for
      others, questioning the use of such models for individual decision making. The presence of grouping
      loss also means that downstream tasks relying on confidence scores can be hindered, such as causal
      inference with propensity scores or simulation-based inference. Finally, this heterogeneity raises
      fairness concerns. In fact, the grouping loss and our lower bound are fundamentally related to fairness
      –see sufficiency and group calibration (Barocas et al., 2017, chap 3), and multicalibration (Kleinberg
      et al., 2016). We hope that our measure of grouping loss will spur new research in this area.


                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

All datasets are publicly available (ImageNet-R, ImageNet-C, ImageNet-1K, Yahoo Answers Top-
ics) and all models involved are pre-trained and publicly available on PyTorch and HuggingFace.
Simulated examples are described in Appendix B. Detailed experimental methods are given in
Appendix D and E. Proofs of all theoretical results are listed in Appendix C. The source code for
the implementation of the algorithm, experiments, simulations and figures is available on GitHub:
https://github.com/aperezlebel/beyond_calibration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge support in part by the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche under Grant
ANR-20-CHIA-0026 (LearnI).

R EFERENCES
Rina Foygel Barber. Is distribution-free inference possible for binary regression? Electronic Journal
  of Statistics, 14(2):3487–3524, apr 2020.

Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J. Candès, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. The limits of
  distribution-free conditional predictive inference. Information and Inference, 10(2):455–482, mar
  2019. ISSN 20498772. doi: 10.48550/arxiv.1903.04684.

Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning. Nips tutorial,
  2017.

Jochen Bröcker. Reliability, sufficiency, and the decomposition of proper scores. Quarterly Journal
  of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology
  and physical oceanography, 135(643):1512–1519, 2009.

Jochen Bröcker. Estimating reliability and resolution of probability forecasts through decomposition
  of the empirical score. Climate dynamics, 39(3):655–667, 2012.

A. P. Dawid. Probability forecasting, 1986.

A. Philip Dawid and Monica Musio. Bayesian model selection based on proper scoring rules.
  Bayesian Analysis, 10:479–499, 9 2014. doi: 10.1214/15-BA942.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Peter A. Flach. Classifier Calibration. Encyclopedia of Machine Learning and Data Mining, pp. 1–8,
  2016.

Dean P Foster and Rakesh V Vohra. Asymptotic calibration. Biometrika, 85(2):379–390, 1998.

Matthieu Garcin and Samuel Stéphan. Credit scoring using neural networks and SURE posterior
 probability calibration. 2021.

Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E. Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102, 2007. ISSN 01621459. doi: 10.1198/
  016214506000001437.

Tilmann Gneiting, Fadoua Balabdaoui, and Adrian E Raftery. Probabilistic forecasts, calibration
  and sharpness. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 69(2):
  243–268, 2007.

Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kartik Gupta, Amir Rahimi, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Thomas Mensink, Cristian Sminchisescu,
  and Richard Hartley. Calibration of Neural Networks using Splines. 2020. ISSN 2331-8422.
Ursula Hébert-Johnson, Michael P Kim, Omer Reingold, and Guy N Rothblum. Multicalibration:
  Calibration for the (Computationally-Identifiable) Masses, jul 2018. ISSN 2640-3498.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common corrup-
  tions and perturbations. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. ICCV,
  2021.
Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent Trade-Offs in the Fair
  Determination of Risk Scores. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, LIPIcs, 67, sep
  2016. ISSN 18688969. doi: 10.48550/arxiv.1609.05807.
Max Kuhn and Kjell Johnson. Applied predictive modeling. 2013.
Meelis Kull and Peter Flach. Novel decompositions of proper scoring rules for classification: Score
 adjustment as precursor to calibration. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and
 Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 68–85. Springer, 2015.
Meelis Kull, Miquel Perello Nieto, Markus Kängsepp, Telmo Silva Filho, Hao Song, and Peter Flach.
 Beyond temperature scaling: Obtaining well-calibrated multi-class probabilities with dirichlet
 calibration. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Ananya Kumar, Percy S Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Verified uncertainty calibration. In H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
 Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. pp. 7871–7880, 10 2019.
Takahiro Mimori, Keiko Sasada, Hirotaka Matsui, and Issei Sato. Diagnostic uncertainty calibration:
  Towards reliable machine predictions in medical domain. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu
  (eds.), Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  volume 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3664–3672. PMLR, 13–15 Apr
  2021.
Matthias Minderer, Josip Djolonga, Rob Romijnders, Frances Hubis, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby,
 Dustin Tran, and Mario Lucic. Revisiting the calibration of modern neural networks. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory F. Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated prob-
 abilities using bayesian binning. Proceedings of the ... AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015:2901–2907, 2015.
Christine Osborne. Statistical calibration: a review. International Statistical Review/Revue Interna-
  tionale de Statistique, pp. 309–336, 1991.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward
 Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
  Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
  library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 12 2019. ISSN 10495258.
Rebecca Roelofs, Nicholas Cain, Jonathon Shlens, and Michael C Mozer. Mitigating bias in
  calibration error estimation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 4036–4054. PMLR, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Juozas Vaicenavicius, David Widmann, Carl Andersson, Fredrik Lindsten, Jacob Roll, and Thomas
  Schön. Evaluating model calibration in classification. In The 22nd International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3459–3467. PMLR, 2019.
Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world.
  Springer US, 2005. ISBN 0387001522. doi: 10.1007/b106715.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
  sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
 American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
  nologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 1112–1122. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2018.
Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Transforming classifier scores into accurate multiclass probabil-
  ity estimates. In Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
  discovery and data mining, pp. 694–699, 2002.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS



Table of Contents
     A Examples of confusing statements on calibration                                             14

     B Examples of accurate and calibrated classifiers with high grouping loss                     14
       B.1 Arbitrary link between true posterior probabilities Q and confidence scores S . .       14
       B.2 Realistic example based on neural network’s output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16

     C Proofs                                                                                      19
       C.1 Lemma 4.1: The grouping loss as an h-variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
       C.2 Theorem 4.1: Grouping loss decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
       C.3 Proposition 4.1: Binning-induced grouping loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
       C.4 Proposition 4.2: Explained grouping loss accounting for binning . . . . . . . . .       20
       C.5 Proposition 4.3: Debiased estimator for the Brier score . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
       C.6 The plugin estimator for the grouping loss lower bound is biased upwards. . . . .       23
       C.7 Estimator for the induced grouping loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
       C.8 Analysis of binning-induced errors for the Brier score . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
       C.9 Extension to classwise calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26
       C.10 Impact of recalibration on the grouping loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29

     D ImageNet                                                                                    30
       D.1 ImageNet-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30
       D.2 ImageNet-C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
       D.3 ImageNet-1K validation set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31

     E NLP                                                                                         32

     Grouping diagrams of all vision networks                                                      35
        ImageNet-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
        ImageNet-C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
        ImageNet-1K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    46


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E XAMPLES OF CONFUSING STATEMENTS ON CALIBRATION
Here we detail specific examples of confusing statements on calibration in the literature. We choose
most of these examples in well-cited and well regarded works.

       • Kuhn & Johnson (2013): “We desire that the estimated class probabilities are reflective of
         the true underlying probability of the sample. That is, the predicted class probability (or
         probability-like value) needs to be well-calibrated. To be well-calibrated, the probabilities
         must effectively reflect the true likelihood of the event of interest.”
         The authors write that it is desirable to have confidence scores S reflective of the true
         posterior probabilities Q, which is indeed desirable as discussed in Section 1. However,
         they write this is obtained through calibration. Although post-hoc recalibration makes the
         confidence scores closer to Q in some sense, there is an implicit shortcut. As pointed out
         in Section 2 and Appendix B, calibration, even with optimal accuracy, does not guarantee
         confidence scores S to be close to the true posterior probabilities Q.
       • (Gupta et al., 2020): “A classifier is said to be calibrated if the probability values it associates
         with the class labels match the true probabilities of correct class assignments.”
         The authors write that calibration is matching the confidence scores S of a classifier to the
         true posterior probabilities Q. In fact, calibration is matching the confidence scores S to the
         calibrated scores C, which can be far from the true posterior probabilities Q as pointed out
         in Section 2 and Appendix B.
       • Garcin & Stéphan (2021): “Ideally, we would like machine learning models to output
         accurate probabilities in the sense that they reflect the real unobserved probabilities. This is
         exactly the purpose of calibration techniques, which aim to map the predicted probabilities
         to the true ones in order to reduce the probability distribution error of the model.”
         The authors write that calibration is outputting confidence scores S that are true posterior
         probabilities Q. As in the previous citations, calibration is outputting calibrated scores C,
         which can be far from Q (Section 2 and Appendix B).
       • Flach (2016): “A probabilistic classifier is well calibrated if, among the instances receiving
         a predicted probability vector p, the class distribution is approximately distributed as p.
         Hence, the classifier approximates, in some sense, the class posterior.” “The main point
         is that knowing the true class posterior allows the classifier to make optimal decisions. It
         therefore makes sense for a classifier to (approximately) learn the true class posterior.”
         Here, calibration is rightly defined as outputting confidence scores S that are equal to the
         calibrated scores C. However, by writing that confidence scores S of a calibrated classifier
         approximate the true class posterior Q, the author makes an implicit assumption that the
         calibrated scores C are close to the true posterior probabilities Q, which is not guaranteed
         in theory as pointed out in Section 2 and Appendix B.

B     E XAMPLES OF ACCURATE AND CALIBRATED CLASSIFIERS WITH HIGH
      GROUPING LOSS

Here we build simple binary classification examples of calibrated classifiers with optimal accuracy
having their confidence scores far from the true posterior probabilities. In Appendix B.1 we build
examples with an arbitrary link between true posterior probabilities Q and confidence scores S (up to
a limit to keep the classifier’s accuracy optimal). In Appendix B.2 we build a more realistic example
based on the output of a neural network.

B.1   A RBITRARY LINK BETWEEN TRUE POSTERIOR PROBABILITIES Q AND CONFIDENCE
      SCORES S

To show that calibration, even combined with optimal accuracy, does not impose strong constraints on
how close the true posterior probabilities Q should be from the classifiers’ confidence scores S, we
build examples in which Q and S have an arbitrary link. For simplicity we consider binary examples
with a one-dimensional feature space X . These can be extended to multiple dimensions by projecting
onto a vector ω (via x 7→ ω T x).


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 h : s 7→ −s2 + 2s                                                            h : s 7→ min(2s, 1)
1                                   1                 Negative                    1                               1                 Negative
                                                      Positive                                                                      Positive


                             True probability Q


                                                                                                           True probability Q
1                                                                                 1
2                                                                                 2

                   S(X)                                                                           S(X)
                   Q(X)                                                                           Q(X)
0                    X
                                    0                                             0                X
                                                                                                                  0
    2       X            2                        0     Confidence score S   1        2   X            2                        0     Confidence score S   1

Figure 9: Calibrated but not accurate. Example of calibrated classifiers S constructed from links
h following the procedure described in Appendix B.1. The accuracy of these two classifiers is not
optimal as Q and S are not on the same side of the decision threshold ( 12 ) wherever Q ̸= 12 . Refer to
Figure 10 for an example with optimal accuracy. Calibration curves (in black on 2nd and 4th plot) are
obtained from 1 million samples.


The idea is to build a classifier that outputs confidence scores having at most two antecedents each.
One antecedent should have its true posterior probability Q at an arbitrary distance +∆ from the
associated confidence score S, while the other has a distance −∆. Scores with only one antecedent
should have Q = S. This combined with an equal density weight of X onto the two antecedents
guarantees calibration: E[Q | S] = S. To maintain the classifier’s accuracy optimal, the offset ∆ is
constrained to keep Q and S on the same side of the decision threshold.
To achieve this, we cut the one-dimensional feature space X into three parts: R⋆+ , R⋆− and {0}.
As a classifier, we take an even function S(X) with S −1 ({0}) reduced to a singleton so that each
confidence score has either two antecedents (one in R⋆+ and one in R⋆− ) or one antecedent in {0}.
To assign an equal weight to each antecedent, we choose a symmetric distribution for X , e.g. a
standard normal distribution centered on 0. We build the true posterior probabilities Q from deviations
h : [0, 1] → [0, 1] and g : [0, 1] → [0, 1] of the confidence scores S in R⋆+ and R⋆− :
                              Q : x 7→ 1x>0 h(S(x)) + 1x<0 g(S(x)) + 1x=0 S(0)                                                                             (14)
For S to be calibrated, deviations must average to identity, i.e. ∀s ∈ S(R), 21 (h(s) + g(s)) = s. A
proof of this statement is given below:

Proof.
E[Q(X) | S(X)] = E[1X>0 | S(X)] h(S(X)) + E[1X<0 | S(X)] g(S(X)) + E[1X=0 | S(X)] S(0)
               = P (X > 0|S(X)) h(S(X))+P (X < 0|S(X)) g(S(X))+P (X = 0|S(X)) S(0)
               = 1/21S(X)̸=S(0) (h(S(X)) + g(S(X))) + 1S(X)=S(0) S(0)


since P (X > 0|S(X)) = P (X < 0|S(X)) = 21 1S(X)̸=S(0) .
Hence, S(X) calibrated ⇔ E[Q(X) | S(X)] = S(X) ⇔ 21 (h(S(X)) + g(S(X))) = S(X).

From here, we choose h : [0, 1] → [0, 1] and define g : s 7→ 2s−h(s). Note that to keep g(s) ∈ [0, 1],
h is constrained by: ∀s ∈ S(R), 2s − 1 ≤ h(s) ≤ 2s. At this point of the procedure, classifiers S
may not have an optimal accuracy. Figure 9 shows two examples of links h, one of which saturates
the constraint h(s) <= min(2s, 1).
To make the classifiers accurate, the deviations h(s) − s should be small enough to keep S and Q on
the same side of the decision threshold. This adds two constraints on h: ∀s ∈ S(R)∩[0, 1/2[, h(s) < 12
and ∀s ∈ S(R) ∩ [1/2, 1], h(s) ≥ 12 (with the convention that a score of exactly 12 predicts the positive
class). Figure 10 (left) shows a classifier built following the above procedure. Figure 10 (right) shows
that we can release the constraint 1/2(h(s) + g(s)) = s if we tweak the distribution of X to adapt the
weights between the two antecedents accordingly (and take e.g. g(s) = 1h(s)<s ).


                                                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         h : s 7→ max(min(2s, 12 )), 2s − 1)                                              h : s 7→ 12 10<s<1 + 1s=1
1                                   1                 Negative                    1                              1                 Negative
                                                      Positive                                                                     Positive


                             True probability Q


                                                                                                          True probability Q
1                                                                                 1
2                                                                                 2

                   S(X)                                                                          S(X)
                   Q(X)                                                                          Q(X)
0                    X
                                    0                                             0               X
                                                                                                                 0
    2        X           2                        0     Confidence score S   1        2    X          2                        0     Confidence score S   1

Figure 10: Calibrated and optimal accuracy. Example of calibrated classifiers S constructed
from links h following the procedure described in Appendix B.1. The accuracy of these two
classifiers is optimal as Q and S are on the same side of the decision threshold ( 12 ) wherever Q ̸= 12 .
However, confidence scores S are almost everywhere different from the true posterior probabilities
Q. Calibration curves (in black on 2nd and 4th plot) are obtained from 1 million samples.



B.2     R EALISTIC EXAMPLE BASED ON NEURAL NETWORK ’ S OUTPUT

The examples of Appendix B.1, while proving our point, are quite unusual in practice especially in
the choice of classifier S. In this section we build a more realistic example based on the output of
a neural network. We focus on a binary classification setting with a feature space X being at least
two-dimensional. The classifier is taken as a sigmoid of ω T X (akin to the last layer of a neural
network predicting the confidence score of the positive class). Based on this choice of model, we
build a class of calibrated and accurate classifiers with confidence scores S far from the true posterior
probabilities Q.
The idea is to create heterogeneity in the blind spot of calibration, i.e. orthogonally to ω. The
perturbations creating heterogeneity must balance each other out to keep the classifier calibrated.
To achieve this, we define:
    • d ≥ 2 the dimension of the feature space X .
    • ω ∈ Rd , the last layer’s weights.
    • φ : R → [0, 1] the link function mapping ω T x to confidence scores, e.g. a sigmoid.
    • S : x ∈ Rd 7→ φ(ω T x) ∈ [0, 1] the classifier’s confidence scores of the positive class.
    • ω⊥ ∈ Rd such that ω T ω⊥ = 0, the direction in which heterogeneity will be introduced.
    • ψ : R → [−1, 1] an odd perturbation introducing balanced heterogeneity along ω⊥ .
    • ∆max : x 7→ min(1−S(x), S(x)) modulating the range of the perturbation to keep Q ∈ [0, 1].
    • Q : x ∈ Rd 7→ S(x) + ψ(ω⊥    T
                                     x)∆max (x) ∈ [0, 1] the constructed true posterior probabilities.
    • X ∼ N (0, Σ) the data distribution, with Σ ∈ Rd×d having ω and ω⊥ among its eigenvectors.
With the above construction, the classifier S is calibrated. Indeed,

                                                 T

                    E[Q(X) | S(X)] = S(X) + E ψ(ω⊥ X)∆max (X) S(X)                                                                                        (15)
                                                 T

                                   = S(X) + E ψ(ω⊥ X) S(X) ∆max (X)                                                                                       (16)

                                                        T

since ∆max (X) is a function of S(X). We have E ψ(ω⊥      X) S(X) = 0 by construction: ψ is odd
and the distribution of X has a symmetric weight along ω⊥ since Σ is aligned on ω and ω⊥ . Hence
E[Q(X) | S(X)] = S(X). Figure 11 shows two examples generated with this procedure. However,
it is not yet accurate. As in Appendix B.1, the perturbation should be constrained to keep Q and S
on the same side of the decision threshold to keep the accuracy optimal. This is simply achieved by
defining ∆max : x 7→ min(1−S(x), S(x), | 12 − S(x)|).


                                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                a. Classifier S(X) = (1 + exp(−ω T X))−1
                                                S(X) = ( T X)  S(X)
                                        2                           1



                                                                              1



                                              X2
                                                                              2


                                                       S = 12
                                              2                               0
                                                  2             X1        2


                            b. Perturbation ψ(z) = 2(1 + exp(−z))−1 − 1
         (X) = ( T X) max (X)       (X)               Q(X) = S(X) + (X)   Q(X)
 2                                    1                                       1          1
                                      2                                                                    Negative
                                                                                                           Positive


                                      0                                       1   True probability Q
X2


                                                                              2



            T X=0                                      S(X) = 12
 2                                        1                                   0          0
     2          X1              2         2
                                                  2             X1        2                            0     Confidence score S   1

                                     c. Perturbation ψ(z) = 1z>0 − 1z<0
         (X) = ( T X) max (X)       (X)               Q(X) = S(X) + (X)   Q(X)
 2                                    1                                       1          1
                                      2                                                                    Negative
                                                                                                           Positive
                                                                                  True probability Q


                                      0                                       1
X2


                                                                              2



            T X=0                                      S(X) = 12
 2                                        1                                   0          0
     2          X1              2         2
                                                  2             X1        2                            0     Confidence score S   1

Figure 11: Calibrated but not accurate. Example of a calibrated classifier S constructed following
the procedure described in Appendix B.2. Its accuracy is not optimal as Q and S are not on the same
side of the decision threshold ( 12 ) wherever Q ̸= 12 . Refer to Figure 12 for an example with optimal
accuracy. Calibration curves (in black on last column) are obtained from 1 million samples.


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                a. Classifier S(X) = (1 + exp(−ω T X))−1
                                                S(X) = ( T X)  S(X)
                                        2                           1



                                                                              1


                                              X2
                                                                              2


                                                       S = 12
                                              2                               0
                                                  2             X1        2


                            b. Perturbation ψ(z) = 2(1 + exp(−z))−1 − 1
         (X) = ( T X) max (X)       (X)               Q(X) = S(X) + (X)   Q(X)
 2                                    1                                       1          1
                                      4                                                                    Negative
                                                                                                           Positive



                                                                                  True probability Q
                                      0                                       1
X2


                                                                              2



            T X=0                                      S(X) = 12
 2                                        1                                   0          0
     2          X1              2         4
                                                  2             X1        2                            0     Confidence score S   1

                                     c. Perturbation ψ(z) = 1z>0 − 1z<0
         (X) = ( T X) max (X)       (X)               Q(X) = S(X) + (X)   Q(X)
 2                                    1                                       1          1
                                      4                                                                    Negative
                                                                                                           Positive
                                                                                  True probability Q


                                      0                                       1
X2


                                                                              2



            T X=0                                      S(X) = 12
 2                                        1                                   0          0
     2          X1              2         4
                                                  2             X1        2                            0     Confidence score S   1

Figure 12: Calibrated and optimal accuracy. Example of a calibrated classifier S constructed
following the procedure described in Appendix B.2. Its accuracy is optimal as Q and S are on the
same side of the decision threshold wherever Q ̸= 12 . However, confidence scores S are almost
everywhere different from the true posterior probabilities Q. Calibration curves (in black on last
column) is obtained from 1 million samples.


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     P ROOFS
C.1      L EMMA 4.1: T HE GROUPING LOSS AS AN H - VARIANCE

Lemma 4.1 (The grouping loss as an h-variance). Let h be the negative entropy of the scoring rule ϕ,
i.e. h : p 7→ −sϕ (p, p). The grouping loss GL of the classifier S with calibrated scores C = E[Q | S]
and scoring rule ϕ writes:
                                     E[dϕ (C, Q)] = E[Vh [Q | S]]                                  (7)
                                     |    {z    }
                                        GL(S)


Proof of Lemma 4.1. Let ϕ be a scoring rule, h : p 7→ −sϕ (p, p) and C = E[Q | S].
    E[dϕ (C, Q)] = E[sϕ (C, Q) − sϕ (Q, Q)]                               Definition of divergence      (17)
                 = E[sϕ (C, Q) + h(Q)]                                             Definition of h      (18)
                    "K                       #
                      X
                 =E       ϕ(C, ek )Qk + h(Q)                         Definition of expected score       (19)
                       k=1
                    " "K                      ##
                       X
                  =E E   ϕ(C, ek )Qk + h(Q) S                             Law of total expectation      (20)
                          k=1
                    "K                                 #
                     X
                  =E   E[ϕ(C, ek )Qk | S] + E[h(Q) | S]                    Linearity of expectation     (21)
                       k=1
                    "K                                 #
                     X
                  =E   ϕ(C, ek )E[Qk | S] + E[h(Q) | S]                ϕ(C, ek ) is a function of S     (22)
                       k=1
                    "K                          #
                     X
                  =E   ϕ(C, ek )Ck + E[h(Q) | S]                                     Ck = E[Qk | S]     (23)
                       k=1
                  = E[−h(C) + E[h(Q) | S]]                                           Definition of h    (24)
                  = E[E[h(Q) | S] − h(E[Q | S])]                                      C = E[Q | S]      (25)
                  = E[Vh [Q | S]]                                            Definition of Vh [Q | S]   (26)



C.2      T HEOREM 4.1: G ROUPING LOSS DECOMPOSITION

Lemma C.1 (Law of total h-variance). Let X, Y, Z : Ω → Rd be random variables defined on the
same probability space and a function f : Rd → R. The law of total variance holds for the f -variance:
                        Vf [Y | Z] = E[Vf [Y | X, Z] | Z] + Vf [E[Y | X, Z] | Z]                        (27)

Proof.
             E[f (Y )] = E[E[f (Y ) | X]]                                            Law of total expectation
                       = E[Vf [Y | X]] + E[f (E[Y | X])]                              Definition of Vf [Y | X]

E[f (Y )] − f (E[Y ]) = E[Vf [Y | X]] + E[f (E[Y | X])] − f (E[E[Y | X]])  Law of total expectation
                      = E[Vf [Y | X]] + Vf [E[Y | X]]                     Definition of Vf [E[Y | X]]
The same proof holds when the expectations and h-variances are conditioned on Z.
Theorem 4.1 (Grouping loss decomposition). Let R : X → N be a partition of the feature space. It
holds that:
                     GL(S) = E[Vh [E[Q | S, R] | S]] + E[Vh [Q | S, R]]                     (8)
                                |        {z        }   |     {z      }
                                          GLexplained (S)           GLresidual (S)

Moreover if the scoring rule is proper, then:               GL(S) ≥ GLexplained (S) ≥ 0.                 (9)


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Theorem 4.1. Applying Lemma C.1 with (R, Q, S) as (X, Y, Z) gives the decomposition.
Proper scoring rules have a convex negative entropy h (see Gneiting & Raftery, 2007, th. 1). Note
that depending on the convention (maximization or minimization of scoring rules), one may find in
the litterature that the entropy is either convex or concave. In the convention taken by this article
(minimization of scoring rules), the entropy is concave and the negative entropy is convex. Using
Jensen’s inequality, we thus have Vh [Q | S, R] ≥ 0. Hence both GLexplained and GLresidual are positive,
which gives GL ≥ GLexplained .

C.3     P ROPOSITION 4.1: B INNING - INDUCED GROUPING LOSS

Proposition 4.1 (Binning-induced grouping loss). The grouping loss of the binned classifier GL(SB )
deviates from that of the original classifier GL(S) by an induced grouping loss GLinduced (S, SB ):
                               E[Vh [Q | SB ]] = E[Vh [Q | S]] + E[Vh [C | SB ]]                                    (11)
                               |     {z     }    | {z }          |     {z     }
                                   GL(SB )                   GL(S)         GLinduced (S,SB )

Moreover, if the scoring rule is proper:                        GLinduced (S, SB ) ≥ 0.

Proof of Proposition 4.1.
   Vh [Q | SB ] = E[Vh [Q | S, SB ] | SB ] + Vh [E[Q | S, SB ] | SB ] Law of total h-variance (Lemma C.1)
                = E[Vh [Q | S] | SB ] + Vh [E[Q | S] | SB ]           SB is a function of S
                = E[Vh [Q | S] | SB ] + Vh [C | SB ]                  C = E[Q | S]

E[Vh [Q | SB ]] = E[Vh [Q | S]] + E[Vh [C | SB ]]                               Law of total expectation
     GL(SB ) = GL(S) + GLinduced (S, SB )                                       Lemma 4.1 and definition of GLinduced
Remark: this proposition does not require SB to be the average scores on the bins E[S | S ∈ Bj ].

C.4     P ROPOSITION 4.2: E XPLAINED GROUPING LOSS ACCOUNTING FOR BINNING

Proposition 4.2 (Explained grouping loss accounting for binning).
                    GL(S) = GLexplained (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB ) + GLresidual (SB )                               (12)

If the scoring rule is proper, then:                 GL(S) ≥ GLexplained (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB ) .               (13)
                                                             |                 {z                }
                                                                               GLLB (S,SB )


Proof of Proposition 4.2.
   GL(S) = GL(SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB )                                                          Propostion 4.1
         = GLexplained (SB ) + GLresidual (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB )                    Theorem 4.1 on GL(SB )
For proper scoring rules, Theorem 4.1 gives GLresidual (SB ) ≥ 0 which completes the proof.

C.5     P ROPOSITION 4.3: D EBIASED ESTIMATOR FOR THE B RIER SCORE

Proposition 4.3 (Debiased estimator for the Brier score). For all class k ∈ {1, . . . , K} and bin
                          (s,k)
s ∈ S, let n(s,k) (resp. nj ) be the number of samples belonging to level set R(s) (resp. region
  (s)
Rj ). We define the empirical average of Y over these regions as:

                (s,k)          1         X             (i)                         1           X         (i)
              µ̂j       :=    (s,k)
                                                     Yk       and ĉ(s,k) =                             Yk
                             nj                (s)
                                                                               n(s,k)
                                    i:X (i) ∈R                                          i:X (i) ∈R(s)
                                               j

                                                                                   K X (s,k)
                                                                                   X
                                                             c explained (SB ) =      n                  (s,k)
                                                                                                    c explained (SB )
    The debiased estimator of GLexplained is:                GL                                     GL
                                                                                               n
                                                                                   k=1 s∈S



                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with:

   (s,k)              X J  (s,k)
                          nj                          2   X J  (s,k) (s,k)
                                                              nj
                                                                                 (s,k)
                                                                     µ̂j (1 − µ̂j ) ĉ(s,k) (1 − ĉ(s,k) )

c explained (SB ) =                  (s,k)     (s,k)
GL                                 µ̂j     − ĉ         −                              −
                      j=1
                          n(s,k)                          j=1
                                                              n(s,k)    nj
                                                                          (s,k)
                                                                                −1       n(s,k) − 1
                      |              {z               }   |                      {z                      }
                         plugin estimator GL
                                          c plugin                              bias estimation GL
                                                                                                c bias


                                                                        (s,k)
                                                          (s,k)       n
Proof. Let s ∈ S (k) and k ∈ {1, K}, and define p̂j                   j
                                                                  := n(s,k) . We now compute the bias of the
                            (s,k)
                     c explained . To ease calculations, we start by rewriting the plugin estimate:
plugin estimator for GL

                (s,k)
                            J
                            X                              2
             c plugin =         (s,k)     (s,k)
             GL               p̂j       µ̂j     − ĉ(s,k)                                                (28)
                            j=1
                                                                             
                          J
                          X                    2              J
                                                              X                      2
                              (s,k)     (s,k)                     (s,k) (s,k)
                        =   p̂j       µ̂j        − 2ĉ(s,k)    p̂j µ̂j  + ĉ(s,k)                      (29)
                            j=1                                   j=1
                            J
                            X                    2           2
                                (s,k)     (s,k)
                        =     p̂j       µ̂j       − ĉ(s,k)                                              (30)
                            j=1


From now on, we omit the exponent (s, k) to lighten notations. We now take the expectation of both
terms in the lower-bound.


                                                        2
                                          E ĉ2 = E [ĉ] + Var(ĉ)                                       (31)
                                                               c(1 − c)
                                                   = c2 +                                                (32)
                                                                  n
where we made use of Lemma C.2 for equation 32. Similarly,
                                                           2
                                      E µ̂2j p̂j = E [µ̂j ] + Var(µ̂j )                                  (33)
                                                                µj (1 − µj )
                                                     = µ2j +                                             (34)
                                                                     nj

When nj = 0 (or equivalently p̂j = 0), which happens with probability νj = (1 − pj )n , µ̂j as well
as the right term in equation 34 are undefined. The problem disappears when multiplying by p̂j , and
agreeing that µ̂j = 0 whenever nj = 0.

                                     
                          XJ              J
                                          X
                        E   p̂j µ̂2j  =   E E p̂j µ̂2j 1p̂j ≥0 p̂j                                     (35)
                             j=1             j=1

                                             XJ
                                                                     µj (1 − µj )
                                         =       E p̂j 1p̂j ≥0 µ2j +                                     (36)
                                             j=1
                                                                          nj

                                             XJ
                                                                    µj (1 − µj )
                                         =       pj µ2j + E 1p̂j ≥0                                      (37)
                                             j=1
                                                                         n

                                             XJ
                                                                    µj (1 − µj )
                                         =       pj µ2j + (1 − νj )                                      (38)
                                             j=1
                                                                         n


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Putting together equations 32 and 38, we get:

                    h    i X J              XJ
                                                          µj (1 − µj ) c(1 − c)
                 c
               E GLplugin =         2    2
                                pj µj − c +     (1 − νj )             −                                                                   (39)
                            j=1             j=1
                                                               n          n
                                                 J
                                                 X                          J
                                                                            X
                                                                        2                           µj (1 − µj ) c(1 − c)
                                             =         pj (µj − c) +                (1 − νj )                   −                         (40)
                                                 j=1                        j=1
                                                                                                         n          n
                                                 |           {z         }   |                            {z             }
                                                       GLexplained                                    GLbias



In practice νj , which gives the probability that no sample falls in component j, is very close to 0
unless pj and n are very small. Hence, we will approximate νj ≈ 0. More importantly, the expression
of the bias given in 40 depends on oracle quantities µj and c, which are unavailable. Therefore, we
resort to debiasing the plugin estimate of the lower-bound using sample estimates of the bias, which
gives:


                     J  (s,k)                       2 X  J   (s,k) (s,k)       (s,k)
     (s,k)         X   nj         (s,k)                     nj     µ̂j (1 − µ̂j ) ĉ(s,k) (1 − ĉ(s,k) )
  c
  GL                                    −    (s,k)
                                                      −
     explained =                µ̂j       ĉ                                         +
                   j=1
                       n(s,k)                           j=1
                                                            n(s,k)    nj
                                                                        (s,k)
                                                                              −1       n(s,k) − 1
                   |              {z                }
                         plugin estimator GL
                                          c plugin
                                                                                               (41)
where we used a Bessel correction for the estimation of population variances. Finally, a debiased
estimator of GLexplained is obtained by summing over the debiased estimators for all k ∈ {1, K} and
all s ∈ Sk .



                                  (s,k)
Lemma C.2. Define µ̂j                         and ĉ(s,k) as in Proposition 4.3. Then:


                                                                                                      (s,k)               (s,k)
                         h               i                                                          µj            1 − µj
                                 (s,k)               (s,k)                          (s,k)
                     E µ̂j                   = µj             and       V ar µ̂j                =                 (s,k)
                                                                                                                                      .   (42)
                                                                                                              nj

Similarly,

                             h            i
                                  (s,k)              (s,k)                          (s,k)         c(s,k) 1 − c(s,k)
                         E ĉ                 =c              and V ar ĉ                       =                     .                   (43)
                                                                                                        n(s,k)

                   (i)
The labels Yk are by definition drawn from a Bernoulli distribution with probability
     (i)          (i)
P (Yk |X (i) ) = Qk , i.e., for each sample i, the probability of the Bernoulli changes.
This lemma shows that despite these varying Bernoulli probabilities, the empirical average of labels
Yk over a given subspace has the same expectation and variance as a binomial variable that would be
drawn with a probability equal to the expectation of Qk over this subspace.



                                                                                                         (s,k)
Proof of Lemma C.2. Below we write the proof for the case of µ̂j      (equation 42) as the one for
                                                               n                 o
                                                           (s)               (s)
ĉ(s,k) (equation 43) follows exactly the same lines. Let Ij = i : X (i) ∈ Rj , be the subset of
                                                                  (s)
samples such that X (i) belongs to bin Rj .


                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                h        i              1          X        h                           i
                   (s,k)                                       (i)
               E µ̂j       =            (s,k)
                                                           E Yk | Sk = s, R(X (i) ) = j               (44)
                                    nj               (s)
                                                  i∈Ij

                                        1          X        h h          i                        i
                                                                 (i)
                                =       (s,k)
                                                           E E Yk | X (i) | Sk = s, R(X (i) ) = j     (45)
                                    nj               (s)
                                                  i∈Ij

                                        1          X        h                           i
                                                              (i)
                                =       (s,k)
                                                           E Qk | Sk = s, R(X (i) ) = j               (46)
                                    nj               (s)
                                                  i∈Ij

                                        1          X        (s,k)
                                =    (s,k)
                                                           µj                                         (47)
                                    nj         (s)
                                           i∈I       j

                                   (s,k)
                                = µj                                                                  (48)
where we used the law of total expectation in eq 45, the definition of Qk in eq 46, and the definition
    (s,k)
of µj     in eq 47.

                 h                                            i
      (s,k)           (s,k)      (s,k)
Var µ̂j       = E (µ̂j       − µj )2 Sk = s, R(X (i) ) = j                                            (49)
                              2                                     2
                       (s,k)                                 (s,k)
              = E µ̂j             Sk = s, R(X (i) ) = j − µj                                          (50)
                                                                               
                                                                                              2
                     1          X (i) X (l)                          (i)             (s,k)
              =           2  E          Y        Yk    Sk = s, R(X       ) = j  −   µj              (51)
                   (s,k)
                 nj             i∈Ij
                                     (s)      (s)
                                           l∈Ij
                                                                                       

                         1         X           X                                            2
                                         (i)       (i) (l)             (i)           (s,k)
              =               2 E      Yk    +   Yk   Yk   Sk = s, R(X     ) = j  − µj
                       (s,k)       (s)                                           
                   nj                   i∈Ij                       i̸=l
                                                                      (s)
                                                                i,l∈Ij
                                                                                                      (52)
                                                                             

                         1       X            X   (s,k)  2            2
                                      (s,k)                    (s,k)
              =               2      µj     +    µj         − µj                                    (53)
                       (s,k)     (s)                       
                   nj                 i∈Ij                         i̸=l
                                                                      (s)
                                                                i,l∈Ij
                                                                                2             2
                         1           (s,k) (s,k)     (s,k) (s,k)         (s,k)         (s,k)
              =                 2  n j    µj     + n j    (nj    − 1)   µj         −  µj              (54)
                       (s,k)
                   nj
                   (s,k)              (s,k)
                  µj         (1 − µj          )
              =               (s,k)
                                                                                                      (55)
                             nj
                                      (i)            (l)
where we used the fact that Yk              and Yk are independent when i ̸= l in eq 52.

C.6   T HE PLUGIN ESTIMATOR FOR THE GROUPING LOSS LOWER BOUND IS BIASED UPWARDS .

Analytical evaluation of the sign of the bias Let k ∈ {1, . . . , K} and s ∈ S. The bias of the
                   (s,k)
                c
plugin estimate GL       (SB ) is given by (40):
                       explained
                              X J               (s,k) (1 − µ(s,k) ) c(s,k) (1 − c(s,k) )
             (s,k)
           c explained (SB ) =           (s,k) µj             j
      bias GL                       1 − νj              (s,k)
                                                                   −                                  (56)
                               j=1
                                                      n                    n(s,k)


                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          2
By convexity of the function x 7→ (x − E [x]) , we have:
                                                   2
        J    (s,k)                J    (s,k)                J    (s,k)              h        i 2
       X   nj        (s,k)
                                X    n j       (s,k) 
                                                           X   nj          (s,k)       (s,k)
                  µ̂j     − E              µ̂j         ≤               µ̂j     − E µ̂j                 (57)
           n (s,k)                   n (s,k)                   n (s,k)
       j=1                       j=1                       j=1


                                PJ      nj
                                          (s,k)
                                                 (s,k)
Using the fact that ĉ(s,k) =       j=1 n(s,k) µ̂j     , and taking the expectation of both sides, we get:
                                                          J  (s,k)
                                                          X nj                       (s,k)
                                     Var(ĉ(s,k) ) ≤                      Var(µ̂j            )           (58)
                                                          j=1
                                                              n(s,k)

Finally, using Lemma C.2, we get:

                                                                        (s,k)            (s,k)
                                (s,k)
                                c        1−c  (s,k)            J µ
                                                               X  j                 1 − µj
                                                          ≤                                              (59)
                                        n(s,k)                 j=1
                                                                                n(s,k)

Hence, we have:
                X J  (s,k)        (s,k)
                    µj (1 − µj ) c(s,k) (1 − c(s,k) ) X  J          (s,k)        (s,k)
                                                                          (1 − µj )
       b(s,k)                                                (s,k) µj
  bias LGL =                             −            −     νj                         (60)
                j=1
                           n(s,k)          n(s,k)       j=1
                                                                          n(s,k)
                |                     {z            }
                                              ≥0

                                      (s,k)
Because of the term involving νj , this inequality does not prove that the bias is always positive.
                                           n(s,k)
                       (s,k)        (s,k)
However in practice νj       = 1 − pj             , which represents the probability that no point
                                                          (s,k)
belongs to region j, is very close to 0 unless pj  is very small or the total number of points n(s,k)
is small. Hence, equality 60 shows that the bias can only be ’slightly’ negative. In the simulations
below, the upwards bias of the plugin estimate appears clearly.

C.7    E STIMATOR FOR THE INDUCED GROUPING LOSS

Proposition C.1 (Estimator for the induced grouping loss). Let Ĉ be an estimator of C. An estimator
                     1
                        P                            (i)      (s)
of CB is ĈB (s) = n(s)    i:SB (X (i) )=s Ĉ(S(X )) with n       the number of sample in the level set s.
An estimator of the grouping loss induced by the binning of S into SB is:
                                                                                           
                                 X n(s)         1        X
           c induced (S, SB ) =
           GL                                                  e(Ĉ(S(X (i) )) − e(ĈB (s))        (61)
                                         n     n (s)
                                 s∈S                      (i) i:SB (X    )=s


C.8    A NALYSIS OF BINNING - INDUCED ERRORS FOR THE B RIER SCORE

It is well known that binning can induce error in estimating calibration loss, leading to underestimating
it (Bröcker, 2012; Kumar et al., 2019; Roelofs et al., 2022). Proposition 4.1 shows that it also leads to
errors on the grouping loss, overestimating it. Here we characterize the errors on the calibration and
grouping loss for the Brier score and show that they partly compensate each other and the error on
the sum of both can be bounded.
Proposition C.2 gives the deviation term induced by the binning for the calibration loss with the Brier
scoring rule.
Proposition C.2 (Calibration loss decomposition). Let h be the negative entropy of the Brier scoring
rule and C = E[Q | S]. The binned calibration loss CL(SB ) deviates from the calibration loss CL(S)
by a negative induced calibration loss CLinduced (S, SB ):

                    E ∥SB − CB ∥2 = E ∥S − C∥2 − E Vh S − C SB                                     (62)
                    |       {z       }     |    {z     } |           {z           }
                        CL(SB )                CL(S)         CLinduced (S, SB )

                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The calibration loss induced by the binning, CLinduced (S, SB ), is always negative. CL(SB ) is
thus biased downward, which is already known from Kumar et al. (2019); Roelofs et al. (2022).
Conversely, the grouping loss induced by the binning, GLinduced (S, SB ), is always positive. GL(SB )
is thus biased upward. The mere effect of binning artificially creates grouping loss and artificially
reduces calibration error. For calibrated continuous classifiers, CLinduced = 0 and induced grouping
loss is small: with N equal-width bins, GLinduced ≤ 4N1 2 . If in addition the scores are uniform on
                          1
the bins: GLinduced = 12N   2 (Lemma C.3). Both induced calibration and grouping losses can be
large since V[C | SB ] can be large. High GLinduced expresses strong miscalibrations within the bin.
However interestingly, both induced losses compensate. In a binary setting, the sum of induced
calibration and grouping losses is contained as showed by Theorem C.1, and can be bounded by
estimable quantities (Corollary C.1). While measuring CL(SB ) and GL(SB ) separately can lead
to high binning-induced bias, measuring CL(SB ) + GL(SB ) through CL(S      c B ) + GL c explained (SB )
enables reducing binning-induced errors and minorizing MSE(S, Q) (Corollary C.2).
Theorem C.1 (Bounds on induced calibration and grouping losses). In a binary setting, the calibra-
tion and grouping losses induced by the binning of classifier S into SB sums to:
                      CLinduced + GLinduced = E[2Cov[S, C | SB ] − V[S | SB ]]
which is bounded by:
   hp            p          p           i
−E V[S | SB ] 2 V[C | SB ] + V[S | SB ] ≤ CLinduced + GLinduced
                                                hp             p        p           i
                                           ≤ E V[S | SB ] 2 V[C | SB ] − V[S | SB ]

Suppose that [0, 1] is divided in N equal-width bins. Then:
               hp                 i                               hp           i
        − N1 E CB (1 − CB ) − 4N1 2 ≤ CLinduced + GLinduced ≤ N1 E CB (1 − CB )
Corollary C.1.
  hp             p            p           i
−E V[S | SB ] 2 CB (1 − CB ) + V[S | SB ] ≤ CLinduced + GLinduced
                                                  hp             p          p            i
                                             ≤ E V[S | SB ] 2 CB (1 − CB ) − V[S | SB ]
With N equal-width bins:
              hp           i                                      hp           i
        − N1 E CB (1 − CB ) − 4N1 2 ≤ CLinduced + GLinduced ≤ N1 E CB (1 − CB )
Corollary C.2. The mean square error (MSE) between continuous S and Q is lower bounded by:
          MSE(S, Q) = CL + GL
                                           hp          p            p            i
                     ≥ ℓ2 -ECEB + LGLB − E V[S | SB ] 2 V[C | SB ] − V[S | SB ]
                                           hp          p              p             i
                     ≥ ℓ2 -ECEB + LGLB − E V[S | SB ] 2 CB (1 − CB ) − V[S | SB ]
                                             hp            i
  With N equal bins: ≥ ℓ2 -ECEB + LGLB − N1 E CB (1 − CB )

where ℓ2 -ECEB is the ℓ2 Expected Calibration Error of the binned classifier SB and LGLB is the
grouping loss lower bound of SB .

P ROOFS

Proof of Proposition C.2. Let h the negative entropy of the Brier scoring rule.
   ∥SB − CB ∥2 = ∥E[S | SB ] − E[C | SB ] ∥2                        SB = E[S | SB ] , CB = E[C | SB ]
                                      2
                 = ∥E[S − C | SB ] ∥                                Linearity of expectation

                 = E ∥S − C∥2 SB − Vh [S − C | SB ]                 Definition of Vh [S − C | SB ]


E (SB − CB )2 = E ∥S − C∥2 − E[Vh [S − C | SB ]]                    Law of total expectation



                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma C.3. In a binary setting, suppose that [0, 1] is divided in N equal-width bins. Then:
                                              V[S | SB ] ≤ 4N1 2                                  (63)
If in addition, scores S are uniform:
                                                             1
                                              V[S | SB ] = 12N 2                                  (64)

Proof of Lemma C.3. Without loss of generality, consider the first bin [0, N1 ] with binned score s1 .
                                                   2
V[S | SB = s1 ] = E S 2 SB = s1 − E[S | SB = s1 ]                 Definition of the variance
                                                            2
                ≤ N1 E[S | SB = s1 ] − E[S | SB = s1 ]              0 ≤ S ≤ N1 ⇒ S 2 ≤ N1 S
                = N12 (1 − N E[S | SB = s1 ])N E[S | SB = s1 ]
                ≤ 4N1 2                                             Max when N E[S | SB = s1 ] = 21
For uniform scores: S|SB = s1 ∼ U([0, N1 ]). Hence V[S | SB = s1 ] = 12
                                                                      1 1             1
                                                                        ( N − 0)2 = 12N 2.


Other bins have same variance as V[S | SB = s1 ] (variance is translation-invariant).
Remark: this proves that GLinduced ≤ 4N1 2 for S calibrated (S = C ⇒ V[C | SB ] = V[S | SB ]).

Proof of Theorem C.1. In a binary setting for the Brier scoring rule, we have Vh = V. Hence:
        CLinduced + GLinduced = −E[Vh [S − C | SB ]] + E[Vh [C | SB ]]      Propositons 4.1 and C.2
                              = −E[V[S − C | SB ]] + E[V[C | SB ]]          Vh = V
                              = E[2Cov[S, C | SB ] − V[S | SB ]]            Expansion of V[S − C | SB ]

                                 p          p
2Cov[S, C | SB ] − V[S | SB ] ≤ 2 V[S | SB ] V[C | SB ] − V[S | SB ]        Cauchy-Schwarz

2Cov[S, C | SB ] − V[S | SB ] ≥ −2 | Cov[S, C | SB ] | − V[S | SB ]
                                  p           p
                              ≥ −2 V[S | SB ] V[C | SB ] − V[S | SB ] Cauchy-Schwarz

With N equal-width bins:
                                  p         p
2Cov[S, C | SB ] − V[S | SB ] ≤ 2 V[S | SB ] V[C | SB ]                     Positivity of the variance
                                  p
                              ≤ N1 V[C | SB ]                               V[S | SB ] ≤ 4N1 2
                                  p
                              ≤ N1 CB (1 − CB )                             V[C | SB ] ≤ CB (1 − CB )

                                        p
2Cov[S, C | SB ] − V[S | SB ] ≥ − N1        V[C | SB ] − 4N1 2              V[S | SB ] ≤ 4N1 2
                                        p
                              ≥ − N1        CB (1 − CB ) − 4N1 2            V[C | SB ] ≤ CB (1 − CB )



C.9     E XTENSION TO CLASSWISE CALIBRATION

C.9.1    P ROPER SCORING RULES DECOMPOSITION
We show below that the proper scoring rules decomposition of Kull & Flach (2015) holds for
classwise-calibration (Definition 3.2) for the Brier score and the log-loss.
Proposition C.3 (Brier and log-loss classwise decomposition). For the Brier score as well as the
log-loss, the decomposition into calibration, grouping, and irreducible losses (Equation 6) holds
when replacing the calibrated scores by the classwise-calibrated scores (Definition 3.2).

Proof of Proposition C.3. For all k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, let Ck = E [Yk |Sk ] be the classwise-calibrated
scores (Definition 3.2).


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Brier Score Given any two probability vectors P and Q, the divergence associated to the Brier
score reads:
                                           K
                                           X
                               d(P, Q) =      (Pk − Qk )2                                (65)
                                                   k=1

For all k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, let dk : Pk , Qk 7→ (Pk − Qk )2 .
        dk (Sk , Yk ) = (Sk − Yk )2                                                               (66)
                                                                2
                     = (Sk − Ck + Ck − Qk + Qk − Yk )                                             (67)
                                    2                2                2
                     = (Sk − Ck ) + (Ck − Qk ) + (Qk − Yk ) + 2(Sk − Ck )(Ck − Qk )
                                                                                                  (68)
                         + 2(Sk − Ck )(Qk − Yk ) + 2(Ck − Qk )(Qk − Yk )

Taking the expectation on both sides conditional on X:

              E [dk (Sk , Yk ) | X] = (Sk − Ck )2 + (Ck − Qk )2 + E (Qk − Yk )2 X
                                                                                                  (69)
                                                                    +2(Sk − Ck )(Ck − Qk )

since Sk and Qk are function of X, Ck is a function of Sk and thus of X, and E [Yk | X] = Qk .
Then taking the expectation conditional on Sk :

        E [dk (Sk , Yk ) | Sk ] = (Sk − Ck )2 + E (Ck − Qk )2 Sk + E (Qk − Yk )2 Sk      (70)
where we use the fact that Ck is a function of Sk , that E [Qk | Sk ] = Ck , and the property according
to which for two random variables U and V and a function h, E [E [V | U ] | h(U )] = E [V | h(U )].
Finally, taking the expectation over Sk we get:

              E [dk (Sk , Yk )] = E (Sk − Ck )2 + E (Ck − Qk )2 + E (Qk − Yk )2                    (71)
The desired decomposition is then obtained by summing over the K classes on both sides.

log-loss Given any two probability vectors P and Q, the divergence associated to the log loss reads:
                                                     XK
                                                                   Qk
                                       d(P, Q) =         Qk log                                   (72)
                                                                   Pk
                                                     k=1

For all k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, let dk : Pk , Qk 7→ Qk log Q     k
                                                           Pk .

                                      Yk
           dk (Sk , Yk ) = Yk log                                                                 (73)
                                      Sk

                                      Yk                  Qk                  Ck
                          = Yk log           + Yk log           + Yk log                          (74)
                                      Qk                  Ck                  Sk

                                          Yk                        Qk                   Ck
   E [dk (Sk , Yk ) | X] = E Yk log                X + Qk log              + Qk log               (75)
                                          Qk                        Ck                   Sk

                                          Yk                             Qk                    Ck
  E [dk (Sk , Yk ) | Sk ] = E Yk log               Sk + E Qk log                 Sk + Ck log      (76)
                                          Qk                             Ck                    Sk
                          = E [dk (Qk , Yk ) | Sk ] + E [dk (Ck , Qk ) | Sk ] + dk (Sk , Ck )     (77)
where we have used the same properties as those described for the proof of the Brier score classwise
decomposition above. The desired decomposition is then obtained by taking the expectation over Sk
and summing over the K classes.



The proper scoring rule decomposition holds for top-label calibration. Unlike classwise cal-
ibration, top-label calibration does not define a vector C ∈ RK of calibrated probabilities. Instead,
it defines a notion of calibration for a simpler binary problem in which labels indicate whether
the classifier predicts the correct class for a given X. More precisely, the labels for this binary


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


problem are given by Y ′ := 1Y =earg max(S) . Since S is a function of X, the random variable Y ′ is a
function of Y and X. Define now the scores associated to this binary problem as S ′ := max(S) ∈ R.
Reformulated in terms of these notations, top-label calibration states that S ′ is well calibrated if for
all s, P (Y ′ = 1|S ′ = s) = s. Thus, as for a classical binary problem, we can define C ′ := E[Y ′ |S ′ ]
and Q′ = E [Y ′ |X]. C ′ (resp Q′ ) gives the probability that the classifier predicts the correct class for
a given score S ′ (resp. a given input X). As the quantities S ′ , C ′ , Q′ and Y ′ define a classical binary
problem, the decomposition (6) into calibration, grouping, and irreducible loss holds for this problem.
Compared to the classwise definition of calibration and grouping, here the calibration loss measures
whether on average over all points scored S across all classes, the proportion of correctly predicted
points in actually S. In this setting, the grouping loss also measures to what extent there exist
over-confident scores for certain classes that compensate under-confident scores for other classes.

C.9.2    R ESULTS HOLD FOR B RIER AND LOG - LOSS IN CLASSWISE SETTING
Appendix C.9.1 proves the scoring rule decomposition (6) in a classwise setting for Brier and log-loss
scoring rules, which is necessary for the other results to hold. However, the proof of Lemma 4.1
does not readily apply to classwise calibration. Equation 22 uses a conditioning on the full vector
of joint confiences S to move ϕ(C, ek ) outside of the conditional expectation on S and turn Qk
into Ck in expectation. In classwise calibration the conditioning is on each marginal Sk instead of
the joint S. As a result, in the general case, ϕ(C, ek ) cannot be moved outside of the conditional
expectation given Sk since C depends on all marginals of C, not just Ck . However for some scoring
rules, ϕ(p, ek ) depends only on pk and the proof can be adapted. This is the case of the log-loss for
which ϕLL (p, ek ) = − log(pk ).
Lemma C.4 (Adaptation of Lemma 4.1 for classwise calibration). Suppose there exists g : RK → R
such that for all k in {1, . . . , K} and x in RK , ϕ(x, ek ) = g(xk ). Define hk : p 7→ −ϕ(p, ek )pk , the
k th component of the negative entropy of the scoring rule ϕ. The grouping loss GL of the classifier S
with calibrated scores Ck = E[Qk | Sk ] and scoring rule ϕ writes:
                                                    PK
                                    E[dϕ (C, Q)] =    k=1 E[Vhk [Qk | Sk ]]                           (78)
                                    |    {z    }
                                    GL(S)


Proof of Lemma C.4. Define the vector C with Ck = E[Qk | Sk ] for all k in {1, . . . , K}. Let ϕ
be a scoring rule, h : p 7→ −sϕ (p, p). Suppose for all k in {1, . . . , K}, ϕ(x, ek ) = g(xk ) with
g : RK → R. Then:
    E[dϕ (C, Q)] = E[sϕ (C, Q) − sϕ (Q, Q)]                                   Definition of dϕ (79)
                    hP                     P                 i
                         K                  K
                 =E      k=1 ϕ(C, ek )Qk +  k=1 ϕ(Q, ek )Qk                   Definition of sϕ (80)
                   PK
                 = k=1 E[ϕ(C, ek )Qk − ϕ(Q, ek )Qk ]                 Linearity of expectation (81)
                   PK
                 = k=1 E[g(Ck )Qk − g(Qk )Qk ]                               Hypothesis on ϕ (82)
                   PK
                 = k=1 E[E[g(Ck )Qk | Sk ] − E[g(Qk )Qk | Sk ]] Law of total expectation (83)
                   PK
                 = k=1 E[g(Ck )E[Qk | Sk ] − E[g(Qk )Qk | Sk ]]         Ck is a function of Sk (84)
                   PK
                 = k=1 E[g(Ck )Ck − E[g(Qk )Qk | Sk ]]                       Definition of Ck (85)
                   PK
                 = k=1 E[Vhk [Qk | Sk ]]                                     Definition of Vhk (86)


Theorem C.2 (Results in classwise setting). Suppose Equation 78 is satisfied for the scoring rule ϕ.
For all k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, let Rk : X → N be a partition of the feature space. It holds that:
                                 PK                                        PK
                      GL(S) =        k=1 E[Vhk [E[Qk | Sk , Rk ] | Sk ]] +       E[Vhk [Qk | Sk , Rk ]] (87)
                                 |                {z                  }    | k=1      {z             }
                                             GLexplained (S)                           GLresidual (S)
 PK                         PK                        PK
   k=1 E[Vhk [Qk | SBk ]] =   k=1 E[Vhk [Qk | Sk ]] +       E[Vhk [Ck | SBk ]]                          (88)
 |        {z           }    |        {z          }    | k=1    {z           }
          GL(SB )                        GL(S)                     GLinduced (S,SB )

                    GL(S) = GLexplained (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB ) + GLresidual (SB )                   (89)


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Moreover, if hk is convex, then:

                                           GL(S) ≥ GLexplained (S) ≥ 0                             (90)
                                                    GLinduced (S, SB ) ≥ 0                         (91)
                             GL(S) ≥ GLexplained (SB ) − GLinduced (S, SB )                        (92)
                                     |                 {z                }
                                                      GLLB (S,SB )


Proof of Theorem C.2. Applying the law of total variance (Lemma C.1) on each of the Vhk [Qk | Sk ]
with Rk as conditioning variable proves Equation 87. Similarly, applying the law of total variance
on each of the Vhk [Qk | SBk ] with Sk as conditioning variable proves Equation 88. The proof for
Equation 89 is the same as Proposition 4.2.
Using Jensen’s inequality, if hk is convex, then Vhk ≥ 0, which proves Equation 90, 91 and 92.


For the log-loss scoring rule, we have ϕLL (p, ek ) = − log(pk ) and hk (p) = log(pk )pk wich is
convex. Thus, Theorem C.2 holds for the log-loss. Unfortunately the Brier score does not satisfy the
assumptions of Lemma C.4 since ϕBS (p, ek ) is not a function of pk . But a forumlation similar to
Equation 78 holds for the Brier score:



       E dϕBS (C, Q) = E sϕBS (C, Q) − sϕBS (Q, Q)                         Definition of dϕBS      (93)
                         = E[(C − Q) · (C − Q)]                             Definition of sϕBS     (94)
                         = E[(C · C − 2C · Q + Q · Q)]                                             (95)
                         = E[(Q · Q − C · C)]                               E[C · Q] = C · C       (96)
                           PK
                         = k=1 E (Q2k − Ck2 )                         Linearity of expectation     (97)
                           PK
                         = k=1 E (E Q2k Sk − Ck2 )                    Law of total expectation     (98)
                           PK
                         = k=1 E[V[Qk | Sk ]]                        Definition of the variance    (99)
                 with:                                                                            (100)
                             PK
              E[C · Q] =      k=1 E[Ck Qk ]                                                       (101)
                             PK
                         =    k=1 E[E[Ck Qk | Sk ]]                   Law of total expectation    (102)
                             PK
                         =    k=1 E[Ck E[Qk | Sk ]]                     Ck is a function of Sk    (103)
                             PK      2
                         =    k=1 E Ck                                        Definition of Ck    (104)
                         = E[C · C]                                                               (105)

Since V = Vf with f : x 7→ x2 Equation 78 is satisfied for the Brier score. Since f is convex,
Theorem C.2 holds for the Brier score.
To conclude, Theorem C.2 holds for the Brier score and the log-loss in a classwise setting. It is likely
that some other proper scoring rules satisfy Equation 78 and Theorem C.2.

C.10    I MPACT OF RECALIBRATION ON THE GROUPING LOSS

Lemma C.5. Let ĉ be a recalibration mapping and S ′ = ĉ(S) the classifier recalibrated with that
mapping. The grouping loss of the recalibrated classifier GL(S ′ ) deviates from that of the original
classifier GL(S) as follows:

                                   GL(S ′ ) = GL(S) + E[Vh [C | S ′ ]]

If the mapping is perfect (i.e. S ′ = C) or invertible, then GL(S ′ ) = GL(S).


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Lemma C.5.
 GL(S ′ ) = E[Vh [Q | S ′ ]]                                                             Definition of GL
                         ′                      ′      ′
          = E[Vh [Q | S , S]] + E[Vh [E[Q | S , S] | S ]] Law of total h-variance on S (Lemma C.1)
          = E[Vh [Q | S]] + E[Vh [E[Q | S] | S ′ ]]                                  S ′ is a function of S
          = GL(S) + E[Vh [C | S ′ ]]                                         Definition of GL(S) and C
If S ′ = C, then Vh [C | S ′ ] = 0, hence GL(S ′ ) = GL(S). If the mapping ĉ is invertible, then
knowing S ′ is knowing S. Hence Vh [C | S ′ ] = Vh [C | S] = 0 since C a function of S. Hence
GL(S ′ ) = GL(S).

D     I MAGE N ET
ImageNet-1K (ILSVRC2012) (Deng et al., 2009) is a classification dataset for computer vision with
1 000 classes. Networks studied in this article are pre-trained on the training set of ImageNet-1K, com-
prising 1.2 million samples. Models’ architectures and weights are available on PyTorch v0.12 (Paszke
et al., 2019). We evaluated the networks on ImageNet variants’ ImageNet-R and ImageNet-C (Ap-
pendix D.1, D.2) as well as the validation set of ImageNet-1K (Appendix D.3). We work in the high-
level feature space of the networks, i.e. the output space of the penultimate layer (embedding space).
For each of ImageNet-R, ImageNet-C and the validation set of ImageNet, we plot the grouping
diagrams of each network with and without post-hoc recalibration, obtained with a balanced decision
stump. For each network, if several versions are available, we study both the smallest and the best
performing one on the validation set of ImageNet-1K (usually the largest version). For ImageNet-R
we also provide the grouping diagrams obtained with a 2-cluster k-means. Each experiment is detailed
in Appendix D.1, D.2 and D.3.

Detailed experimental method First, we forward each sample of the evaluation dataset (ImageNet-
R, ImageNet-C or the validation set of ImageNet-1K) through the studied network. We build
confidence scores by applying a softmax to the output logits. We extract a representation of the
input images in the high-level feature space of the network (i.e. the input space of the last linear
layer). Since there is not enough samples per class (50), we restrict our study to the top-label problem
(Definition 3.3). For each sample, the class with the highest confidence is predicted. The label is 1 if
the network predicted a correct class (0 otherwise) and the associated confidence score is the one of
the predicted class. We divide the samples of the evaluation set in half making sure that the confidence
score distribution is the same in both resulting subsets. On one set, we train the isotonic regression
for calibration and calibrate the confidence scores of both sets. If no post-hoc recalibration is used,
we skip this step. Then, we create groups of same-level confidences by binning the confidence scores
with 15 equal-width bins in [0, 1]. We partition each of the 15 level sets independently. For each
of them, we create the partition by training the partitioning method on the training samples of the
isotonic regression. We then evaluate region scores on the remaining samples to avoid overfitting.
For the grouping diagrams, we mainly use a balanced decision stump with 2 clusters (e.g. using
scikit-learn’s DecisionTreeRegressor with min_samples_leaf taken as half the samples
in the bin), resulting in one split along one of the axis of the high-level feature space. For comparison,
we also used k-means with 2 clusters. Constraining the partitioning methods to 2 regions is a choice to
provide visually informative grouping diagrams rather than to maximize the lower bound GL       c explained .
When optimizing the lower bound, (Figure 7 and Figure 14), we increase the number of allowed
regions in the partition by setting a region ratio: the number of training samples in the bin over the
number of allowed regions in the bin. Fixing a region ratio prevents from having regions with too few
samples. In our experiments, we fix the region ratio to 30.

D.1    I MAGE N ET-R

ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021) is a variant of ImageNet containing renditions of the ImageNet
classes. Example of renditions are: paintings, toys, tattoos and origami. There are 15 rendition types
in total listed in Figure 13. The dataset contains 30 000 images and is limited to 200 of the 1 000
ImageNet classes. Figure 14a. compares estimated grouping loss lower bound and calibration errors
of all networks (small and best versions) on ImageNet-R. Overall, we observe a strong grouping loss


                                                      30
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Deviantart
             Sketch
                 Art                                   Network          Figure 13: Comparison of renditions
                                                      VGG-11
         Videogame                                    ResNet-18         on ImageNet-R. Differences between
               Misc                                   AlexNet           the calibrated scores of samples of one
                Toy                                   DenseNet-121      rendition C̄rendition and the calibrated
Renditions


            Graphic                                   Inception
                                                      GoogLeNet         scores of all samples C̄all , weighted by
           Sculpture                                  ShuffleNet 0.5    the number of samples of this rendition
            Origami                                   MobileNet V2      in the level set and summed over the 15
             Graffiti                                 ResNeXt-50
                                                      Wide ResNet-50    bins on confidence scores. Interpreta-
             Sticker                                  MNASNet 0.5       tion: should renditions define regions
              Tattoo                                  EfficientNet-B0   of the feature space, they would ex-
            Cartoon                                   RegNet y_400mf
         Embroidery                                   ViT B-16          hibit a high grouping loss lower bound.
                                                      ConvNeXt Tiny
                        0.2     0.1    0.0      0.1
                              Crendition Call

   in most of the networks, especially those with highest accuracy. The estimated debiased lower bound
   remains high after post-hoc recalibration. Grouping diagrams of all networks are available at:
             • Section D.1.1: ImageNet-R – No post-hoc recalibration, small versions.
             • Section D.1.2: ImageNet-R – No post-hoc recalibration, small versions, k-means.
             • Section D.1.3: ImageNet-R – No post-hoc recalibration, best versions.
             • Section D.1.4: ImageNet-R – Isotonic recalibration, small versions.
             • Section D.1.5: ImageNet-R – Isotonic recalibration, best versions.
  We also investigate whether there is heterogeneity among renditions. In Figure 13 we observe that
  some renditions are better predicted than average (e.g. deviant art, sketch or art) while some others are
  predicted worse than average (e.g. embroidery, cartoon, tattoo). These considerations would be useful
  in a fairness setting. Also, Figure 13 highlights that if we could build regions out of renditions (i.e. ren-
  ditions are well separated in the feature space), this would result in a high grouping loss lower bound.

   D.2       I MAGE N ET-C

  ImageNet-C is a variant of ImageNet containing corrupted versions of ImageNet images. Examples
  of corruptions are: blur, noise, saturate, contrast, brightness and compression. There are 19 corruption
  types in total. Each corruption has a severity ranging from 1 to 5. The dataset contains the 50 000
  images of the validation set of ImageNet, each of them being applied 19 corruptions with 5 severity
  levels each. We built a merged version of ImageNet-C by randomly sampling one corruption for each
  image. We also study one corruption only (snow). For both the merged version and the snow version,
  we study the maximum severity of the corruption (5). Figure 14b. and c. compare estimated grouping
  loss lower bound and calibration errors of all networks (small and best versions) on ImageNet-C
  merged and snow. Overall, we observe similar effect than on ImageNet-R. However, when all samples
  have the same corruption (snow), we exhibit more grouping loss among the networks than when
  the 19 corruptions are randomly applied on the dataset (merged) (Figure 14c.). An intuition is that
  heterogeneity created by one corruption is canceled out by another one having heterogeneity in the
  opposite direction, leading to region scores closer to the average. Grouping diagrams of all networks
  are available at:

             • Section D.2.1: ImageNet-C – No post-hoc recalibration, small versions.
             • Section D.2.2: ImageNet-C – No post-hoc recalibration, best versions.
             • Section D.2.3: ImageNet-C – Isotonic recalibration, small versions.
             • Section D.2.4: ImageNet-C – Isotonic recalibration, best versions.

   D.3       I MAGE N ET-1K VALIDATION SET

   The validation set of ImageNet-1K comprises 50 000 samples for 1 000 classes. Figure 14d. compares
   estimated grouping loss lower bound and calibration errors of all networks (small and best versions)


                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


on the validation set of ImageNet-1K. Conversely to ImageNet-R and ImageNet-C, we cannot exhibit
substantial grouping loss on any of the networks. The grouping diagrams (Figure 24) show however
that ConvNeXt Tiny displays more heterogeneity than the other networks on this dataset. Grouping
diagrams are available in:

       • Section D.3.1: ImageNet-1K – No post-hoc recalibration, small versions.
       • Section D.3.2: ImageNet-1K – No post-hoc recalibration, best versions.
       • Section D.3.3: ImageNet-1K – Isotonic recalibration, small versions.
       • Section D.3.4: ImageNet-1K – Isotonic recalibration, best versions.


E    NLP
We use BART Large (Lewis et al., 2019) pre-trained on the Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference
dataset (Williams et al., 2018) and fine-tuned on the Yahoo Answers Topics dataset for zero-shot topic
classification. The fine-tuned model is available on HuggingFace at https://huggingface.
co/joeddav/bart-large-mnli-yahoo-answers. Yahoo Answers Topics is composed
of question titles and bodies and topic labels. There are 1 400 000 training samples, 60 000 test
samples and 10 topics. The dataset is available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/
yahoo_answers_topics. The model is fine-tuned on 5 out of the 10 topics of the training set,
totalizing 700 000 samples. Given a question title and a hypothesis (e.g. “This text is about Science
& Mathematics”), the model outputs its confidence in the hypothesis to be true for the given question.
The classification being zero-shot, the hypothesis can be about an unseen topic. We evaluate the
model separately on the 5 unseen topics and the 5 seen topics of the test set (i.e. seen topics but
unseen samples). This results in a binary classification task in which each sample is composed of a
question title and a hypothesis and each label is 1 or 0 whether the hypothesis is correct or not. As
for the clustering and calibration procedure, we used a balanced decision stump in the same way as
described in Section D: “Detailed experimental method”. We work in the high-level feature space of
the network, i.e. the output space of the penultimate layer (embedding space).
                                             a. Vision
                                                 ′                  ′
              Network               c
                                    CL      c
                                            CL            c LB
                                                          GL      c LB
                                                                  GL      Accuracy↑ (%)
              ViT B-16             0.044   0.000          0.019   0.021       30.1
              ConvNeXt Tiny        0.017   0.000          0.036   0.039       29.0
              Inception            0.200   0.000          0.006   0.009       27.3
              Wide ResNet-50       0.082   0.000          0.020   0.019       25.9
              ResNeXt-50           0.091   0.000          0.013   0.013       25.1
              EfficientNet-B0      0.028   0.000          0.015   0.018       24.1
              DenseNet-121         0.059   0.000          0.013   0.010       23.9
              GoogLeNet            0.009   0.001          0.011   0.011       23.3
              RegNet y_400mf       0.084   0.000          0.011   0.010       21.0
              ResNet-18            0.057   0.000          0.010   0.009       20.4
              MobileNet V2         0.070   0.000          0.007   0.009       18.9
              MNASNet 0.5          0.017   0.000          0.005   0.007       15.9
              VGG-11               0.061   0.000          0.007   0.007       15.8
              ShuffleNet 0.5       0.072   0.000          0.004   0.003       14.6
              AlexNet              0.063   0.000          0.003   0.003       12.6

                                              b. NLP
                                                 ′                   ′
             Setting                c
                                    CL      c
                                            CL            c LB
                                                          GL      c LB
                                                                  GL      Accuracy ↑ (%)
             in-distribution       0.026   0.000          0.000   0.000        88.2
             out-of-distribution   0.091   0.000          0.015   0.015        71.1

Table 1: Raw values of the estimators in the vision (Figure 7) and NLP experiments of Section 5.2,
                                     ′         ′
        c and GL
before (CL     c LB ) and after (CL
                                  c and GL c LB ) isotonic recalibration.


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       a. ImageNet-R                                                                b. ImageNet-C (merged)

                       No recalibration Isotonic                                                               No recalibration Isotonic
ConvNeXt Large                                                   34.8                           ViT L-16                                                 41.4
 EfficientNet-B7                                                 32.0                           ViT B-16                                                 40.6
        ViT B-16                                                 30.1                   ConvNeXt Large                                                   40.1
 ConvNeXt Tiny                                                   29.0                    ConvNeXt Tiny                                                   31.1
   ResNeXt-101                                                   28.9                    EfficientNet-B7                                                 28.1
  RegNet y 32gf                                                  28.7                     RegNet y 32gf                                                  28.0
     ResNet-152                                                  27.8                      DenseNet-161                                                  27.0
        ViT L-16                                                 27.4                      ResNeXt-101                                                   25.9
        Inception                                                27.3                   Wide ResNet-101                                                  25.1
   DenseNet-161                                                  26.9                        ResNet-152                                                  24.5


                                                                        Accuracy↑ (%)


                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy↑ (%)
Wide ResNet-101                                                  26.9                    EfficientNet-B0                                                 24.4
Wide ResNet-50                                                   25.9                           Inception                                                22.7
     ResNeXt-50                                                  25.1                   Wide ResNet-50                                                   22.1
 EfficientNet-B0                                                 24.1                        ResNeXt-50                                                  22.1
   DenseNet-121                                                  23.9                      DenseNet-121                                                  21.1
      GoogLeNet                                                  23.3                    MobileNet V3L                                                   20.2
 MobileNet V3L                                                   22.1                   RegNet y 400mf                                                   17.7
    VGG-19 BN                                                    21.2                         GoogLeNet                                                  17.1
RegNet y 400mf                                                   20.9                       VGG-19 BN                                                    16.0
       ResNet-18                                                 20.4                     MNASNet 1.0                                                    15.4
  MNASNet 1.0                                                    19.9                          ResNet-18                                                 14.8
  MobileNet V2                                                   18.9                     MobileNet V2                                                   13.9
  ShuffleNet 1.0                                                 18.8                     ShuffleNet 1.0                                                 12.7
  MNASNet 0.5                                c LB
                                                                 15.9                     MNASNet 0.5                                c LB
                                                                                                                                                         11.7
         VGG-11                              GL                  15.8                            VGG-11                              GL                  10.2
  ShuffleNet 0.5                             c
                                             CL
                                                                 14.6                     ShuffleNet 0.5                             c
                                                                                                                                     CL
                                                                                                                                                          9.3
         AlexNet                                                 12.6                            AlexNet                                                  7.8
                0.00    0.05   0.10   0.15    0.20 0.00   0.05                                          0.00    0.05   0.10   0.15    0.20 0.00   0.05
                          c LB + CL
                          GL     c                                                                                c LB + CL
                                                                                                                  GL     c


                c. ImageNet-C (snow)                                                           d. ImageNet-1K (validation set)

                       No recalibration Isotonic                                                               No recalibration Isotonic
ConvNeXt Large                                                   43.8                   ConvNeXt Large                                                   84.1
        ViT L-16                                                 40.9                    ConvNeXt Tiny                                                   82.1
        ViT B-16                                                 39.5                           ViT B-16                                                 81.1
 ConvNeXt Tiny                                                   35.6                     RegNet y 32gf                                                  80.9
   DenseNet-161                                                  26.2                           ViT L-16                                                 79.7
 EfficientNet-B7                                                 23.5                      ResNeXt-101                                                   79.3
 EfficientNet-B0                                                 22.5                   Wide ResNet-101                                                  78.8
  RegNet y 32gf                                                  21.9                   Wide ResNet-50                                                   78.5
Wide ResNet-101                                                  21.4                        ResNet-152                                                  78.3
   ResNeXt-101                                                   21.1                    EfficientNet-B0                                                 77.7
                                                                        Accuracy↑ (%)


                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy↑ (%)
     ResNet-152                                                  20.9                        ResNeXt-50                                                  77.6
        Inception                                                20.6                      DenseNet-161                                                  77.1
   DenseNet-121                                                  18.9                      DenseNet-121                                                  74.4
     ResNeXt-50                                                  17.5                       VGG-19 BN                                                    74.2
      GoogLeNet                                                  17.1                   RegNet y 400mf                                                   74.0
Wide ResNet-50                                                   17.0                    MobileNet V3L                                                   74.0
 MobileNet V3L                                                   13.7                    EfficientNet-B7                                                 73.9
    VGG-19 BN                                                    12.7                     MNASNet 1.0                                                    73.5
RegNet y 400mf                                                   12.2                     MobileNet V2                                                   71.9
       ResNet-18                                                 10.5                         GoogLeNet                                                  69.8
  ShuffleNet 1.0                                                 10.5                          ResNet-18                                                 69.8
  MNASNet 1.0                                                    10.1                           Inception                                                69.5
  MobileNet V2                                                    9.0                     ShuffleNet 1.0                                                 69.4
  MNASNet 0.5                                c LB
                                                                  7.5                            VGG-11                              c LB
                                                                                                                                                         69.0
         VGG-11                              GL                   7.1                     MNASNet 0.5                                GL                  67.7
  ShuffleNet 0.5                             c
                                             CL
                                                                  6.2                     ShuffleNet 0.5                             c
                                                                                                                                     CL
                                                                                                                                                         60.6
         AlexNet                                                  4.9                            AlexNet                                                 56.5
                0.00    0.05   0.10   0.15    0.20 0.00   0.05                                          0.00    0.05   0.10   0.15    0.20 0.00   0.05
                          c LB + CL
                          GL     c                                                                                c LB + CL
                                                                                                                  GL     c

Figure 14: Comparing vision models: a debiased estimate of the grouping loss lower bound GL       c LB
                                                       c
(Equation 13) and an estimate of the calibration loss CL, both accounting for binning, evaluated on
ImageNet-R, ImageNet-C and ImageNet-1K, sorted by model accuracy. Partitions R are obtained
from a decision tree partitioning constrained to create at most # samples in bin/30 regions in each bin.
Isotonic regression is used for post-hoc recalibration of the models (right).


                                                                             33
                  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          a. ImageNet-R                                                       b. ImageNet-C (merged)
                              ′
Network           CL
                  c        CL
                           c        GL
                                    c LB    c ′LB
                                            GL      Accuracy↑ (%)        Network            CL
                                                                                            c       c′
                                                                                                    CL     GL
                                                                                                           c LB     c ′LB
                                                                                                                    GL       Accuracy↑ (%)
ConvNeXt Large    0.029   0.000     0.055   0.060       34.8             ViT L-16          0.004   0.000   0.016     0.016       41.4
EfficientNet-B7   0.055   0.000     0.022   0.021       32.0             ViT B-16          0.001   0.000   0.007     0.009       40.6
ViT B-16          0.044   0.000     0.019   0.021       30.1             ConvNeXt Large    0.002   0.000   0.016     0.016       40.1
ConvNeXt Tiny     0.017   0.000     0.036   0.039       29.0             ConvNeXt Tiny     0.005   0.000   0.008     0.008       31.1
ResNeXt-101       0.114   0.000     0.019   0.018       28.9             EfficientNet-B7   0.025   0.000   0.009     0.007       28.1
RegNet y_32gf     0.108   0.000     0.020   0.020       28.7             RegNet y_32gf     0.053   0.000   0.002     0.002       28.0
ResNet-152        0.082   0.000     0.020   0.018       27.8             DenseNet-161      0.045   0.000   0.004     0.004       27.0
ViT L-16          0.096   0.000     0.044   0.043       27.4             ResNeXt-101       0.071   0.000   0.005     0.006       25.9
Inception         0.200   0.000     0.006   0.009       27.3             Wide ResNet-101   0.036   0.000   0.003     0.004       25.1
DenseNet-161      0.093   0.001     0.023   0.021       26.9             ResNet-152        0.031   0.000   0.002     0.002       24.5
Wide ResNet-101   0.079   0.000     0.022   0.020       26.9             EfficientNet-B0   0.003   0.000   0.002     0.002       24.4
Wide ResNet-50    0.082   0.000     0.020   0.019       25.9             Inception         0.171   0.000   -0.006    0.001       22.7
ResNeXt-50        0.091   0.000     0.013   0.013       25.1             Wide ResNet-50    0.040   0.000   0.003     0.003       22.1
EfficientNet-B0   0.028   0.000     0.015   0.018       24.1             ResNeXt-50        0.058   0.000   0.006     0.006       22.1
DenseNet-121      0.059   0.000     0.013   0.010       23.9             DenseNet-121      0.021   0.000   0.002     0.002       21.1
GoogLeNet         0.009   0.001     0.011   0.011       23.3             MobileNet V3L     0.024   0.000   0.001     0.001       20.2
MobileNet V3L     0.104   0.000     0.007   0.006       22.2             RegNet y_400mf    0.034   0.000   0.003     0.002       17.7
VGG-19 BN         0.073   0.000     0.012   0.011       21.2             GoogLeNet         0.004   0.000   0.001     0.001       17.1
RegNet y_400mf    0.084   0.000     0.011   0.010       21.0             VGG-19 BN         0.019   0.000   0.003     0.003       16.0
ResNet-18         0.057   0.000     0.010   0.009       20.4             MNASNet 1.0       0.032   0.000   0.002     0.002       15.4
MNASNet 1.0       0.095   0.000     0.008   0.008       19.9             ResNet-18         0.027   0.000   0.004     0.004       14.8
MobileNet V2      0.070   0.000     0.007   0.009       18.9             MobileNet V2      0.028   0.000   0.002     0.002       13.9
ShuffleNet 1.0    0.091   0.000     0.007   0.006       18.8             ShuffleNet 1.0    0.073   0.000   0.002     0.003       12.7
MNASNet 0.5       0.017   0.000     0.005   0.007       15.9             MNASNet 0.5       0.009   0.000   0.003     0.003       11.7
VGG-11            0.061   0.000     0.007   0.007       15.8             VGG-11            0.022   0.000   0.005     0.004       10.2
ShuffleNet 0.5    0.072   0.000     0.004   0.003       14.6             ShuffleNet 0.5    0.084   0.000   0.006     0.005        9.3
AlexNet           0.063   0.000     0.003   0.003       12.6             AlexNet           0.029   0.000   0.001     0.001        7.8

                     c. ImageNet-C (snow)                                                  d. ImageNet-1K (validation set)
                                ′
Network            CL
                   c       CL
                           c        GL
                                    c LB    c ′LB
                                            GL      Accuracy↑ (%)        Network            CL
                                                                                            c       c′
                                                                                                    CL     GL
                                                                                                           c LB     c ′LB
                                                                                                                    GL       Accuracy↑ (%)
ConvNeXt Large    0.002   0.000     0.030   0.031       43.8             ConvNeXt Large    0.015   0.000   0.002     0.002       84.1
ViT L-16          0.007   0.000     0.013   0.013       40.9             ConvNeXt Tiny     0.028   0.000   0.002     0.002       82.1
ViT B-16          0.004   0.000     0.005   0.005       39.5             ViT B-16          0.004   0.000   -0.000    0.000       81.1
ConvNeXt Tiny     0.011   0.000     0.021   0.021       35.6             RegNet y_32gf     0.009   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       80.9
DenseNet-161      0.069   0.000     0.019   0.019       26.2             ViT L-16          0.003   0.000   0.001     0.001       79.7
EfficientNet-B7   0.034   0.000     0.006   0.005       23.5             ResNeXt-101       0.010   0.000   -0.002    0.000       79.3
EfficientNet-B0   0.015   0.000     0.008   0.009       22.5             Wide ResNet-101   0.004   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       78.8
RegNet y_32gf     0.102   0.000     0.021   0.020       21.9             Wide ResNet-50    0.004   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       78.5
Wide ResNet-101   0.057   0.000     0.012   0.011       21.4             ResNet-152        0.004   0.000   -0.001    0.000       78.3
ResNeXt-101       0.133   0.000     0.025   0.025       21.1             EfficientNet-B0   0.006   0.000   0.000     0.000       77.7
ResNet-152        0.070   0.000     0.020   0.020       20.9             ResNeXt-50        0.006   0.000   -0.001    0.000       77.6
Inception         0.194   0.000     0.000   0.004       20.6             DenseNet-161      0.004   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       77.1
DenseNet-121      0.042   0.000     0.009   0.007       18.9             DenseNet-121      0.001   0.000   -0.000   -0.000       74.4
ResNeXt-50        0.100   0.000     0.018   0.019       17.5             VGG-19 BN         0.002   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       74.2
GoogLeNet         0.008   0.000     0.005   0.005       17.1             RegNet y_400mf    0.001   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       74.0
Wide ResNet-50    0.083   0.000     0.015   0.014       17.0             MobileNet V3L     0.006   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       74.0
MobileNet V3L     0.055   0.000     0.004   0.003       13.7             EfficientNet-B7   0.001   0.000   0.003     0.002       73.9
VGG-19 BN         0.053   0.000     0.011   0.010       12.7             MNASNet 1.0       0.003   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       73.5
RegNet y_400mf    0.070   0.000     0.009   0.007       12.2             MobileNet V2      0.001   0.000   -0.001    0.000       71.9
ResNet-18         0.088   0.000     0.009   0.010       10.5             GoogLeNet         0.006   0.000   -0.000    0.000       69.8
ShuffleNet 1.0    0.116   0.000     0.006   0.005       10.5             ResNet-18         0.001   0.000   0.000    -0.000       69.8
MNASNet 1.0       0.081   0.000     0.007   0.006       10.1             Inception         0.050   0.000   -0.007    0.001       69.5
MobileNet V2      0.100   0.000     0.007   0.006        9.0             ShuffleNet 1.0    0.008   0.000   -0.001    0.000       69.4
MNASNet 0.5       0.026   0.000     0.002   0.003        7.5             VGG-11            0.000   0.000   -0.000    0.000       69.0
VGG-11            0.047   0.000     0.005   0.004        7.1             MNASNet 0.5       0.012   0.000   -0.001   -0.000       67.7
ShuffleNet 0.5    0.094   0.000     0.002   0.002        6.2             ShuffleNet 0.5    0.004   0.000   -0.001    0.000       60.6
AlexNet           0.051   0.000     0.002   0.002        4.9             AlexNet           0.001   0.000   -0.001   -0.001       56.5

                                                                                                           ′        ′
                                                                              c and GL
                  Table 2: Raw values of the estimators of Figure 14, before (CL    c LB ) and after (CL
                                                                                                      c and GL
                                                                                                            c )
                                                                                                               LB
                  isotonic recalibration.

                                                                    34
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.1.1                       I MAGE N ET-R – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS

                                  AlexNet                    VGG 11                 ResNet 18               DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                       Sizes                     Sizes
                           148                        143                         119                        70
Correct predictions


                           750                        800                         600                        600
                           1390                       1217                        1064                       912


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


                              Inception                 GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5          MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                       Sizes                     Sizes
                           68                         173                         77                        57
Correct predictions


                           1500                       1000                        800                       600
                           2472                       1652                        1209                      1028


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


                             ResNext 50               WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                       Sizes                     Sizes
                           39                         70                          94                        183
Correct predictions


                           600                        600                         1200                      600
                           1197                       1183                        1937                      1141


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf                 ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                      Sizes
                            55                         72                         33
Correct predictions


                            450                        450                        600
                            884                        814                        979


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 15: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-R for small versions of pre-trained networks, without post-hoc recali-
bration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision
stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                          35
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.1.2                      I MAGE N ET-R – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS , K - MEANS

                              AlexNet                   VGG 11                    ResNet 18              DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           59                        86                         117                       58
Correct predictions


                           1200                      900                        750                       800
                           1985                      1685                       1358                      1207


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                             Inception                GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5         MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           26                        16                         65                        59
Correct predictions


                           1500                      1200                       900                       750
                           2592                      2077                       1617                      1359


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                            ResNext 50              WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           34                        35                         27                        123
Correct predictions


                           900                       900                        1500                      900
                           1605                      1666                       2852                      1717


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf               ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes
                           26                        86                         15
Correct predictions


                           600                       750                        750
                           1166                      1486                       1333


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 16: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-R for small versions of pre-trained networks, without post-hoc recali-
bration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a k-means
clustering, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy (for a fair comparison with decision stump clustering).


                                                                        36
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.1.3                       I MAGE N ET-R – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , BEST VERSIONS

                             VGG 19 BN                 ResNet 152               DenseNet 161         ShuffleNet V2 x1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                            75                        28                        16                         48
Correct predictions


                            600                       750                       600                        600
                            918                       1238                      1176                       933


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


                      MobileNet V3 Large              ResNext 101              WideResNet 101             MNASNet 1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                            36                        47                        110                        66
Correct predictions


                            600                       900                       800                        450
                            958                       1769                      1208                       870


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


                           EfficientNet B7           RegNet y_32gf                ViT L-16               ConvNeXt Large
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                            75                        24                        20                         20
Correct predictions


                            600                       900                       750                        450
                            907                       1627                      1241                       742


          0
                      0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 17: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-R for best versions of pre-trained networks, without post-hoc recalibration.
In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision stump
constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                         37
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.1.4                      I MAGE N ET-R – I SOTONIC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS

                              AlexNet                   VGG 11                    ResNet 18              DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           19                        14                         14                        23
Correct predictions


                           1800                      1800                       1200                      1200
                           3505                      3250                       2129                      2017


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                             Inception                GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5         MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           31                        17                         14                        27
Correct predictions


                           1200                      1200                       2400                      1500
                           1894                      1842                       3793                      2522


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                            ResNext 50              WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           49                        14                         14                        17
Correct predictions


                           900                       1200                       1600                      1500
                           1680                      2235                       2410                      2777


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf               ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes
                           17                        92                         333
Correct predictions


                           1200                      1200                       1000
                           2233                      1928                       1577


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 18: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-R for small versions of pre-trained networks, with isotonic recalibration.
In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision stump
constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        38
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.1.5                      I MAGE N ET-R – I SOTONIC RECALIBRATION , BEST VERSIONS

                            VGG 19 BN                 ResNet 152               DenseNet 161         ShuffleNet V2 x1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           34                        54                        86                        34
Correct predictions


                           1200                      1000                      1200                      1500
                           2115                      1541                      2115                      2666


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                      MobileNet V3 Large             ResNext 101              WideResNet 101             MNASNet 1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           41                        32                        34                        18
Correct predictions


                           1200                      1200                      1200                      1500
                           1885                      2094                      2069                      2658


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          EfficientNet B7           RegNet y_32gf                ViT L-16               ConvNeXt Large
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           17                        47                        94                        205
Correct predictions


                           1200                      1000                      750                       1200
                           1901                      1520                      1460                      1841


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


Figure 19: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-R for best versions of pre-trained networks, with isotonic recalibration.
In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision stump
constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        39
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.2.1                      I MAGE N ET-C – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS

                              AlexNet                   VGG 11                    ResNet 18              DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           94                        107                        215                       303
Correct predictions


                           1800                      1800                       1500                      1200
                           3328                      3374                       2763                      2285


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                             Inception                GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5         MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           416                       121                        248                       205
Correct predictions


                           1500                      1800                       1200                      1500
                           2976                      3220                       2197                      2834


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                            ResNext 50              WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           421                       346                        57                        280
Correct predictions


                           1000                      1200                       2400                      1600
                           1591                      1959                       3692                      2533


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf               ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes
                           301                       38                         16
Correct predictions


                           1200                      900                        1500
                           2176                      1580                       2858


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 20: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-C for small versions of pre-trained networks, without post-hoc recali-
bration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision
stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        40
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.2.2                      I MAGE N ET-C – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , BEST VERSIONS

                            VGG 19 BN                 ResNet 152               DenseNet 161         ShuffleNet V2 x1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           214                       386                       441                       284
Correct predictions


                           1500                      1250                      1000                      1200
                           2785                      1862                      1410                      2081


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                      MobileNet V3 Large             ResNext 101              WideResNet 101             MNASNet 1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           283                       488                       381                       237
Correct predictions


                           1200                      1250                      1250                      1600
                           2286                      1864                      1847                      2455


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          EfficientNet B7           RegNet y_32gf                ViT L-16               ConvNeXt Large
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           382                       443                       42                        23
Correct predictions


                           1000                      1250                      750                       1200
                           1528                      1822                      1403                      1924


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


Figure 21: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-C for best versions of pre-trained networks, without post-hoc recalibration.
In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision stump
constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        41
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.2.3                      I MAGE N ET-C – I SOTONIC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS

                              AlexNet                   VGG 11                    ResNet 18              DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           16                        19                         29                        71
Correct predictions


                           6000                      4500                       3000                      2400
                           9043                      7623                       5389                      3724


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                             Inception                GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5         MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           66                        21                         14                        52
Correct predictions


                           1800                      2400                       4500                      3000
                           3342                      4565                       7267                      5539


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                            ResNext 50              WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           35                        61                         17                        44
Correct predictions


                           2400                      1800                       4500                      1800
                           3819                      3382                       6779                      3104


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf               ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes
                           20                        20                         122
Correct predictions


                           3000                      1200                       1500
                           4842                      1979                       2998


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 22: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-C for small versions of pre-trained networks, with isotonic recalibration.
In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision stump
constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        42
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.2.4                      I MAGE N ET-C – I SOTONIC RECALIBRATION , BEST VERSIONS

                            VGG 19 BN                 ResNet 152               DenseNet 161         ShuffleNet V2 x1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           43                        79                        20                        25
Correct predictions


                           3000                      2400                      1500                      4500
                           5747                      3971                      2493                      6196


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                      MobileNet V3 Large             ResNext 101              WideResNet 101             MNASNet 1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           73                        58                        61                        22
Correct predictions


                           2400                      1800                      1800                      3000
                           3895                      3524                      3310                      5241


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          EfficientNet B7           RegNet y_32gf                ViT L-16               ConvNeXt Large
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           63                        103                       285                       100
Correct predictions


                           1500                      2000                      1200                      1200
                           2871                      3016                      1840                      1897


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


Figure 23: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-C for best versions of pre-trained networks, with isotonic recalibration.
In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a decision stump
constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        43
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.3.1                      I MAGE N ET-1K – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS

                              AlexNet                   VGG 11                    ResNet 18              DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           82                        35                         28                        117
Correct predictions


                           1500                      2400                       2400                      3000
                           2766                      4374                       4644                      5553


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                             Inception                GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5         MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           15                        145                        36                        25
Correct predictions


                           4500                      1500                       2400                      3000
                           8266                      2954                       3940                      5086


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                            ResNext 50              WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           50                        15                         157                       20
Correct predictions


                           4500                      4500                       1200                      1500
                           7309                      7233                       2040                      2701


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf               ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes
                           78                        54                         17
Correct predictions


                           3000                      3000                       1200
                           5488                      5047                       2234


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 24: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-1K (validation set) for small versions of pre-trained networks, without
post-hoc recalibration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions
with a decision stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        44
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.3.2                      I MAGE N ET-1K – N O POST- HOC RECALIBRATION , BEST VERSIONS

                            VGG 19 BN                 ResNet 152               DenseNet 161         ShuffleNet V2 x1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           111                       36                        43                        15
Correct predictions


                           3000                      4500                      4500                      3000
                           5817                      7073                      6852                      5868


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                      MobileNet V3 Large             ResNext 101              WideResNet 101             MNASNet 1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           51                        19                        56                        102
Correct predictions


                           4500                      4500                      4500                      3000
                           6452                      8167                      7390                      5817


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          EfficientNet B7           RegNet y_32gf                ViT L-16               ConvNeXt Large
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           24                        19                        31                        34
Correct predictions


                           1800                      4500                      4500                      2400
                           3500                      8433                      6547                      3740


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


Figure 25: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-1K (validation set) for best versions of pre-trained networks, without
post-hoc recalibration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions
with a decision stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        45
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.3.3                      I MAGE N ET-1K – I SOTONIC RECALIBRATION , SMALL VERSIONS

                              AlexNet                   VGG 11                    ResNet 18              DenseNet 121
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           38                        14                         30                        100
Correct predictions


                           1200                      2400                       2400                      2400
                           2252                      4059                       3997                      4569


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                             Inception                GoogleNet               ShuffleNet V2 x0.5         MobileNet V2
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           28                        18                         92                        20
Correct predictions


                           2400                      1800                       1200                      2400
                           4075                      3360                       2392                      4244


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                            ResNext 50              WideResNet 50               MNASNet 0.5              EfficientNet B0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes                     Sizes
                           16                        21                         23                        15
Correct predictions


                           3000                      2400                       1800                      3000
                           5139                      4665                       3387                      5155


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          RegNet y_400mf               ViT B-16                ConvNeXt Tiny
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                      Sizes
                           30                        22                         112
Correct predictions


                           2400                      4500                       3000
                           4728                      6038                       5314


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0     Confidence score   1


Figure 26: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-1K (validation set) for small versions of pre-trained networks, with isotonic
recalibration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a
decision stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        46
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 D.3.4                      I MAGE N ET-1K – I SOTONIC RECALIBRATION , BEST VERSIONS

                            VGG 19 BN                 ResNet 152               DenseNet 161         ShuffleNet V2 x1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           15                        99                        19                        35
Correct predictions


                           2400                      3000                      3000                      2400
                           4781                      5709                      5294                      4358


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                      MobileNet V3 Large             ResNext 101              WideResNet 101             MNASNet 1.0
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           17                        28                        67                        45
Correct predictions


                           2400                      3000                      3000                      2400
                           4165                      5288                      5867                      4697


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


                          EfficientNet B7           RegNet y_32gf                ViT L-16               ConvNeXt Large
 100
 (%)                      Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes                     Sizes
                           99                        111                       16                        66
Correct predictions


                           1800                      3000                      4500                      4500
                           3473                      5866                      6346                      6214


          0
                      0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1 0    Confidence score   1


Figure 27: Vision: Fraction of correct predictions versus confidence score of predicted class
(maxk Sk ) on ImageNet-1K (validation set) for best versions of pre-trained networks, with iso-
tonic recalibration. In each bin on confidence scores, the level set is partitioned into 2 regions with a
decision stump constrained to one balanced split, with a 50-50 train-test split strategy.


                                                                        47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               48
