Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING G ROUP I MPORTANCE USING THE D IFFEREN -
TIABLE H YPERGEOMETRIC D ISTRIBUTION

 Thomas M. Sutter, Laura Manduchi, Alain Ryser, Julia E. Vogt
 Department of Computer Science
 ETH Zurich
 Switzerland
 {thomas.sutter,laura.manduchi,alain.ryser,julia.vogt}@inf.ethz.ch



                                            A BSTRACT

         Partitioning a set of elements into subsets of a priori unknown sizes is essential
         in many applications. These subset sizes are rarely explicitly learned - be it the
         cluster sizes in clustering applications or the number of shared versus independent
         generative latent factors in weakly-supervised learning. Probability distributions
         over correct combinations of subset sizes are non-differentiable due to hard con-
         straints, which prohibit gradient-based optimization. In this work, we propose
         the differentiable hypergeometric distribution. The hypergeometric distribution
         models the probability of different group sizes based on their relative importance.
         We introduce reparameterizable gradients to learn the importance between groups
         and highlight the advantage of explicitly learning the size of subsets in two typical
         applications: weakly-supervised learning and clustering. In both applications, we
         outperform previous approaches, which rely on suboptimal heuristics to model the
         unknown size of groups.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Many machine learning approaches rely on differentiable sampling procedures, from which the
reparameterization trick for Gaussian distributions is best known (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014). The non-differentiable nature of discrete distributions has long hindered their use
in machine learning pipelines with end-to-end gradient-based optimization. Only the concrete
distribution (Maddison et al., 2017) or Gumbel-Softmax trick (Jang et al., 2016) boosted the use of
categorical distributions in stochastic networks. Unlike the high-variance gradients of score-based
methods such as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), these works enable reparameterized and low-
variance gradients with respect to the categorical weights. Despite enormous progress in recent years,
the extension to more complex probability distributions is still missing or comes with a trade-off
regarding differentiability or computational speed (Huijben et al., 2021).
The hypergeometric distribution plays a vital role in various areas of science, such as social and
computer science and biology. The range of applications goes from modeling gene mutations and
recommender systems to analyzing social networks (Becchetti et al., 2011; Casiraghi et al., 2016;
Lodato et al., 2015). The hypergeometric distribution describes sampling without replacement and,
therefore, models the number of samples per group given a limited number of total samples. Hence, it
is essential wherever the choice of a single group element influences the probability of the remaining
elements being drawn. Previous work mainly uses the hypergeometric distribution implicitly to model
assumptions or as a tool to prove theorems. However, its hard constraints prohibited integrating the
hypergeometric distribution into gradient-based optimization processes.
In this work, we propose the differentiable hypergeometric distribution. It enables the reparameteri-
zation trick for the hypergeometric distribution and allows its integration into stochastic networks
of modern, gradient-based learning frameworks. In turn, we learn the size of groups by modeling
their relative importance in an end-to-end fashion. First, we evaluate our approach by performing
a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, where we compare the proposed method to a non-differentiable refer-
ence implementation. Further, we highlight the advantages of our new formulation in two different
applications, where previous work failed to learn the size of subgroups of samples explicitly. Our


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


first application is a weakly-supervised learning task where two images share an unknown number of
generative factors. The differentiable hypergeometric distribution learns the number of shared and
independent generative factors between paired views through gradient-based optimization. In contrast,
previous work has to infer these numbers based on heuristics or rely on prior knowledge about the
connection between images. Our second application integrates the hypergeometric distribution into
a variational clustering algorithm. We model the number of samples per cluster using an adaptive
hypergeometric distribution prior. By doing so, we overcome the simplified i.i.d. assumption and
establish a dependency structure between dataset samples. The contributions of our work are the
following: i) we introduce the differentiable hypergeometric distribution, which enables its use for
gradient-based optimization, ii) we demonstrate the accuracy of our approach by evaluating it against
a reference implementation, and iii) we show the advantages of explicitly learning the size of groups
in two different applications, namely weakly-supervised learning and clustering.

2    R ELATED W ORK
In recent years, finding continuous relaxations for discrete distributions and non-differentiable
algorithms to integrate them into differentiable pipelines gained popularity. Jang et al. (2016) and
Maddison et al. (2017) concurrently propose the Gumbel-Softmax gradient estimator. It enables
reparameterized gradients with respect to parameters of the categorical distribution and their use in
differentiable models. Methods to select k elements - instead of only one - are subsequently introduced.
Kool et al. (2019; 2020a) implement sequential sampling without replacement using a stochastic beam
search. Kool et al. (2020b) extend the sequential sampling procedure to a reparameterizable estimator
using REINFORCE. Grover et al. (2019) propose a relaxed version of a sorting procedure, which
simultaneously serves as a differentiable and reparameterizable top-k element selection procedure.
Xie & Ermon (2019) propose a relaxed subset selection algorithm to select a given number k out
of n elements. Paulus et al. (2020) generalize stochastic softmax tricks to combinatorial spaces.1
Unlike Kool et al. (2020b), who also use a sequence of categorical distributions, the proposed method
describes a differentiable reparameterization for the more complex but well-defined hypergeometric
distribution. Differentiable reparameterizations of complex distributions with learnable parameters
enable new applications, as shown in Section 5.
The classical use case for the hypergeometric probability distribution is sampling without replacement,
for which urn models serve as the standard example. The hypergeometric distribution has previously
been used as a modeling distribution in simulations of social evolution (Ono et al., 2003; Paolucci
et al., 2006; Lashin et al., 2007), tracking of human neurons and gene mutations (Lodato et al.,
2015; 2018), network analysis (Casiraghi et al., 2016), and recommender systems (Becchetti et al.,
2011). Further, it is used as a modeling assumption in submodular maximization (Feldman et al.,
2017; Harshaw et al., 2019), multimodal VAEs (Sutter & Vogt, 2021), k-means clustering variants
(Chien et al., 2018), or random permutation graphs (Bhattacharya & Mukherjee, 2017). Despite
not being differentiable, current sampling schemes for the multivariate hypergeometric distribution
are a trade-off between numerical stability and computational efficiency (Liao & Rosen, 2001; Fog,
2008a;b).

3    P RELIMINARIES
Suppose we have an urn with marbles in different colors. Let c ∈ N be the number of different
classes or groups (e.g. marble colors in the urn),P  m = [m1 , . . . , mc ] ∈ Nc describe the number of
                                                       c
elements per class (e.g. marbles per color), N = i=1 mi be the total number of elements (e.g. all
marbles in the urn) and n ∈ {0, . . . , N } be the number of elements (e.g. marbles) to draw. Then, the
multivariate hypergeometric distribution describes thePprobability of drawing x = [x1 , . . . , xc ] ∈ Nc0
                                                         c
marbles by sampling without replacement such that i=1 xi = n, where xi is the number of drawn
marbles of class i.
Using the central hypergeometric distribution, every marble is picked with equal probability. The
number of selected elements per class is then proportional to the ratio between number of elements
per class and the total number of elements in the urn. This assumption is often too restrictive, and we
   1
     Huijben et al. (2021) provide a great review article of the Gumbel-Max trick and its extensions describing
recent algorithmic developments and applications.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


want an additional modeling parameter for the importance of a class. Generalizations, which make
certain classes more likely to be picked, are called noncentral hypergeometric distributions.
In the literature, two different versions of the noncentral hypergeometric distribution exist, Fisher’s
(Fisher, 1935) and Wallenius’ (Wallenius, 1963; Chesson, 1976) distribution. Due to limitations of
the latter (Fog, 2008a), we will refer to Fisher’s version of the noncentral hypergeometric distribution
in the remaining part of this work.
Definition 3.1 (Multivariate Fisher’s Noncentral Hypergeometric Distribution (Fisher, 1935)). A
random vector X follows Fisher’s noncentral multivariate distribution, if its joint probability mass
function is given by
                                                           c
                                                       1 Y m i xi
                       P (X = x; ω) = pX (x; ω) =                   ωi                           (1)
                                                       P0 i=1 xi
                    Qc           yi
where P0 = y∈S i=1 m                                                                   c
             P
                           yi ωi . The support S of the PMF is given by S = {x ∈ N0 : ∀i xi ≤
                             i

    Pc                  n
                                   n!
mi , i=1 xi = n} and k = k!(n−k)!     .

The total number of samples per class m, the number of samples to draw n, and the class importance
ω parameterize the multivariate distribution. Here, we assume m and n to be constant per experiment
and are mainly interested in the class importance ω. Consequently, we only use ω as the distribution
parameter in Equation (1) and the remaining part of this work.
The class importance ω is a crucial modeling parameter in applying the noncentral hypergeometric
distribution (see (Chesson, 1976)). It resembles latent factors like the importance, fitness, or adaptation
capabilities of a class of elements, which are often more challenging to measure in field experiments
than the sizes of different populations. Introducing a differentiable and reparameterizable formulation
enables the learning of class importance from data (see Section 5). We provide a more detailed
introduction to the hypergeometric distribution in Appendix A.

4     M ETHOD
The reparameterizable sampling for the proposed differentiable hypergeometric distribution consists
of three parts:

      1. Reformulate the multivariate distribution as a sequence of interdependent and conditional
         univariate hypergeometric distributions.
      2. Calculate the probability mass function of the respective univariate distributions.
      3. Sample from the conditional distributions utilizing the Gumbel-Softmax trick.

We explain all steps in the following Sections 4.1 to 4.3. Additionally, Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2
(see Appendix B.5) describe the full reparameterizable sampling method using pseudo-code and
Figures 5 and 6 in the appendix illustrate it graphically.

4.1   S EQUENTIAL S AMPLING U SING C ONDITIONAL D ISTRIBUTIONS

Because it scales linearly with the number of classes and not with the size of the support S (see
Definition 3.1), we use the conditional sampling algorithm (Liao & Rosen, 2001; Fog, 2008b).
Following the chain rule of probability, we sample from the following sequence of conditional
probability distributions
                                                        c
                                                        Y                [
                           pX (x; ω) = pX1 (x1 ; ω)         pXi (xi |{         xj }; ω)                 (2)
                                                      i=2                j<i


Following Equation (2), every pXi (·) describes the probability of a single class i of samples given
the already sampled classes j < i. In the conditional sampling method, we model every conditional
distribution pXi (·) as a univariate hypergeometric distribution with two classes L and R: for i = 1..c,
we define class L := {i} as the left class and class R := {j : j > i ∧ j ≤ c} as the right class.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Sampling from the differentiable hypergeometric distribution. The different blocks are
explained in more detail in Sections 4.1 to 4.3 and Algorithm 2.
  Input: m ∈ Nc , ω ∈ Rc0+ , n ∈ N, τ ∈ R0+
  Output: x ∈ Nc0 , {αi ∈ Rmi }ci=1 , {r̂i ∈ Rmi }ci=1
  for i ∈ {1, . . . , c} S
                         do
                           c
      L ← i, R ← { j=i+1 j}                            # Formulate the multivariate as a univariate
      m → mL , mR ∈ Z0+ , ω → ωL , ωR ∈ R0+                            # distribution (Section 4.1)
      xL , αL , r̂L ←sampleUNCHG(mL , mR , ωL , ωR , n, τ ) # Sample from univariate distribution
      n ← n − xL , m ← m \ mL , ω ← ω \ ωL                       # Re-assign classes for next step
      xi ← xL , αi ← αL , r̂i ← r̂L                                    # Assign values for class i
  end for
  return x, {αi }ci=1 , {r̂i }ci=1

  function SAMPLE UNCHG(mi , mj , ωi , ωj , n, τ )
     αi ← calcLogPMF(mi , mj , ωi , ωj , n)                                             # Section 4.2
     xi , r̂i ← contRelaxSample(αi , τ ))                                               # Section 4.3
     return xi , αi , r̂i
  end function


To sample from the original multivariate hypergeometric distribution, we sequentially sample from
the urn with only two classes L and R, which simplifies to sampling from the univariate noncentral
hypergeometric distribution given by the following parameters (Fog, 2008b):
                                                   P                        P
                                                      l∈L ωl · ml                  ωr · mr
              X                  X
       mL =       ml ,    mR =      mr ,     ωL =                 ,   ωR = r∈R                 (3)
                                                        mL                       mR
              l∈L                r∈R
We leave the exploration of different and more sophisticated subset selection strategies for future
work.
Samples drawn using this algorithm are only approximately equal to samples from the joint noncentral
multivariate distribution with equal ω̃. Because of the merging operation in Equation (3), the
approximation error is only equal to zero for the central hypergeometric distribution. One way to
reduce this approximation error independent of the learned ω is a different subset selection algorithm
(Fog, 2008b). Note that the proposed method introduces an approximation error compared to a
non-differentiable reference implementation with the same ω (see Section 5.1), but not the underlying
and desired true class importance. We can still recover the true class importance because a different
ω overcomes the approximation error introduced by merging needed for the conditional sampling
procedure.

4.2   C ALCULATE P ROBABILITY M ASS F UNCTION

In Section 4.1, we derive a sequential sampling procedure for the hypergeometric distribution, in
which we repeatedly draw from a univariate distribution to simplify sampling. Therefore, we only
need to compute the PMF for the univariate distribution. See Appendix B.1, for the multivariate
extension. The PMF pXL (xL ; ω) for the hypergeometric distribution of two classes L and R defined
by mL , mR , ωL , ωR and n is given as

                                           1 mL xL           mR
                          pXL (xL ; ω) =            ωL               ω n−xL                       (4)
                                          P0 x L           n − xL R
P0 is defined as in Equation (1), ωL , ωR and their derivation from ω, and mL , mR , n as in Equa-
tion (3). The large exponent of ω and the combinatorial terms can lead to numerical instabilities
making the direct calculation of the PMF in Equation (4) infeasible. Calculations in log-domain
increase numerical stability for such large domains, while keeping the relative ordering.
Lemma 4.1. The unnormalized log-probabilities
                  log pXL (xL ; ω) =xL log ωL + (n − xL ) log ωR + ψF (xL ) + C                   (5)
define the unnormalized weights of a categorical distribution that follows Fisher’s noncentral hyper-
geometric distribution. C is a constant and ψF (xL ) is defined as
  ψF (xL ) = − log (Γ(xL + 1)Γ(n − xL + 1)) − log (Γ(mL − xL + 1)Γ(mR − n + xL + 1)) (6)


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We provide the proof to Lemma 4.1 in Appendix B.2. Common automatic differentiation frameworks2
have numerically stable implementations of log Γ(·). Therefore, Equation (6) and more importantly
Equation (5) can be calculated efficiently and reliably. Lemma 4.1 relates to the calcLogPMF
function in Algorithm 1, and Algorithm 2 describes calcLogPMF in more detail.
Using the multivariate form of Lemma 4.1 (see Appendix B.1), it is possible to directly calculate
the categorical weights for the full support S. Compared to the conditional sampling procedure, this
would result Qin a computational speed-up for a large number of classes c. However, the size of the
                c
support S is i=1 mi , quickly resulting in unfeasible memory requirements. Therefore, we would
restrict ourselves to settings with no practical relevance.

4.3       C ONTINUOUS R ELAXATION FOR THE CONDITIONAL DISTRIBUTION

Continuous relaxations describe procedures to make discrete distributions differentiable with respect
to their parameters (Huijben et al., 2021). Following Lemma 4.1, we make use of the Gumbel-
Softmax trick to reparameterize the hypergeometric distribution via its conditional distributions
pXL (·). The Gumbel-Softmax trick enables a reparameterization of categorical distributions that
allows the computation of gradients with respect to the distribution parameters. We state Lemma 4.2,
and provide a proof in Appendix B.3.
Lemma 4.2. The Gumbel-Softmax trick can be applied to the conditional distribution
pXi (xi |{xk }i−1
              k=1 ; ω) of class i given the already sampled classes k < i.

Lemma 4.2 connects the Gumbel-Softmax trick to the hypergeometric distribution. Hence, reparame-
terizing enables gradients with respect to the parameter ω of the hypergeometric distribution:
                    u ∼ U (0, 1),           gi = − log(− log(u)),                r̂i = αi (ω) + gi         (7)
where u ∈ [0, 1]mi +1 is a random sample from an i.i.d. uniform distribution U . gi is therefore i.i.d.
gumbel noise. r̂i are the perturbed conditional probabilities for class i given the class conditional
unnormalized log-weights αi (ω):
                 αi (ω) = log pXi (xi ; ω) − C = [log pXi (0; ω), . . . , log pXi (mi ; ω)] − C            (8)

We use the softmax function to generate (mi + 1)-dimensional sample vectors from the perturbed
unnormalized weights rˆi /τ , where τ is the temperature parameter. Due to Lemma 4.2, we do not
need to calculate the constant C in Equations (5) and (8). We refer to the original works (Jang et al.,
2016; Maddison et al., 2017) or Appendix A.2 for more details on the Gumbel-Softmax trick itself.
Lemma 4.2 corresponds to the contRelaxSample function in Algorithm 1 (see Algorithm 2 for
more details).
Note the difference between the categorical and the hypergeometric distribution concerning the
Gumbel-Softmax trick. Whereas the (unnormalized) category weights are also the distribution param-
eters for the former, the log-weights αi of class i are a function of the class importance ω and the
pre-defined xi = P[0, . . . , mi ] for the latter. It follows that for a sequence of categorical distributions,
                   c
we would have i=1 mi learnable parameters, whereas for the differentiable hypergeometric distri-
bution we only have c learnable parameters. In Appendix B.4, we discuss further difficulties in using
a sequence of unconstrained differentiable categorical distributions.

5       E XPERIMENTS
We perform three experiments that empirically validate the proposed method and highlight the
versatility and applicability of the differentiable hypergeometric distribution to different important
areas of machine learning. We first test the generated samples of the proposed differentiable formu-
lation procedure against a non-differentiable reference implementation. Second, we present how
the hypergeometric distribution helps detecting shared generative factors of paired samples in a
weakly-supervised setting. Our third experiment demonstrates the hypergeometric distribution as a
prior in variational clustering algorithms. In our experiments we focus on applications in the field
of distribution inference where we make use of the reparameterizable gradients. Nevertheless, the
    2
        E. g. Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016) or PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   (a) Histograms                               (b) Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test

Figure 1: Comparing random variables from the proposed differentiable formulation to a non-
differentiable reference implementation. We draw samples from a multivariate noncentral hypergeo-
metric distribution consisting of three classes. mi = 200 ∀i and n = 180. The class weights ω1 and
ω3 for classes 1 and 3 are set to 1.0, ω2 is increased from 1.0 to 10.0 with a step size of 1.0 (w2 in
the figure). Figure 1a shows histograms of the number of elements for class 2. Figure 1b represents
the calculated distance values of the KS test between the reference and proposed implementation
(upper plot) and their respective p-values (lower plot).

proposed method is applicable to any application with gradient-based optimization, in which the
underlying process models sampling without replacement 3 .

5.1     KOLMOGOROV-S MIRNOV T EST

To assess the accuracy of the proposed method, we evaluate it against a reference implementation
using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Kolmogorov, 1933; Smirnov, 1939, KS). It is a nonparametric
test to estimate the equality of two distributions by quantifying the distance between the empirical
distributions of their samples. The null distribution of this test is calculated under the null hypothesis
that the two groups of samples are drawn from the same distribution. If the test fails to reject the
null hypothesis, the same distribution generated the two groups of samples, i.e., the two underlying
distributions are equal. As described in Section 4, we use class conditional distributions to sample
from the differentiable hypergeometric distribution. We compare samples from our differentiable
formulation to samples from a non-differentiable reference implementation (Virtanen et al., 2020,
SciPy). For this experiment, we use a multivariate hypergeometric distribution of three classes. We
perform a sensitivity analysis with respect to the class weights ω. We keep ω1 and ω3 fixed at 1.0,
and ω2 is increased from 1.0 to 10.0 in steps of 1.0. For every value of ω2 , we sample 50000 i.i.d.
random vectors. We use the Benjamini-Hochberg correction (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) to adjust
the p-values for false discovery rate of multiple comparisons as we are performing c = 3 tests per
joint distribution. Given a significance threshold of t = 0.05, p > 0.05 implies that we cannot reject
the null hypothesis, which is desirable for our application.
Figure 1a shows the histogram of class 2 samples for all values of ω2 , and Figure 1b the results of the
KS test for all classes. The histograms for classes 1 and 3 are in the Appendix (Figure 4). We see that
the calculated distances of the KS-test are small, and the corrected p-values well above the threshold.
Many are even close to 1.0. Hence, the test clearly fails to reject the null hypothesis in 30 out of 30
cases. Additionally, the proposed and the reference implementation histograms are visually similar.
The results of the KS test strongly imply that the proposed differentiable formulation effectively
follows a noncentral hypergeometric distribution. We provide more analyses and results from KS test
experiments in Appendix C.1.

5.2     W EAKLY-S UPERVISED L EARNING

Many data modalities, such as consecutive frames in a video, are not observed as i.i.d. samples, which
provides a weak-supervision signal for representation learning and generative models. Hence, we are
not only interested in learning meaningful representations and approximating the data distribution but
also in the detailed relation between frames. Assuming underlying factors generate such coupled
   3
       The code can be found here: https://github.com/thomassutter/mvhg


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: To compare the three methods (LabelVAE, AdaVAE, HGVAE) in the weakly-supervised
experiment, we evaluate their learned latent representations with respect to shared (S) and independent
(I) generative factors. To assess the amount of shared and independent information in the latent
representation, we train linear classifiers on the respective latent dimensions only. We report the
adjusted balanced classification accuracy, such that the random classifier achieves score 0.
                s=0                 s=1                        s=3                      s=5
                   I           S             I             S            I           S            I
 L ABEL        0.14±0.01   0.19±0.03    0.16±0.01       0.10±0.00   0.23±0.01   0.34±0.00    0.00±0.00
 A DA          0.12±0.01   0.19±0.01    0.15±0.01       0.10±0.03   0.22±0.02   0.33±0.03    0.00±0.00
 HG (O URS )   0.18±0.01   0.22±0.05    0.19±0.01       0.08±0.02   0.28±0.01   0.28±0.01    0.01±0.00

data, a subset of factors should be shared among frames to describe the underlying concept leading
to the coupling. Consequently, differing concepts between coupled frames stem from independent
factors exclusive to each frame. The differentiable hypergeometric distribution provides a principled
approach to learning the number of shared and independent factors in an end-to-end fashion.
In this experiment, we look at pairs of images from the synthetic mpi3D toy dataset (Gondal et al.,
2019). We generate a coupled dataset by pairing images, which share a certain number of their seven
generative factors. We train all models as variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014, VAE)
to maximize an evidence lower bound (ELBO) on the marginal log-likelihood of images using the
setting and code from Locatello et al. (2020). We compare three methods, which sequentially encode
both images to some latent representations using a single encoder. Based on the two representations,
the subset of shared latent dimensions is aggregated into a single representation. Finally, a single
decoder independently computes reconstructions for both samples based on the imputed shared and
the remaining independent latent factors provided by the respective encoder. The methods only differ
in how they infer the subset of shared latent factors. We refer to Appendix C.2 or Locatello et al.
(2020) for more details on the setup of the weakly-supervised experiment.
The LabelVAE assumes that the number of independent
factors is known (Bouchacourt et al., 2018; Hosoya, 2018,
LabelVAE). Like in Locatello et al. (2020), we assume 1
known factor for all experiments. The AdaVAE relies on a
heuristic to infer the shared factors (Locatello et al., 2020,
AdaVAE). Based on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between corresponding latent factors across images, the
decision between shared and independent factors is based
on a hand-designed threshold. The proposed HGVAE uses
the differentiable hypergeometric distribution to model the
number of shared and independent latent factors. We infer
the unknown group importance ω ∈ R20+ with a single
dense layer, which uses the KL divergences between cor-
responding latent factors as input (similar to AdaVAE). Figure 2: We report the mean squared
Based on ω and with d being the number of latent di- error MSE(s, ŝ) between true s and es-
mensions, we sample random variables to estimate the k timated ŝ number of shared factors to
independent and s := d − k shared factors by reparameter- assess the models’ performance.
izing the hypergeometric distribution, providing us with k̂ and ŝ := d− k̂. The proposed differentiable
formulation allows us to infer such ω and simultaneously learn the latent representation in a fully
differentiable setting. After sorting the latent factors by KL divergence (Grover et al., 2019), we
define the top-k̂ latent factors as independent, and the remaining ŝ as shared ones. For a more detailed
description of HGVAE, the baseline models, and the dataset, see Appendix C.2.
To evaluate the methods, we compare their performance on two different tasks. We measure the
mean squared error MSE(s, ŝ) between the actual number of shared latent factors s and the estimated
number ŝ (Figure 2) and the classification accuracy of predicting the generative factors on the shared
and independent subsets of the learned representations (Table 1). We train classifiers for all factors
on the shared and independent part of the latent representation and calculate their balanced accuracy.
The reported scores are the average over the factor-specific balanced accuracies. Because the number
of different classes differs between the discrete generative factors, we report the adjusted balanced
accuracy as a classification metric. These two tasks challenge the methods regarding their estimate


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of the relationship between images. Generating the dataset controls the number of independent and
shared factors, k and s, which allows us to evaluate the methods on different versions of the same
underlying data regarding the number of shared and independent generative factors. We generate
four weakly-supervised datasets with s = {0, 1, 3, 5}. On purpose, we also evaluate the edge case of
s = 0, which is equal to the two views not sharing any generative factors.
Figure 2 shows that previous methods cannot accurately estimate the number of shared factors. Both
baseline methods estimate the same number of shared factors ŝ independent of the underlying ground
truth number of shared factors s. What is not surprising for the first model is unexpected for the
second approach, given their - in theory - adaptive heuristic. On the other hand, the low mean squared
error (MSE) reflects that the proposed HGVAE can dynamically estimate the number of shared factors
for every number of shared factors s. These results suggest that the differentiable hypergeometric
distribution is able to learn the relative importance of shared and independent factors in the latent
representations. Previous works’ assumptions, though, do not reflect the data’s generative process
(LabelVAE), or the designed heuristics are oversimplified (AdaVAE). We also see the effect of these
oversimplified assumptions in evaluating the learned latent representation. Table 1 shows that the
estimation of a large number of shared factors ŝ leads to an inferior latent representation of the
independent factors, which is reflected in the lower accuracy scores of previous work compared to
the proposed method. More surprisingly, for the shared latent representation, our HGVAE reaches
the same performance on the shared latent representation despite being more flexible.
Given the general nature of the method, the positive results of the proposed method are encouraging.
Unlike previous works, it is not explicitly designed for weakly-supervised learning but achieves
results that are more than comparable to field-specific models. Additionally, the proposed method
accurately estimates the latent space structure for different experimental settings.

5.3   D EEP VARIATIONAL C LUSTERING

We investigate the use of the differentiable hypergeometric distribution in a deep clustering task.
Several techniques have been proposed in the literature to combine long-established clustering
algorithms, such as K-means or Gaussian Mixture Models, with the flexibility of deep neural
networks to learn better representations of high-dimensional data (Min et al., 2018). Among those,
Jiang et al. (2016), Dilokthanakul et al. (2016), and Manduchi et al. (2021) include a trainable
Gaussian Mixture prior distribution in the latent space of a VAE. A Gaussian Mixture model permits
a probabilistic approach to clustering where an explicit generative assumption of the data is defined.
All methods are optimized using stochastic gra-                              Uniform
dient variational Bayes (Kingma & Welling,            0.10
                                                  Weight


2014; Rezende et al., 2014). A major drawback         0.05
of the above models is that the samples are ei-       0.00
ther assumed to be i.i.d. or they require pairwise                       Subsampling 80%
                                                      0.10
                                                  Weight


side information, which limits their applicability
                                                      0.05
in real-world scenarios.
                                                      0.00
The differentiable hypergeometric distribution                           Subsampling 60%
                                                      0.10
                                                  Weight


can be easily integrated in VAE-based clustering
algorithms to overcome limitations of current         0.05
                                                      0.00  0   1    2    3   4    5   6  7   8   9
approaches. We want to cluster a given dataset
           N                                                                 Cluster
X = {xi }i=1 into K subgroups. Like previous
work (Jiang et al., 2016), we assume the data Figure 3: True class (■) vs. learned hypergeomet-
is generated from a random process where the ric cluster weights π (■)
                                                                         i
cluster assignments are first drawn from a prior
probability p(c; π), then each latent embedding zi is sampled from a Gaussian distribution, whose
mean and variance depend on the selected cluster ci . Finally the sample xi is generated from a
Bernoulli distribution whose parameter µxi is the output of a neural network parameterized by
θ, as in the classical VAE. With these assumptions, the latent embeddings zi follow a mixture of
Gaussian distributions, whose means and variances, {µi , σi2 }K
                                                              i=1 , are tunable parameters. The above
generative model can then be optimised by maximising the ELBO using the stochastic gradient
variational Bayes estimator (we refer to Appendix C.3 for a complete description of the optimisation
                                                                                            Q
procedure). Previous work (Jiang et al., 2016) modeled the prior distribution as p(c; π) = i p(ci ) =
Q
   i Cat(ci | π) with either tunable or fixed parameters π. In this task, we instead replace this prior


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Evaluation of the clustering experiment on the MNIST datasets. We compare the methods on
3 different dataset versions, namely i) uniform class distribution ii) subsampling with 80% of samples
and iii) subsampling with only 60% of samples. We subsample half of the classes. Accuracy (Acc),
normalized mutual information (NMI), and adjusted rand index (ARI) are used as evaluation metrics.
Higher is better for all metrics. Mean and standard deviations are computed across 5 runs. For fair
comparison with the baselines all methods use the pretraining weights provided by Jiang et al. (2016).
        DATASET V ERSION                    U NIFORM      C ATEGORICAL      H YPERGEOMETRIC
                               ACC (%)     92.0 ± 3.0        87.2 ± 5.0          91.4 ± 5.0
        U NIFORM               NMI (%)      84.8 ± 2.2       81.8 ± 1.9         85.6 ± 2.0
                               ARI (%)      84.2 ± 4.3       78.3 ± 4.6         84.8 ± 4.6
                               ACC (%)      90.8 ± 4.0       87.4 ± 4.7         92.5 ± 0.5
        S UBSAMPLING 80%       NMI (%)      84.1 ± 2.2       81.8 ± 2.3         84.6 ± 0.8
                               ARI (%)      83.2 ± 3.6       78.2 ± 5.0         84.4 ± 1.0
                               ACC (%)      83.5 ± 3.9       86.5 ± 4.9         89.7 ± 4.3
        S UBSAMPLING 60%       NMI (%)      80.7 ± 1.4       81.3 ± 2.9         82.9 ± 2.2
                               ARI (%)      77.6 ± 2.6       77.7 ± 6.3         81.5 ± 3.9


with the multivariate noncentral hypergeometric distribution with weights π and K classes where
every class relates to a cluster. Hence, we sample the number of elements per cluster (or cluster
size) following Definition 3.1 and Algorithm 1. The hypergeometric distribution permits to create
a dependence between samples. The prior probability of a sample to be assigned to a given cluster
is not independent of the remaining samples anymore, allowing us to loosen the over-restrictive
i.i.d. assumption. We explore the effect of three different
                                                       Q prior probabilities in Equation (54), namely
(i) the categorical distribution, by setting p(c; π) = i Cat(ci | π); (ii) the uniform distribution, by
fixing πi = 1/K ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , K}; and (iii) the multivariate noncentral hypergeometric distribution.
We compare them on three different MNIST versions (LeCun & Cortes, 2010). The first version is
the standard dataset which has a balanced class distribution. For the second and third dataset version
we explore different ratios of subsampling for half of the classes. The subsampling rates are 80% in
the moderate and 60% in the severe case. In Table 2 we evaluate the methods with respect to their
clustering accuracy (Acc), normalized mutual information (NMI) and adjusted rand index (ARI).
The hypergeometric prior distribution shows fairly good clustering performance in all datasets.
Although the uniform distribution performs reasonably well, it assumes the clusters have equal
importance. Hence it might fail in more complex scenarios. On the other hand, the categorical
distribution has subpar performance compared to the uniform distribution, even in the moderate
subsampling setting. This might be due to the additional complexity given by the learnable cluster
weights, which results in unstable results. On the contrary, the additional complexity does not seem
to affect the performance of the proposed hypergeometric prior but instead boosts its clustering
performance, especially in the imbalanced dataset. In Figure 3, we show that the model is able to
learn the weights, π, which reflect the subsampling rates of each cluster, which is not directly possible
using the uniform prior model.


6    C ONCLUSION

We propose the differentiable hypergeometric distribution in this work. In combination with the
Gumbel-Softmax trick, this new formulation enables reparametrized gradients with respect to the class
weights ω of the hypergeometric distribution. We show the various possibilities of the hypergeometric
distribution in machine learning by applying it to two common areas, clustering, and weakly-
supervised learning. In both applications, methods using the hypergeometric distribution reach at
least state-of-the-art performance. We believe this work is an essential step toward integrating the
hypergeometric distribution into more machine learning algorithms. Applications in biology and
social sciences represent potential directions for future work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Ričards Marcinkevičs for good discussions and help with the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov-Test. TS is supported by the grant #2021-911 of the Strategic Focal Area “Personalized


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Health and Related Technologies (PHRT)” of the ETH Domain (Swiss Federal Institutes of Tech-
nology). LM is supported by the SDSC PhD Fellowship #1-001568-037. AR is supported by the
StimuLoop grant #1-007811-002 and the Vontobel Foundation.

7   E THICS S TATEMENT

In this work, we propose a general approach to learning the importance of subgroups. In that regard,
potential ethical concerns arise with the different applications our method could be applied to. We
intend to apply our model in the medical domain in future work. Being able to correctly model
the dependencies of groups of patients is important and offers the potential of correctly identifying
underlying causes of diseases on a group level. On the other hand, grouping patients needs to be
handled carefully and further research is needed to ensure fairness and reliability with respect to
underlying and hidden attributes of different groups.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

For all theoretical statements, we provide detailed derivations and state the necessary assumptions.
We present empirical support on both synthetic and real data to back our idea of introducing the
differentiable hypergeometric distribution. To ensure empirical reproducibility, the results of each
experiment and every ablation were averaged over multiple seeds and are reported with standard
deviations. All of the used datasets are public or can be generated from publicly available resources
using the code that we provide in the supplementary material. Information about implementation
details, hyperparameter settings, and evaluation metrics are provided in the main text or the appendix.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Gregory S
 Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian J Goodfellow, Andrew
 Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Józefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath
 Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dan Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Gordon Murray, Chris
 Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul A Tucker,
 Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda B Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin
 Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine
 Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems. CoRR, abs/1603.0, 2016.

Bruce Barrett. A note on exact calculation of the non central hypergeometric distribution. Communi-
  cations in Statistics - Theory and Methods, 46(13):6737–6741, 2017.

Luca Becchetti, Ugo Maria Colesanti, Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela, and Andrea Vitaletti. Rec-
  ommending items in pervasive scenarios: models and experimental analysis. Knowledge and
  information systems, 28(3):555–578, 2011.

Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients through
  stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.

Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
  approach to multiple testing. Journal of the royal statistical society series b-methodological, 57:
  289–300, 1995.

Bhaswar B Bhattacharya and Sumit Mukherjee. Degree sequence of random permutation graphs.
  The Annals of Applied Probability, 27(1):439–484, 2017. doi: 10.1214/16-AAP1207.

Diane Bouchacourt, Ryota Tomioka, and Sebastian Nowozin. Multi-level variational autoencoder:
  Learning disentangled representations from grouped observations. In Thirty-Second AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.

Giona Casiraghi, Vahan Nanumyan, Ingo Scholtes, and Frank Schweitzer. Generalized Hypergeomet-
  ric Ensembles: Statistical Hypothesis Testing in Complex Networks. 7 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jean Chesson. A non-central multivariate hypergeometric distribution arising from biased sampling
  with application to selective predation. Journal of Applied Probability, 13(4):795–797, 1976.
I Chien, Chao Pan, and Olgica Milenkovic. Query k-means clustering and the double dixie cup
   problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05938, 2018.
David R Cox. The regression analysis of binary sequences. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
  Series B (Methodological), 20(2):215–232, 1958.
N Dilokthanakul, P A M Mediano, M Garnelo, M C H Lee, H Salimbeni, K Arulkumaran, and
  M Shanahan. Deep unsupervised clustering with Gaussian mixture variational autoencoders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.02648, 2016.
Moran Feldman, Christopher Harshaw, and Amin Karbasi. Greed is good: Near-optimal submodular
 maximization via greedy optimization. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 758–784. PMLR,
 2017.
Ronald A Fisher. The logic of inductive inference. Journal of the royal statistical society, 98(1):
  39–82, 1935.
Agner Fog. Calculation methods for Wallenius’ noncentral hypergeometric distribution. Communica-
  tions in Statistics—Simulation and Computation®, 37(2):258–273, 2008a.
Agner Fog. Sampling methods for Wallenius’ and Fisher’s noncentral hypergeometric distributions.
 Communications in Statistics—Simulation and Computation®, 37(2):241–257, 2008b.
Muhammad Waleed Gondal, Manuel Wuthrich, Djordje Miladinovic, Francesco Locatello, Martin
 Breidt, Valentin Volchkov, Joel Akpo, Olivier Bachem, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Stefan Bauer. On
 the Transfer of Inductive Bias from Simulation to the Real World: a New Disentanglement Dataset.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
H T Gonin. XIV. The use of factorial moments in the treatment of the hypergeometric distribution and
  in tests for regression. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal
  of Science, 21(139):215–226, 1936.
Aditya Grover, Eric Wang, Aaron Zweig, and Stefano Ermon. Stochastic Optimization of Sorting
  Networks via Continuous Relaxations. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
  OpenReview.net, 2019.
Emil Julius Gumbel. Statistical theory of extreme values and some practical applications: a series of
  lectures, volume 33. US Government Printing Office, 1954.
Chris Harshaw, Moran Feldman, Justin Ward, and Amin Karbasi. Submodular maximization beyond
  non-negativity: Guarantees, fast algorithms, and applications. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2634–2643. PMLR, 2019.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts with a
   Constrained Variational Framework. ICLR, 2(5):6, 2017.
Haruo Hosoya. A simple probabilistic deep generative model for learning generalizable disentangled
  representations from grouped data. CoRR, abs/1809.0, 2018.
Iris A M Huijben, Wouter Kool, Max B Paulus, and Ruud J G van Sloun. A Review of the Gumbel-
   max Trick and its Extensions for Discrete Stochasticity in Machine Learning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2110.01515, 2021.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Zhuxi Jiang, Yin Zheng, Huachun Tan, Bangsheng Tang, and Hanning Zhou. Variational deep embed-
  ding: An unsupervised and generative approach to clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05148,
  2016.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mark E Johnson. Multivariate statistical simulation: A guide to selecting and generating continuous
 multivariate distributions, volume 192. John Wiley & Sons, 1987.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations. OpenReview.net, 2014.
Andrey Kolmogorov. Sulla determinazione empirica di una lgge di distribuzione. Inst. Ital. Attuari,
 Giorn., 4:83–91, 1933.
Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Stochastic Beams and Where To Find Them: The
 Gumbel-Top-k Trick for Sampling Sequences Without Replacement. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 3499–3508. PMLR, 2019.
Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Ancestral Gumbel-Top-k Sampling for Sampling
 Without Replacement. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(47):1–36, 2020a.
Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Estimating Gradients for Discrete Random Variables
 by Sampling without Replacement. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
 OpenReview.net, 2020b.
Sergey A Lashin, Valentin V Suslov, Nikolay A Kolchanov, and Yury G Matushkin. Simulation of
  coevolution in community by using the” Evolutionary Constructor” program. In silico biology, 7
  (3):261–275, 2007.
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010.
Jason G Liao and Ori Rosen. Fast and stable algorithms for computing and sampling from the
  noncentral hypergeometric distribution. The American Statistician, 55(4):366–369, 2001.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4114–4124. PMLR,
  2019.
Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf, Olivier Bachem, and Michael
  Tschannen. Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 6348–6359. PMLR, 2020.
Michael A. Lodato, Mollie B. Woodworth, Semin Lee, Gilad D. Evrony, Bhaven K. Mehta, Amir
 Karger, Soohyun Lee, Thomas W. Chittenden, Alissa M. D’Gama, Xuyu Cai, Lovelace J. Luquette,
 Eunjung Lee, Peter J. Park, and Christopher A. Walsh. Somatic mutation in single human neurons
 tracks developmental and transcriptional history. Science, 350(6256):94–98, 10 2015.
Michael A. Lodato, Rachel E. Rodin, Craig L. Bohrson, Michael E. Coulter, Alison R. Barton,
 Minseok Kwon, Maxwell A. Sherman, Carl M. Vitzthum, Lovelace J. Luquette, Chandri N.
 Yandava, Pengwei Yang, Thomas W. Chittenden, Nicole E. Hatem, Steven C. Ryu, Mollie B.
 Woodworth, Peter J. Park, and Christopher A. Walsh. Aging and neurodegeneration are associated
 with increased mutations in single human neurons. Science, 359(6375):555–559, 2 2018.
C Maddison, A Mnih, and Y Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous relaxation of discrete
  random variables. In International Conference on Learning Representations. OpenReview.net,
  2017.
Chris J Maddison, Daniel Tarlow, and Tom Minka. A* sampling. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Laura Manduchi, Kieran Chin-Cheong, Holger Michel, Sven Wellmann, and Julia E Vogt. Deep
  Conditional Gaussian Mixture Model for Constrained Clustering. ArXiv, abs/2106.0, 2021.
E Min, X Guo, Q Liu, G Zhang, J Cui, and J Long. A Survey of Clustering With Deep Learning:
  From the Perspective of Network Architecture. IEEE Access, 6:39501–39514, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Seiji Ono, Kazuharu Misawa, and Kazuki Tsuji. Effect of group selection on the evolution of altruistic
  behavior. Journal of theoretical biology, 220(1):55–66, 2003.

Mario Paolucci, Rosaria Conte, and Gennaro Di Tosto. A model of social organization and the
 evolution of food sharing in vampire bats. Adaptive Behavior, 14(3):223–238, 2006.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
 ward Z Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. CoRR, abs/1912.0, 2019.

Max B Paulus, Dami Choi, Daniel Tarlow, Andreas Krause, and Chris J Maddison. Gradient
 estimation with stochastic softmax tricks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08063, 2020.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, and others. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in Python. Journal of machine learning research, 12(Oct):2825–2830, 2011.

Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
  approximate inference in deep generative models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1278–1286. PMLR, 2014.

Nikolai V Smirnov. On the estimation of the discrepancy between empirical curves of distribution for
  two independent samples. Bull. Math. Univ. Moscou, 2(2):3–14, 1939.

Thomas M Sutter and Julia E Vogt. Multimodal Relational VAE. 2021.

Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, and others. SciPy 1.0:
  fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.

Kenneth T Wallenius. Biased sampling; the noncentral hypergeometric probability distribution.
  Technical report, Stanford Univ Ca Applied Mathematics And Statistics Labs, 1963.

E T Whittaker and G N Watson. A Course of Modern Analysis. Cambridge Mathematical Library.
  Cambridge University Press, 4 edition, 1996.

Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.

Sang Michael Xie and Stefano Ermon. Reparameterizable subset sampling via continuous relaxations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10517, 2019.


A        P RELIMINARIES

A.1        H YPERGEOMETRIC D ISTRIBUTION

The hypergeometric distribution is a discrete probability distribution that describes the probability
of x successes in n draws without replacement from a finite population of size N with m elements
that are part of the success class Unlike the binomial distribution, which describes the probability
distribution of x successes in n draws with replacement.
Definition A.1 (Hypergeometric Distribution (Gonin, 1936)4 ). A random variable X follows the
hypergeometric distribution, if its probability mass function (PMF) is given by
                                                           m N −m

                                                                     x    n−x
                                       P (X = x) = pX (x) =              N
                                                                                                                 (9)
                                                                         n
    4
        Although the distribution itself is older, Gonin (1936) were the first to name it hypergeometric distribution


                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Urn models are typical examples of the hypergeometric probability distribution. Suppose we think
of an urn with marbles in two different colors, e. g. green and purple, we can label as success the
drawing of a green marble. Then N defines the total number of marbles and m the number of green
marbles in the urn. x is the number of green marbles, and n − x is the number of drawn purple
marbles.
The multivariate hypergeometric distribution describes an urn with more than two colors, e.g. green,
purple and yellow in the simplest case with three colors. As described in Johnson (1987), the
definition is given by:
Definition A.2 (Multivariate Hypergeometric Distribution). A random vector X follows the multi-
variate hypergeometric distribution, if its joint probability mass function is given by
                                                            Qc     mi

                                                               i=1 xi
                                 P (X = x) = pX (x) =            N
                                                                                                      (10)
                                                                 n


where c ∈ N+ is the number of different classes (e.g. marble colors in the urn), m P=  [m1 , . . . , mc ] ∈
                                                                                     c
Nc describes the number of elements per class (e.g. marbles per color), N = i=1 mi is the total
number of elements (e.g. all marbles in the urn) and n ∈ {0, . . . , N } is the number of elements (e.g.
marbles) to draw. The support S of the PMF is given by
                                (                            c
                                                                          )
                                                            X
                                          c
                           S = x ∈ N0 : ∀i xi ≤ mi ,             xi = n                               (11)
                                                               i=1


A.2    G UMBEL -S OFTMAX -T RICK

Most of the information in this section is from (Jang et al., 2016; Maddison et al., 2017), which
concurrently introduced the Gumbel-Softmax trick. Gumbel-Softmax is a continuous distribution that
can approximate the categorical distribution, and whose parameter gradients can be easily computed
using the reparameterization trick.
                                                                                         PC
Let z be a categorical variable with categorical weights π = [π1 , . . . , πC ] such that k=1 πk = 1.
Following (Jang et al., 2016), we assume that categorical samples are encoded as one-hot vectors. The
Gumbel-Max trick (Gumbel, 1954; Maddison et al., 2014) defines an efficient way to draw samples z
from a categorical distribution with weights π:
                                 z = one hot(arg max log(πk ) + gk )                                  (12)
                                                    k

where g = [g1 , . . . , gC ] are i. i. d. samples drawn from Gumbel(0,1). We can efficiently sample
g from Gumbel(0,1) by drawing a sample u from a uniform distribution U (0, 1) and applying the
transform g = − log(− log u). For more details, we refer to (Gumbel, 1954; Maddison et al., 2014).
(Jang et al., 2016; Maddison et al., 2017) both use the softmax function as a continuous and differen-
tiable approximation to arg max. The softmax function is defined as
                              exp((log πk + gk )/τ )
                       pk = PC                          for k = 1, . . . , C                          (13)
                             j=1 exp((log πj + gj )/τ )

where τ is a temperature parameter. As τ goes to zero, the softmax function approximates the argmax
function. Hence, the Gumbel-Softmax distribution approximates the categorical distribution.

B     M ETHODS

B.1    PMF FOR THE MULTIVARIATE F ISHER ’ S NONCENTRAL DISTRIBUTION

In this section, we give a detailed derivation for the calculation of the log-probabilities of the
multivariate Fisher’s noncentral hypergeometric distribution. We end up with a formulation that
is proportional to the actual log-probabilities. Because the ordering of categories is not influenced
by scaling with a constant factor (addition/subtraction in log domain), these are unnormalized


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


log-probabilities of the multivariate Fisher’s noncentral hypergeometric distribution.
                                                      c
                                                  1 Y m i xi
                                    pX (x; ω) =                ωi                                 (14)
                                                 P0 i=1 xi

where P0 is defined as in Equation (1). From there it follows
                                             c          !
                                          1 Y m i xi
                  log pX (x; ω) = log                    ωi                                       (15)
                                         P0 i=1 xi
                                                         c         !
                                          1             Y    m i xi
                                 = log        + log               ωi                              (16)
                                         P0             i=1
                                                             xi
                                           X      c
                                          1                  mi xi
                                 = log        +       log         ωi                              (17)
                                         P0      i=1
                                                              xi
                                           X      c
                                          1                  mi
                                 = log        +         log        + log (ωixi )                  (18)
                                         P0      i=1
                                                              xi
                                           X      c
                                          1                  mi
                                 = log        +         log        + xi log (ωi )                 (19)
                                         P0      i=1
                                                              xi

Constant factor can be removed as the argmax is invariant to scaling with a constant factor which
equals addition or subtraction in log-space. It follows
                              c
                             X           mi
            log pX (x; ω) =         log        + xi log (ωi ) + C                            (20)
                             i=1
                                          xi
                              c
                             X                1
                           =        log                 + xi log (ωi ) + C̃                  (21)
                             i=1
                                        xi !(mi − xi )!
                               c
                               X
                           =         (− log (Γ(xi + 1)Γ(mi − xi + 1)) + xi log (ωi )) + C̃        (22)
                               i=1
                                                                                                  (23)

In the last line we used the relation Γ(k + 1) = k!. Setting C = C̃, it directly follows
                                                c
                                                X
                            log pX (x; ω) =           xi log ωi + ψF (x) + C                      (24)
                                                i=1
                   Pc
where ψF (x) = −      i=1 log (Γ(xi + 1)Γ(mi − xi + 1)).
The Gamma function is defined in Whittaker & Watson (1996) as
                                           Z ∞
                                  Γ(z) =       xz−1 e−x dx                                        (25)
                                                  0



B.2   P ROOF FOR L EMMA 4.1

Proof. Factors that are constant for all x do not change the relative ordering between different values
of x. Hence, removing them preserves the ordering of values x (Barrett, 2017).

                                   1 mL xL             mR       n−xL
        log pXL (xL ; ω) = log                ωL              ω                                    (26)
                                   P0 x              n − xL R

                                  mL                mR               xL           n−xL

                          = log           + log            + log (ωL    ) + log ωR       +C        (27)
                                   xL             n − xL


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               (a) Histograms class 1                                  (b) Histograms class 2


                                            (c) Histograms class 3

Figure 4: Comparing random variables drawn from the proposed distribution to a reference distribu-
tion.

Using the definition of the binomial coefficient (see Section 3) and its relation to the Gamma function5
Γ(k + 1) = k!, it follows
                 log pXL (xL ; ω) =x · log ωL + (n − xL ) · log ωR                                   (28)
                                   − log (Γ(xL + 1)Γ(n − xL + 1))
                                   − log (Γ(mL − xL + 1)Γ(mR − n + xL + 1)) + C
With ψF (x) as defined in Equation (6), Equation (5) follows directly.

B.3      P ROOF FOR L EMMA 4.2

Proof. When sampling class i, we draw xi samples from class i where xi ≤ mi . The conditional
distribution pXi (xi |{xk }i−1
                           k=1 ; ω) for class i given the already sampled classes k < i simultaneously
defines the weights of a categorical distribution. Sampling xi elements from class i can be seen
as selecting the xi th category from the distribution defined by the weights pXi (xi |{xk }i−1 k=1 ; ω).
Therefore,
                                     X
                                            pXi xi |{xk }i−1

                                                           k=1 ; ω = 1,                            (29)
                                    0≤xi ≤mi

which allows us to apply the Gumbel-Max trick and, respectively, the Gumbel-Softmax trick.

B.4      T HOUGHT EXPERIMENT FOR MODELING THE HYPERGEOMETRIC DISTRIBUTION WITH A
         SEQUENCE OF UNCONSTRAINED CATEGORICAL DISTRIBUTIONS

We quickly touched on the topic of using a sequence of categorical distributions in the main text
(Section 4.3). To further describe and discuss the problem of using a sequence of categorical
distributions, we provide a more detailed explanation and example here. Of course, the same
constraints as the ones described in the main paper apply, e. g. we want our method to be differentiable,
scalable in the number of random states and computationally efficient. Hence, we are interested in
methods that infer at least all states of a single class in parallel, and not in methods that sequentially
iterate over all possible random states for every re-sampling operation.
   5
       see Appendix B.1 for the definition on the Gamma function


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In our example, we want to model a hypergeometric distribution with 3 classes and the following
specifications
                               m1 = 10, m2 = 7, m3 = 8, n = 9                                       (30)
We use one categorical distribution for every class. The categories of the categorical distributions
describe the number of elements to sample fromP this class. Based on the three categorical distributions,
we would like to sample xj ∈ N0 such that j xj = n. The sequence of distributions ideally should
describe the class conditional distributions of the hypergeometric distribution described in Section 4.1.
Or at least model sampling without replacement, i. e. fulfill the necessary constraint.

                        P π1 , π2 and π3 which define the categorical weights of the three categorical
We then have three vectors
distributions. As such k πj,k = 1 ∀ j. Using three categorical distributions, we are not able to
explicitly model ω, but if we are able to fulfill the constraints, there would be some matching ω. To
make it differentiable, we approximate the categorical distributions using the Gumbel-Softmax (GS)
trick, such that we can use everything in a differentiable pipeline. In most differentiable settings, the
categorical weights are inferred using some neural network, e. g.
                                              πi = fξ,i (·)                                         (31)

Knowing that our categories correspond to integer values, we can use the straight-through estimator
(Bengio et al., 2013) together with the Gumbel-Softmax trick and a bit of matrix multiplication to
convert an one-hot vector to an integer value:
                                   yj =straight through(GS(πj ))                                    (32)
                                      = arg max(GS(πj ))                                            (33)
Please check the provided code for more details on the details of the matrix multiplications.
We can either infer the categorical weights of and sample from the three distributions in parallel
or
P sequentially. We first try to infer the weights of all distributions in parallel. With the constraint
   j xj = n, not all combinations of πj , ∀j are valid anymore. We might be able to learn the
constraints, such that the number of samples fulfilling them is maximized. But it is not possible to
have the constraints respected
                            Pdue to the formulation of this method. Hence, it is not guaranteed that
we sample xj , ∀j such that j xj = n, which then results in non-valid samples.
Therefore, we try to infer the πj sequentially. The sequential procedure models the following
behaviour (similar to our proposed class conditional sampling)
                           p(x1 , x2 , x3 ) = p(x1 )p(x2 | x1 )p(x3 | x1 , x2 )                     (34)
Without loss of generality, we assume that we first infer π1 and sample x1 ∼ Cat(π1 ) such that
x1 = 7. It follows that not all combination of weightsPπ2 and π3 are valid anymore. When inferring
π2 some weights have to be zero to guarantee that j xj = n and sample a valid random vector.
Hence,
                                          π2,k = 0 ∀ k > 2                                          (35)
                                                                                            P
If we assign any nonzero probability to π2,k , k > 2, we are not able to fulfill the constraint j xj = n
anymore for every generated sample. Additionally, from Equation (12) it follows that we would
need to constrain the gumbel noise as well. We are unaware of previous work that proposed a
constrained Gumbel-Softmax trick which would model this behaviour. Also, there is no guarantee
that π2,k > 0, k ≤ 2, leading to additional heuristics-based solution that we would need to implement.
There is an unclear effect on the calculation of the gradients, which would need to be investigated.
Also, for sampling and inferring of weights πj , there arise questions of ordering between classes and
how valid random samples can be guaranteed. We summarize that the implementation and modeling
of a hypergeometric distribution using a sequence of unconstrained categorical distributions is far
from being trivial, because of the open question of how implement constraints in a general and
dynamic way when using the Gumbel-Softmax trick.
Note the important difference to our hypergeometric distribution. Although we also use the Gumbel-
                                                       Pinfer ω in parallel, which does not introduce
Softmax trick to generate random samples, we are able to
an implicit ordering between classes and the constraint j xj = n is guaranteed. The only constraint
with respect to ω we have to satisfy, is ωj ≥ 0, ∀j. ωj ≥ 0 can easily be satisfied using a ReLU


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Subroutines for sampling From Multivariate Noncentral Hypergeometric Distribution.
  function SAMPLE UNCHG(mi , mj , ωi , ωj , n, τ )
     αi ← calcLogPMF(mi , mj , ωi , ωj , n)                                               # Section 4.2
     xi , r̂i ← contRelaxSample(αi , τ ))                                                 # Section 4.3
     return xi , αi , r̂i
  end function

  function CALC L OG PMF(ml , mr , ωl , ωr , n)
     for k ∈ {0, . . . , ml } do
         xl,k ← (k + 1)
         xr,k ← (ReLU(n − k) + 1)
     end for
     l ← log Γ(xl + 1) + log Γ(ml − xl + 1)                                        # see Appendix B.5
     r ← log Γ(xr + 1) + log Γ(mr − xr + 1)
     αl ← xl log ωl + xr log ωr − (l + r)
     return αl
  end function

  function CONT R ELAX S AMPLE(αl , τ )
     u ← U (0, 1)
     g ← − log(− log u)
     r̂l ← αl + g
     pl ← Softmax(r̂l /τ )
     xl ← Count-Index(Straight-Through(pl ))                     # Count-Index and Straight-Through:
                                                                                 # see Appendix B.5
     return xl , r̂l
  end function


activation function. We are then able to calculate the class conditional distributions as a function of ω
such that all constraints are satisfied. We do not need to dynamically change categorical weights, i. e.
model parameters, during the sampling procedure, which is the case for the sequence of constrained
categorical distributions.

B.5     A LGORITHM AND M INIMAL E XAMPLE

In the main text, we drafted the pseudocode for our proposed algorithm (see Algorithm 1). We
only did it for the main functionality, but not the subroutines described in Sections 4.2 and 4.3).
Algorithm 2 describes the subroutines used in Algorithm 1 and explained in Section 4.
The straight-through operator uses a hard one-hot embedding in the forward path, but the relaxed
vector for the backward path and the calculation of the derivative (Bengio et al., 2013). The Count-
Index maps the one-hot vector to an index, which is equal to the number of selected class elements in
our case.

B.5.1    M INIMAL E XAMPLE
We describe a minimal example application using a step-by-step procedure to provide intuition and
further illustrate the proposed method. Here, we learn the generative model of an urn model using
stochastic gradient descent when given samples from an urn model with a priori unknown weights ω.
Note that given a dataset, we could also estimate the weights ω of the hypergeometric distribution by
minimizing the negative log probability of the data given the parameters log pX (x; ω). In contrast, we
use a generative approach to demonstrate how our method allows backpropagation when modeling the
generative process of the samples by reparameterizing the hypergeometric distribution. Additionally,
we illustrate the minimal example with two figures (Figures 5 and 6), which explain the sampling
procedure visually.
                                                                                     K×nc
Let us start with our minimal example. We are given a dataset of i.i.d samples XD ∈ N+     from
                                                            c
a multivariate noncentral distribution with unknown ωgt ∈ R+ . K is the number of samples in the


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              m1 = 3      m2 = 5          m3 = 4

                                                                      N = 12


                                                                       n=5



Figure 5: Illustration of the basic setting of the multivariate hypergeometric distribution. We have 3
classes of elements (green, orange, and blue) with different and unknown importance ωc for every
class c. In our urn, the total number of elements N is given by the sum of elements of all classes mc .
From this urn, we draw a group of n samples. In this example, n = 5. The group importance ωc is
often unknown, and difficult to estimate. Our formulation helps to learn ωc using gradient-based
optimization when simulating how given samples are drawn from the urn.


          N = 12                                     N =9                                  N =4
           n=5                                        n=4                                  n=1

        mL = m1 = 3                                mL = m2 = 5                          mL = m3 = 4
       mR = m2 + m3 = 9                            mR = m3 = 4                           mR = 0
        ωL = ω1                                    ωL = ω2                               ωL = ω3
              ω2 m2 +ω3 m3
       ωR =       mR                               ωR = ω3                               ωR = 0



X1 ∼ pX L (n, mL , mR , ωL , ωR )      X2 ∼ pX L (n, mL , mR , ωL , ωR )       X3 ∼ pX L (n, mL , 0, ωL , 0)


Figure 6: Illustration of the proposed conditional sampling from the multivariate noncentral hyperge-
ometric distribution. We use the same urn as in Figure 5 with m = [3, 5, 4] and n = 5. As described
in Section 4, we sequentially sample random variates of the individual classes. Hence, we start by
sampling class 1. For that, we merge classes 2 and 3 (illustrated by the half blue and half orange
balls) creating the necessary parameters mL , mR , ωL , ωR for pXL (·) (described in the left column).
This is also described in Algorithms 1 and 2. Using the univariate distribution pXL (·) we sample the
random variable X1 , which is equal to 1 in our example (symbolized by the single green ball). We
continue with sampling the class 2, which is described in the middle column. The merge operation
simplifies to assigning mL = m2 and mR = m3 , and n is the original n minus X1 . We draw X2 = 3
in our example (again illustrated by the 3 orange balls below the urn). Because the number of drawn
balls must sum to n, the last class X3 is fully determined already.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


dataset and nc defines the number
                               P of classes. A sample from the dataset XD is denoted as XD . For
every XD ∈ XD , it holds that c XD,c = n. We assume that we know the total number of elements
in the urn, e.g. m = [m1 , m2 , ..., mc ].
In our minimal example, we are interested in learning the unknown importance weights ω with a
generative model using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Hence, we assume a data generating
distribution pX (x; ω) such that X ∼ pX (x; ω). The loss function L is given as
                                    X                 h              i
                                                                   2
                              L=         EX∼pX (x;ω) (XD − X)                            (36)
                                     XD ∈XD
                                      X
                                 =            EX∼pX (x;ω) [L(XD , X)]                                 (37)
                                     XD ∈XD

where L is the loss per sample. pX (x; ω) is a noncentral multivariate hypergeometric distribution as
defined in Definition 3.1 where the class importance ω is unknown.
To minimize E[L(X)], we want to optimize ω. Using SGD, we optimize the parameters ω in an
iterative manner:
                                             d
                           ωt+1 := ωt − η       EX∼pX (x;ω) [L(XD , X)]                        (38)
                                            dω
where η is the learning rate, and t is the step in the optimization process. Unfortunately, we do
                                          d
not have a reparameterization estimator dω  E[L(XD , X)] because of the jump discontinuities of the
arg max function in the categorical distributions.
As described in Sections 4.1 and 4.3, we can rewrite pX (x; ω) as a sequence of conditional distribu-
tions. Every conditional distribution is itself a categorical distribution, which prohibits the calculation
    d
of dω  E[L(XD , X)].
In more detail, we rewrite the joint probability distribution pX (x; ω) as
                                                    nc
                                                    Y
                        pX (x; ω) =pX1 (x1 ; ω)           pXc (xc | x1 , ..., xc−1 ; ω)               (39)
                                                    c=2

where every distribution pXc (·; ω) is a categorical distribution. We sample every Xc using Equa-
tion (5), i.e.
                  pXc (xLc ; ω) =xLc log ωLc + (nc − xL ) log ωRc + ψF (xLc ) + C           (40)
                                 P
ωLc , ωRc , mLc , mRc , and nc = j<c Xj are calculated according to Equation (3) and sequentially
for every class.
The expected element-wise loss EX∼pX (x;ω) [L(XD , X)] changes to
                                                        "n                  #
                                                         X c
                                                                          2
                 EX∼pX (x;ω) [L(XD , X)] =EX∼pX (x;ω)        (XD,c − Xc )                             (41)
                                                                    c=1
                                                                   "n                     #
                                                                    X c

                                                =EX∼pX (x;ω)               L(XD,c , Xc )              (42)
                                                                     c=1
                                                    nc
                                                    X
                                                =         EX∼pX (x;ω) [L(XD,c , Xc )]                 (43)
                                                    c=1

Hence,
                                          nc
                        d                X    d
                          E[L(XD , X)] =        EX∼pX (x;ω) [L(XD,c , Xc )]                           (44)
                       dω                c=1
                                             dω

                             d
Unfortunately, for every dω    E [L(XD,c , Xc )], we face the problem of not having a reparameterizable
gradient estimator. We cannot calculate the gradients of the loss directly, but pXc (·) being categorical
distributions allows us to use the Gumbel-Softmax gradient estimator (Jang et al., 2016; Maddison
et al., 2014; Paulus et al., 2020).


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The Gumbel-Softmax trick is a differentiable approximation to the Gumbel-Max trick (Maddison et al.,
2014), which provides a simple and efficient way to draw samples from a categorical distribution with
weights π. The Gumbel-Softmax trick uses the softmax function as a differentiable approximation to
the argmax function used in the Gumbel-Max trick. It follows (Jang et al., 2016)
                                      y =softmax((log π + g)/τ )                                        (45)
                                        =softmaxτ (log π + g)                                           (46)
where g1 , . . . , gk are i.i.d. samples drawn from Gumbel(0, 1), and τ is a temperature
                                                                               P         parameter. y is
a continuous approximation to a one-hot vector, i.e. 0 ≤ yi ≤ 1 such that i yi = 1.
Different to the standard Gumbel-Softmax trick, we infer the weights π from the probability density
function log pX (·) (see Equations (7) and (8)). We write for a single conditional class xLc as the
procedure is the same for all classes. It follows
                            Xτ,c (ω, g) = softmaxτ (log pXc (xLc ; ω) + g)                              (47)
where xLc = [0, mLc ]. Due to the translation invariance of the softmax function, we do not need to
calculate the constant C in log pXc (xLc ; ω).
The Gumbel-Softmax approximation is smooth for τ > 0, and therefore E[L(XD , Xτ )] has well-
                   d
defined gradients dω .
We write the loss function to optimize and its gradients as
                                                   nc
                                                   X
                       Eg [L(XD , Xτ (ω, g))] =           Eg [L(XD,c , Xτ,c (ω, g))]                    (48)
                                                   c=1
                                                    nc
                    d                              X     d
                      Eg [L(XD , Xτ (ω, g))] =     Eg      L(XD,c , Xτ,c (ω, g))                        (49)
                   dω                          c=1
                                                        dω

By replacing the categorical distribution in Equation (5) with the Gumbel-Softmax distribution (see
Lemma 4.2), we can thus use backpropagation and automatic differentiation frameworks to compute
gradients and optimize the parameters ω (Jang et al., 2016).
We implemented our minimal example for nc = 3 classes. We set m = [m1 , m2 , m3 ] =
[200, 200, 200] and n = 180. We create 10 datasets XD ∈ N1000×3 generated from different
ωgt and show the performance of the proposed method. From these 1000 samples, we use 800 for
training and 200 for validation. Similar to the setting we use for the KS-test (see Section 5.1), we
choose 10 values for ωgt,2 , i.e. ωgt,2 = [1.0, 2.0, . . . , 10.0]. The values for ωgt,1 and ωgt,3 are set to
1.0 for all datasets versions.
As described above the model does not have access to the data generating true ωgt . So, for every
dataset XD , we optimize the unknown ω based on the loss L defined in Equation (43).
Figure 7 shows the training and validation losses over the training steps. We train the model for 10
epochs, but we see that the model converges earlier. The losses only differ at the beginning of the
training procedure, which is probably an initialization effect, but quickly converge to similar values
independent of the ω2 value that generated the dataset. Figure 8 shows the estimation of log ω. The
x-axis shows the training step, the y-axis shows the estimated value. Figures 8a to 8b demonstrate
that the hypergeometric distribution is invariant to the scale of ω. With increasing value of ωgt,2 ,
the values of ω1 and ω3 decrease, although their ground truth values ωgt,1 and ωgt,3 do not change.
The training and validation loss do not increase though (Figures 7a and 7b), which demonstrates the
scale-invariance.

C    E XPERIMENTS
All our experiments were performed on our internal compute cluster, equipped with NVIDIA RTX
2080 and NVIDIA RTX 1080. Every training and test run used only a single NVIDIA RTX 2080
or NVIDIA RTX 1080. The weakly-supervised runs took approximately 3-4 hours each, where the
clustering runs only took about 3 hours each. We report detailed runtimes for the weakly-supervised
experiments in Table 3 to highlight the efficiency of the proposed method.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 (a) Training Loss                                   (b) Validation Loss

Figure 7: Training and validation losses for different values of ωgt of our minimal example described
in Appendix B.5.1.


    (a) Estimation of log ω1            (b) Estimation of log ω2            (c) Estimation of log ω3

Figure 8: The estimated log ω values over training procedure for different ground truth ωgt values of
our minimal example (see Appendix B.5.1). We see nicely that the hypergeometric distribution is
invariant to the scale of ω. With increasing value of ω2 , the estimated values for ω1 and ω3 change as
well, but the training and validation loss remain low (see Figure 7).


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 (a) Histograms class 1                          (b) Histograms class 2


                 (c) Histograms class 3                         (d) Distance and p-values

Figure 9: Sensitivity analysis for a varying number of samples to draw n measured with the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. In this experiment, we have the following specifications: m =
{200, 200, 200}, ω = {1.0, 5.0, 1.0}. The values of n are given in the plot.


C.1     KOLMOGOROV-S MIRNOV T EST

As described in Section 5.1 in the main text, we report the histograms of all classes next to each other
here in Figure 4. We can see that class 1 and class 3 have (at least visually) the same distribution over
histograms for different values of ω2 . And they also match their respective reference histograms.

C.1.1    A BLATION STUDIES FOR KOLMOGOROV-S MIRNOV TEST

To highlight our accurate approximation, we provide more results from KS-tests here in the appendix.
We perform additional tests with varying n and m2 . See Figures 9 and 10 for the detailed results. We
see that over all combinations, our approximation of the hypergeometric distribution performs well
and produces samples of approximately the same quality as the reference distribution.


C.2     W EAKLY-S UPERVISED L EARNING

C.2.1    M ETHOD , I MPLEMENTATION AND H YPERPARAMETERS

In this section we give more details on the used methods.                   We make use of the
disentanglement lib (Locatello et al., 2019) which is also used in the original paper we
compare to (Locatello et al., 2020). The baseline algorithms (Bouchacourt et al., 2018; Hosoya,
2018) are already implemented in disentanglement lib. For details on the implementation of
models, we refer to the original paper. We did not change any hyperparameters or network settings.
All experiments were performed using β = 1.0 as this is the best performing β according to Locatello
et al. (2020). For all experiments we train three models with different random seeds.
All experiments are performed using GroupVAE (Hosoya, 2018). Using GroupVAE, shared latent
factors are aggregated using an arithmetic mean. Bouchacourt et al. (2018) assume also knowledge
about shared and independent latent factors. In contrast to GroupVAE, their ML-VAE aggregates
shared latent factors by using the Product of Experts (i.e. geometric mean).
Figure 12 shows the basic architecture. The different architectures only differ in the View
Aggregation module. In this module, every method selects the latent factors zi ∈ S, which
should be aggregated over different views x1 and x2 . Given a subset S of shared latent factors, it


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 (a) Histograms class 1                         (b) Histograms class 2


                 (c) Histograms class 3                        (d) Distance and p-values

Figure 10: Sensitivity analysis for a varying total number of elements m2 measured with the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. In this experiment, we have the following specifications: n = 200,
ω = {1.0, 5.0, 1.0}, m1 = 200 and m3 = 200. The values of m2 are given in the plot.


             (a) Disentanglement                                  (b) Learned Representation

Figure 11: As an additional evaluation, we perform analysis on how disentangled the latent repre-
sentations are. And related to that, we assess the quality of the learned latent representation using a
linear classifier. We see that the dynamics over different k seems to be related for the disentantlement
and downstream performance of the learned latent representations.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              x1                                           qϕ (z | x1 )                  x̂1
                                     View
                          E                                                   D
                                     Aggregation
              x2                                           qϕ (z | x2 )                  x̂2


Figure 12: Setup for the weakly-supervised experiment. The three methods differ only in the View
Aggregation module.


follows
               qϕ (zi | xj ) =avg(qϕ (zi | x1 ), qϕ (zi | x2 ))                   ∀ i∈S                (50)
               qϕ (zi | xj ) =qϕ (zi | xj )                                          else              (51)
where avg is the averaging function of choice as described above and j ∈ {1, 2}. The methods used
(i. e. LabelVAE, AdaVAE, HGVAE) differ in how to select the subset S.

C.2.2     H YPERGEOMETRIC VAE ( IN MORE DETAIL )
In our approach (HGVAE), we model the number of shared and independent latent factors of a pair
of images as discrete random variables following a hypergeometric distribution with unknown ω. In
reference to the urn model, shared and independent factors each correspond to one color and the urn
contains d marbles of each color, where d is the dimensionality of the latent space. Given the correct
weights ω and when drawing from the urn d times, the number of each respective color corresponds,
in expectation, to the correct number of independent/shared factors. The proposed formulation allows
to simultaneously infer such ω and learn the latent representation in a fully differentiable setting
within the weakly-supervised pipeline by Locatello et al. (2019).
To integrate the procedure described above in this framework, we need two additional building blocks.
First, we introduce a function that returns log ω. To achieve this, we use a single dense layer which
returns the logits log ω. The input to this layer is a vector γ containing the symmetric version of
the KL divergences between pairs of latent distributions, i.e. for latent P and Q, the vector contains
1
2 (KL(P ||Q) + KL(Q||P )). Second, sampling from the hypergeometric distribution with these
weights leads to an estimate k̂ and ŝ. Consequently, we need a method to select k̂ factors out of the d
that are given. Similar to the original paper, we select the factors achieving the highest symmetric
KL-divergence. In order to do this, we sort γ in descending order using the stochastic sorting
procedure neuralsort (Grover et al., 2019). This enables us to select the top k̂ independent as
well as the bottom ŝ = d − k̂ shared latent factors. Like AdaVAE, we substitute the shared factors
by the mean value of the original latent code before continuing the VAE forward pass in the usual
fashion.

C.2.3     H YPERPARAMETER S ENSITIVITY
We perform ablations to examine how sensitive HypergeometricVAE is to certain hyperparameters.
We find that the temperature and the learning rate have the most influence on training stability and
convergence. First, if we set the temperature τ too low, we often observe vanishing or exploding
gradients. This well-known artifact of the Gumbel-Softmax trick can be avoided by introducing
temperature annealing. Hence, similar to the original Gumbel-Softmax trick (Jang et al., 2016;
Maddison et al., 2017) and the neuralsort implementation (Grover et al., 2019), we anneal the
temperature τ using an exponential function
                                          τt = τinit exp(−rt)                                          (52)
where t is the current training step, τinit is the initial temperature, and r is the annealing rate:
                                            log τinit − log τf inal
                                       r=                                                              (53)
                                                    nsteps
τf inal is the final temperature value and nsteps is the number of annealing steps. As shown in
Figure 13, training loss and shared factor estimation then converge almost independently of the final
temperature. In our final experiments, we use identical temperatures τ for both the differentiable


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Average train loss when varying τf inal .         (b) Average train loss when varying the learning rate.


(c) Mean squared error of estimating the number of        (d) Mean squared error of estimating the number of
shared factors when varying τf inal .                     shared factors when varying the learning rate.

Figure 13: Ablation of varying the final temperature τf inal (left) and the learning rate (right) of the
HGVAE in the weakly supervised experiment. We made ablations for the training loss (top) and
mean squared error of estimating the number of shared factors (bottom). The final temperature had
minimal impact on stability and convergence, whereas higher learning rates led to some instabilities.


hypergeometric distribution and neuralsort. We set the initial temperature τinit to 10 and the final
temperature τf inal to 0.01, which is annealed over nsteps = 50000. Further, we find the learning rate
to be the most crucial hyperparameter in terms of convergence. Higher learning rates generally seem
to lead to worse training losses. On the other hand, estimating the number of shared factors seems
robust on average, although high standard deviations imply decreasing consistency for higher learning
rates. We demonstrate this finding in Figure 13. We used an initial learning rate of 10−6 together with
the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) for our final experiments. Finally, we also experimented
with weighting the KL-divergence with a β term like in the β-VAE Higgins et al. (2017), where we
did not find an influence on stability and convergence. Hence, we left it at a default value of 1 in our
experiments.

C.2.4    DATA
The mpi3d dataset (Gondal et al., 2019) consists of frames displaying a robot arm and is based on 7
generative factors:

        • object color, shape and size
        • camera height
        • background color
        • horizontal and vertical axis


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: We report the runtimes for the three methods used in the weakly-supervised experiment, i.
e. labelVAE, adaptiveVAE and hypergeometricVAE. We report the runtime as mean and standard
deviation over all runs per experiment. We report the runtimes for the different number of independent
factors k = {−1, 2, 4, 6}.


                                                        RUNTIME [ S ]
   M ETHOD
                             k = −1               k=2                   k=4              k=6
   LABEL                 21907.4 ± 273.0    20921.1 ± 705.9     21389.3 ± 163.8    21761.1 ± 567.9
   ADAPTIVE              29071.5 ± 133.2    28609.8 ± 439.9     29479.1 ± 487.1    29966.3 ± 303.3
   HYPERGEOMETRIC        21888.9 ± 632.9    21299.4 ± 293.6     21863.9 ± 190.1    22241.0 ± 137.8


For more details on the dataset and in general, we refer to https://github.com/
rr-learning/disentanglement_dataset.



C.2.5    D OWNSTREAM TASK ON THE LEARNED LATENT REPRESENTATIONS

For the downstream task we sample randomly 10000 samples from the training set and 5000 samples
from the test set. For each sample, we extract the predicted shared and the predicted independent
parts of both views. Then, for every generative factor of the dataset, three individual classifiers
are trained on the respective latent representations of the 10000 training samples. Afterwards,
every classifier evaluates its predictive performance on the latent representations of the 5000 test
samples. To arrive at the final scores, we extract the prediction of the shared factors on the shared
representation and compute the balanced accuracy. Similarly, we calculate the balanced accuracy
of the independent factors on the respective independent representation classifiers and average their
balanced accuracy. Because the number of classes differs between generative factors we report
the adjusted balanced accuracy. We use the implementation from scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al.,
2011). For details, see https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.balanced_accuracy_score.html.
For all shared generative factors, we average the accuracies of the individual classifiers into a single
average balanced accuracy. We do the same for the independent factors. This allows us to report the
amount of shared and independent information that is present in the learned latent representation.
Consequently, we report these averages in the main text.
To evaluate the latent representation we train linear classifiers. More specifically, in this work we
use logistic regression classifiers (Cox, 1958) from scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). To train the
model, we increased the max iter parameter so that all models converged and left everything else
on default settings.



C.2.6    RUNTIMES OF DIFFERENT A LGORITHMS

In general, our sampling method scales with the number of classes O(c) and the sampling for a single
class scales with O(mi ), which is calculated in parallel and a single forward pass. The get a better
and empirically validated picture of the overhead created by using the hypergeometric distribution,
we also report the training times for the three methods compared. All methods were trained for an
equal number of epochs and on identical hardware equipped with NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080.
Table 3 reports the runtimes for all methods and averaged over 5 runs.
We see that the overhead of using the hypergeometric distribution is almost negligible. The proposed
hypergeometricVAE reaches approximately equal training runtimes as the labelVAE, which assumes
that the number of shared factors is known. It even outperforms the adaptiveVAE, which uses a very
simple heuristic, but needs to result to more sophisticated methods in order to avoid cutting gradients
in their thresholding function.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.3     C LUSTERING

In this section, we provide the interested reader with more details on the clustering experiments. In
the following we describe the models, the optimisation procedure and the implementation details
used in the clustering task.

C.3.1    M ODEL
We follow a deep variational clustering approach as described by Jiang et al. (2016).
Given a dataset X = {xi }N
                         i=1 that we wish to cluster into K groups, we consider the following
generative assumptions:
         c ∼ p(c; π),      zi ∼ p(zi |ci ) = N (zi |µci , σc2i I),        xi ∼ pθ (xi |zi ) = Ber(µxi )   (54)
where c = {ci }N                                      D
               i=1 are the cluster assignments, zi ∈ R are the latent embeddings of a VAE and xi
is assumed to be binary for simplicity.
In particular, assuming the generative process described in Equation (54), we can write the joint
probability of the data, also known as the likelihood function, as
          XZ                    XZ                               X         YZ
 p(X) =          p(X, Z, c) =         p(c; π)p(X|Z)p(Z|c) =        p(c; π)      p(xi |zi )p(zi |ci )
           c     z                c    z                                    c             i   zi
                                                                                                          (55)
Different from Jiang et al. (2016), the prior probability p(c; π) cannot be factorized as p(ci ; π) for
i = 1, . . . , K are not independent. By using a variational distribution qϕ (Z, c|X), we have the
following evidence lower bound

                                                p(c; π)p(X|Z)p(Z|c)
                 log p(X) ≥ Eqϕ (Z,c,|X) log                              = LELBO .                (56)
                                                     qϕ (Z, c, |X)
For sake of simplicity, we assume the following amortized mean-field variational distribution, as in
previous work (Jiang et al., 2016; Dilokthanakul et al., 2016):
                                                          Y
                    qϕ (Z, c|X) = qϕ (Z|X)qϕ (c|X) =         qϕ (zi |xi )qϕ (ci |xi ).          (57)
                                                                    i

From where it follows
 LELBO =Eqϕ (Z|X)qϕ (c|X) [log p(c|π) + log p(X|Z) + log p(Z|c) − log qϕ (Z, c|X)]                        (58)
          =Eqϕ (Z|X)qϕ (c|X) [log p(c|π)] + Eqϕ (Z|X) [log p(X|Z)] + Eqϕ (Z|X)qϕ (c|X) [log p(Z|c)]
               − Eqϕ (Z|X) [log qϕ (Z|X)] − Eqϕ (Z|X)q(c|X) [log qϕ (c|X)] .                              (59)

In the ELBO formulation all terms, except the first one, can be efficiently calculated as in previous
work (Jiang et al., 2016). For the remaining term, we rely on the following sampling scheme
                                              XZ
             Eqϕ (Z|X)qϕ (c|X) [log p(c|π)] =        qϕ (Z|X)qϕ (c|X) log p(c|π))                (60)
                                                    c     Z
                                                   XYZ
                                               =                   qϕ (zi |xi )qϕ (ci |xi ) log p(c|π)    (61)
                                                    c     i   zi
                                                   L
                                                   X
                                               =         log p(cl |π),                                    (62)
                                                   l=1

where we use the SGVB estimator and the Gumbel-Softmax trick (Jang et al., 2016) to sample from
the variational distributions qϕ (zi |xi ) and qϕ (ci |xi ) respectively. The latter is set to a categorical
distributions with weights given by:
                                                  N (zi |µci , σc2i )πci
                                  p(ci |zi ; π) = P                  2   ,                                (63)
                                                   k N (zi |µk .σk )πk
L is the number of Monte Carlo samples and it is set to 1 in all experiments.


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           qϕ (z | x)
                       x         E                         z         D         x̂
                                           qϕ (c | x)


Figure 14: General Architecture for the clustering experiments. All methods have the same architec-
ture details. They only differ in their definition of the prior distribution p(c; π).


C.3.2    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
To implement our model we adopted a feed-forward architecture for both the encoder and decoder
of the VAE with four layers of 500, 500, 2000, D units respectively, where D = 10. The VAE is
pretrained using the same layer-wise pretraining procedure used by Jiang et al. (2016). Each data
set is divided into training and test sets, and all the reported results are computed on the latter. We
employed the same hyper-parameters for all experiments. In particular, the learning rate is set to
0.001, the batch size is set to 128 and the models are trained for 1000 epochs. Additionally, we
used an annealing schedule for the temperature of the Gumbel-Softmax trick. As the VaDE is rather
sensitive to initialization, we used the same pretraining weights provided by Jiang et al. (2016). These
weights have been selected by the baseline to enhance the performance of their method, leading
to an optimistic outcome. If a random initialization were used instead, the clustering performance
would be lower. Nonetheless, the focus of our work is on comparing methods rather than on absolute
performance values. Figure 14 displays the general architecture of all methods. The methods only
differ in their definition of the prior probability distribution p(c; π).


                                                  29
