Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ULTI -M ODALITY A LONE IS N OT E NOUGH :
G ENERATING S CENE G RAPHS USING C ROSS -
R ELATION -M ODALITY T OKENS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Recent years have seen a growing interest in Scene Graph Generation (SGG), a
         comprehensive visual scene understanding task that aims to predict the relation-
         ships between objects detected in a scene. One of its key challenges is the strong
         bias of the visual world around us toward a few frequently occurring relation-
         ships, leaving a long tail of under-represented classes. Although infusing addi-
         tional modalities is one prominent way to improve SGG performance on under-
         represented classes, we argue that using additional modalities alone is not enough.
         We propose to inject entity relation information (Cross-Relation) and modality de-
         pendencies (Cross-Modality) into each embedding token of a transformer which
         we term primal fusion. The resulting Cross-RElAtion-Modality (CREAM) token
         acts as a strong inductive bias for the SGG framework. Our experimental results
         on the Visual Genome dataset demonstrate that our CREAM model outperforms
         state-of-the-art SGG models by around 20% while being simpler and requiring
         substantially less computation. Additionally, to analyse the generalisability of the
         CREAM model we also evaluate it on the Open Images dataset. Finally, we ex-
         amine the impact of the depth-map quality on SGG performance and empirically
         show the superiority of our model over the prior state of the art by better capturing
         the depth data, boosting the performance by a margin of around 25%.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Visual scene understanding has evolved in recent years from mere object detection and recognition
tasks to more complex problems such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al., 2015) and
Image Captioning (IC) (Hossain et al., 2019). One prominent tool for scene understanding is scene
graph generation (SGG) (Lu et al., 2016): Given any two entities in a scene, the task of SGG is to
detect any existing relationships between them. While standard SGG uses entity features from the
RGB images to detect relations, to move towards the goal of generating scene graphs that adequately
typify our visual world, we need additional clues to effectively capture under-represented classes in
SGG. In this regard, researchers have taken multiple directions such as infusing complementary
modalities (Zareian et al., 2020; Sharifzadeh et al., 2021) or conditioning using additional image
context (Lu et al., 2021). Among SGG methods based on further modalities, Zareian et al. (2020)
exploit external knowledge by using a late fusion mechanism in which the scene graphs generated
from the RGB features are refined in multiple iterations per relation detection iteration using knowl-
edge graphs, resulting in very high computational cost. On the other hand, SGG with additional
depth data (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021) has used an early fusion mechanism. Although Sharifzadeh
et al. (2021) requires less computation, it fails to effectively fuse the modalities and uses depth maps
of limited quality (Fig. 7).
To effectively fuse different modalities, transformer models can be beneficial, with their usage ex-
panding from text (Vaswani et al., 2017) to other modalities such as images (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)
and speech (Lin and Wang, 2020). Recently, transformers have also been used in SGG, mostly to
capture dependencies across time in video-based SGG (Cong et al., 2021). In the case of still im-
ages, transformers were used to extract object dependencies (Dhingra et al., 2021) and context de-
pendencies (Lu et al., 2021). Capturing known dependencies explicitly can boost the performance
on under-represented classes (Lu et al., 2021). However, using transformers for multi-modal fusion


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                            Token Types:



     Layer
                                                                                  cls   Class              CREAM
                                                                                        Subj-Depth     Obj-Depth
                                                                                        Subj-RGB           Obj-RGB
Input tokens   cls                          cls
                     Primal fusion                    Early fusion

Figure 1: Primal vs Early Fusion. In the case of primal fusion the modalities and the subject-object features
are fused explicitly to form the transformer input tokens. Contrastingly, for early fusion there is no interaction
between the modalities and subject-object features prior to entering the transformer.


can be challenging because of the high computational cost and model complexity (Nagrani et al.,
2021). The major reason for the increased expense in multi-modal transformers stems from the
fusion strategies used. Although there is lot of research into multi-modal fusion, it has primarily
focused on fusion strategies inside the transformers, which results in an increased sequence length
thus increasing the model complexity. Moreover, explicitly modeling the known inductive bias is
challenging for fusion strategies that start inside the transformer. The limitations of the existing
methods raise the following open questions: (Q1) How can we effectively combine different modal-
ities in SGG? (Q2) What is more important for improving SGG performance, better quality depth
maps or a better fusion strategy? (Q3) Will having multiple modalities alone be enough to boost the
coverage of under-represented classes in SGG?
To address the above questions, we propose a simple yet effective token generation strategy that
we call Cross-RElAtion-Modality (CREAM) tokens, by strategically combining entity relations (be-
tween the features of the subject and the object entity) with modality dependencies (i.e. between
RGB and the corresponding depth modality). As depicted in Fig. 1 we explicitly combine the
modalities and subject-object features prior to entering the transformer unlike early fusion in which
we rely on implicit fusion inside the transformer. We call our fusion strategy primal fusion. Sur-
prisingly, our primal fused CREAM tokens are able to capture the inherent inductive bias in SGG
using a single encoder-only transformer without using any complex cross-attention (Chen et al.,
2021), fusion (Prakash et al., 2021), or encoder-decoder (Lu et al., 2021) architectures. In partic-
ular, we are using our system to study the effect of the depth-map quality in scene graph genera-
tion using an improved depth map, VG-Depth.v2, generated for the Visual Genome (VG) dataset
(Krishna et al., 2017) using the monocular depth estimator of Yin et al. (2021) and compare to
VG-Depth.v1 maps (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021) (Fig. 7). This study is crucial for two reasons: (1)
to evaluate the relationship between architectural choice and depth-map quality in SGG perfor-
mance and (2) for the efficacy of SGG in real-world visual scene understanding scenarios such
as automated driving, where instantaneous 3D reconstruction is far-fetched but using monocu-
lar depth estimators to generate depth maps is feasible. We make our code publicly available at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/CREAM_Model-113F.
Precisely, we make the following contributions: (C1) We propose a novel token generation strategy
(CREAM tokens) for transformer based multi-modal SGG. Our CREAM tokens explicitly force the
multi-head-self-attention (MSA) component of the transformer to learn enriched representation by
focusing on different subspace. Our proposal can significantly boost the performance while also
reducing the computational cost. (C2) By primaly fusing CREAM tokens, we outperform state-
of-the-art models on the mRecall metric despite not using any additional context. (C3) We conduct
extensive depth-data analysis and ablation studies to show the significance of our proposed approach.


2    R ELATED W ORK

SGG. Scene graphs have been receiving increased attention from the research community due to
their potential usability in assisting downstream visual reasoning tasks (Shi et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2019; Krishna et al., 2018). The scene graph generation (SGG) task was first introduced by Lu
et al. (2016). The bias problem in SGG was first brought into focus by Zellers et al. (2018) and an
unbiased evaluation metric, meanRecall (mRecall), was proposed by Chen et al. (2019a) and Tang
et al. (2019). Various debiasing techniques were proposed subsequently such as using unbiased loss


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


functions including the class-balanced loss (Zareian et al., 2020), employing reinforcement learning
(Lu et al., 2021), and disentangling biased representations from the unbiased (Misra et al., 2016;
Cadene et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2020).
Privileged Scene Graph Generators (PSGGs). Recent progress in SGG pursues additional in-
formation sources to generate scene graphs beyond the standard subject-object features, labels, and
bounding boxes. We call these models privileged SGG (PSGG) models. One such direction in-
volves utilizing context information (Lu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2019; Hung et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2019b). Lu et al. (2021) introduce a transformer-based SGG approach that propagates global
context by making sequential prediction on the decoder by conditioning on the earlier decoded pre-
dictions. Through experiments, we show that CREAM model that uses depth as additional informa-
tion instead of context, outperforms Lu et al. (2021). Another set of PSGGs use external knowledge
graphs (KG) as additional information (Zareian et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019a; Gu et al., 2019).
KG-based SGG generally uses Graph Neural Networks for KG-SGG information propagation. Due
to the complex architecture required for KG-based SGG, these models are highly computationally
expensive. We show that our proposed approach outperforms KG-based SGG by a significant mar-
gin. Sharifzadeh et al. (2021) and Yang et al. (2018) have explored using depth maps as additional
information source for SGG. However, the depth-maps used are of limited quality and the effective
fusion of the depth modality with the RGB data has not been explored in detail. To address this, we
analyse the impact of the depth-map quality on SGG performance and propose an effective way to
combine the modalities and the entity features.
Two stage and one stage SGGs. The above works use two stage SGG pipeline in which the ob-
ject proposals and relation detection are carried out at two separate stages using pretrained object
detectors. On the other hand, one stage SGG (Li et al., 2022; Zou et al., 2021) generates the ob-
ject proposals and entity relations in parallel. Though one stage SGG can produce sparse proposal
set and faster models they are less generalisable. Thus, considering the generalisability and the
availability of off-the-shelf object detectors we use the two stage SGG pipeline in our work.



3   P RIMAL FUSION : E ARLY FUSION OF INDUCTIVE BIASES

To introduce primal fusion and to illustrate it using CREAM, let us briefly review the the core idea
of the transformers exploited in our work and the significance of the proposed fusion strategy.
Multi-Head-Self-Attention (MSA): The core idea of our work is to effectively ex-
ploit the MSA component of the transformer (Lu et  al., 2021). MSA(Q, K, V ) =
                                                                  Qi KiT

Concat (SA1 , SA2 , . . . , SAh ) W O with     SAi = softmax       √
                                                                     d
                                                                           Vi , where SA refers to self-
                                                                 O
attention, Q, K, and V refer to query, key, and value, and W are the trainable parameters. The
input token to the transformer is split into multiple heads to be attended to in parallel by the MSA.
The key to successfully capture the relationship between subject-object pairs in an SGG set-up is
to effectively express the subject-object joint features that accounts for their intricate relationship.
The MSA component of the transformer can jointly attend to diverse features by enabling each head
to focus on different subspace with different semantic or syntactic meanings. Hence, we propose
to use the MSA component to capture the inductive bias in the scene graph generation task. By
enriching each token with both the modalities and subject-object features, we are exploiting the
multi-head-self-attention component of the transformer effectively by feeding it with different sub-
space representations to learn from. As a result, the MSA with multiple heads can jointly attend to
the diverse features which enables the transformer to learn richer representation.
Multi-Model Fusion: The question of where to fuse the modalities in a multi-modal setup is a
pressing issue. Various fusion methods such as early, mid, late and bottleneck fusion were introduced
(Nagrani et al., 2021). Early and mid fusion passes the token sequences of all the modalities as input
to the transformer and the cross-modal information is exchanged implicitly starting from the initial
or later layers in the model . In the case of late fusion, no cross-modal information is exchanged.
The bottleneck fusion mechanism restrict the pairwise self-attention across specific units. Deviating
from the above, our primal fusion explicitly fuse each embedding token with known dependencies,
which acts as a strong inductive bias for SGG. In addition to performance gain the overall sequence
length of the input tokens is reduced to single modality sequence while having enriched tokens.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                            Token Types                              Dimension
                                             CREAM           Learnable    Class, Location       channel, width, height
 Classifier         SGG                                                                                                                𝑝
                                                                                                                                      ( )2
                                                                                                             𝑧01                     𝑧0𝑘
                               Transformer                                                                                      ….
                   Learnable 1D position embeddings
                                  ….
                                                                                                  ….                                                     ….
  Primal fusion                                                                                                                                                              𝑝
                                                                                                                       𝑝                                                    ( )2
                                                                                       1
                                                                                 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗_𝑣𝑠𝑜         ….                 ( )2
                                                                                                               𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗_𝑣𝑠𝑜𝑘
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                      𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗_𝑑𝑠𝑜           ….          𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑗_𝑑𝑠𝑜𝑘
                       Cross-Modality Fusion



    Cross-Relation Fusion                      Cross-Relation Fusion                            2 ∗ 𝑐𝑣 , 𝑝, 𝑝                                          2 ∗ 𝑐𝑑 , 𝑝, 𝑝
                                                                                                       𝑣𝑠𝑜                                                     𝑑𝑠𝑜

                                 RPN

                                                        𝑑                          𝑐𝑣 , 𝑝, 𝑝                        𝑐𝑣 , 𝑝, 𝑝              𝑐𝑑 , 𝑤, ℎ                    𝑐𝑑 , 𝑝, 𝑝
          𝑣                                                                              𝑣𝑠                               𝑣𝑜                     𝑑𝑠                           𝑑𝑜
    RGB Feature                                  Depth Feature                    avg pool                         avg pool                avg pool                    avg pool
     Extractor                                     Extractor


                            Depth Network

        RGB                                        depth-map                                   𝑐𝑣 , 𝑤, ℎ                                           𝑐𝑑 , 𝑤, ℎ


Figure 2: The CREAM architecture. An object detector, operating on each RGB image, first yields en-
tity proposals and entity features v. Moreover, a depth map is estimated from the RGB input, which is also
passed through the feature extractor to obtain depth features d. Then, for each subject-object pair, a sequence
of Cross-Relation-Modality tokens are generated through Cross-Relation and Cross-Modality fusion of the
subject-object features. The resultant tokens are passed through the transformer to yield a relation prediction.


3.1      T HE CREAM ARCHITECTURE

Before describing the CREAM architecture let us briefly review the standard two-stage SGG pipeline
that serves as the basis of our SGG approach. The first stage of a standard SGG pipeline (Lu et al.,
2016) starts with image feature extraction followed by detection and classification of the entities in
the image. The major components for relation detection between entities form part of the second
stage. For any given pair of entities detected in an image, the second stage of a vanilla SGG model
extracts the RGB features of the entities’ bounding box regions (location), and projects these RGB
features along with their location and class information. The final layers of the second stage then
contain a multi-layer perceptron followed by a relation classification head.
Our CREAM architecture also comes under the two stage SGG pipeline. Fig. 2 shows the overall
architecture of our proposed Cross-Relation-Modality transformer. For a given image I, we first
estimate its depth map D using a monocular depth estimator. We use Faster R-CNN (Ren et al.,
2015) to generate object proposals on the RGB features extracted from I, restricted to the proposal
region v. The same proposal information is used to extract the corresponding depth features d. The
object proposal information constitutes the bounding boxes, also called the location information l,
and the class probability distribution c. Followed by feature extraction, the input tokens for the
transformer encoder are generated such that each token sequence contains information of a single
subject-object pair. Each token contains primal fused information from a part of the subject-object
pair from both RGB and depth modalities. The resultant tokens are passed through the transformer
encoder-only model to predict the relations for the subject-object pair.

3.2      G ENERATING CREAM TOKENS

Next, we describe the CREAM token generation strategy for a given pair of subject proposal s and
object proposal o. Let cv , w, h and cd , w, h be the channel, width, and height dimensions for v and
d, respectively. Further, let vs and vo be the RGB features of the subject and object region proposals,
and let ds and do be the corresponding depth features of the subject and object region proposals. Our
primal fusion constitutes two stage fusion. In the first stage we average pool vs , vo , ds , and do along
h and w to summarize the average presence of the features that are crucial for relation prediction.
The resultant pooled features have height and width p which we fuse channel-wise for each modality.
Thus the first stage fusion comprise of vso = fusion1 (vs , vo ) and dso = fusion1 (ds , do ) , where
fusion1 (·) denotes the pooled features that are combined along the channel dimension. Then we split


                                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


vso channel-wise into sequential patches such that if cv , p, p, and k are the channel, width, height,
                                        2
and patch size of vso , we obtain (p/k) patches for vso . Similar to vso , the fused depth features dso
                                                                   2
are also split into sequential patches such that we obtain (p/k) patches for dso with channel size
cd . Each individual patch comprise of the summary of object features in a specific region, now by
combining the subject and object patches together, we are making it explicit to the transformer that
there are some feature dependencies between the subject and object patches that need to be exploited
for the relation prediction. Hence, the first stage fusion corresponds to the Cross-Relation part of the
token generation.
Note that this differs from Lu et al. (2021), who use transformers to capture relations between entities
and treat each entity the same way as a text token in natural language processing. For an SGG setup,
this assumption is limited because for effective relation detection we should capture dependencies
between localised parts within and between entities rather than considering the entity as a whole.
While splitting a word would make it meaningless, splitting an object would aid capturing its part
compositions. Our Cross-Relation component overcomes this limitation by capturing the feature
dependencies more effectively by facilitating the model to attend to crucial dependent features easily
when passed through the transformer to predict the relation.
Followed by the Cross-Relation component creation, the second stage fusion starts where we lin-
early project the patches of both the modalities such that the depth modality has higher projected
                                                                                                    i
dimensionality than the RGB data,        owing to the need to represent 3D structure:       proj − vso =
          v            i             d                                              v        d
f (vso , p ) , proj − dso = f dso , p , where f (·) denotes the linear projection, p and p the projec-
tion dimensionality of vso and dso , and i denotes the patch number ranging from 1 to (p/k)2 . Note
that the sensitivity of our model to the exact proportion of depth and RGB dimensions in CREAM
tokens is negligible in practice (Fig.5). After linear projection of all the patches, the corresponding
patches of both the modalities are fused together. This reduces the total number of tokens from
        2                 2
((p/k) ∗ 2) to (p/k) . The second stage of fusion combines Cross-Relation patches of  both the
modalities, resulting in Cross-Relation-Modality token generation: zi0 = fusion2 vso     i
                                                                                           , diso , where
f usion2 (·) denotes the modality specific projection f (·) followed by Cross-Modality fusion of de-
pendant features. The modality dependency is based on the fact that every feature patch in the RGB
modality has a corresponding feature patch in the depth modality. Thus the f usion2 reduces the
length of the token sequence while ensuring that dependent modality information is closely-knit to
be effectively exploited by the Multi-head Self Attention (MSA) mechanism.
Additionally, the class and the location information obtained from the region proposal network for
the subject-object pair are combined and linearly projected to replicate the Cross-Relation-Modality
                                                                          2
token dimension pv + pd . This results in two additional tokens: z (p/k) +1 = h f lso , pv + pd
           2
and z (p/k) +2 = h f cso , pv + pd , where f (·) is the linear projection and h(·) is the non-linear
function and lso , cso denotes the location and class information of the subject-object pair. As we
will see in Sec. 4, by using this Cross-Relation-Modality token generation strategy, our encoder-
only model outperforms prior state-of-the-art models despite not using any cross-attention, complex
fusion mechanism, or global context propagation.

3.3         T RANSFORMER ENCODER

We use a standard vision transformer encoder architecture (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). We prepend
the CREAM tokens with an additional learnable token z0class and learnable 1D positional embed-
ding z pos is added to each token to preserve the positional information. The resultant sequence is
passed as input to the encoder. The transformer consists of L encoder layers, each with MSA and
MLP blocks. Each encoder layer also contains LayerNorm (LN) before every block and residual
connections after every block:
                                  (p/k)2    (p/k)2 +1 (p/k)2 +2
              h                                                 i                          2      v  d
    z = z class ; z 1 ; · · · ; z
       0          0    0        0        ;z
                                         0           ;z
                                                     0            + z pos , z pos ∈ R((p/k) +3)×(p +p ) (1)
      zℓ′= MSA (LN (zℓ−1 )) + zℓ−1 , ℓ = 1 . . . L                                                  (2)
      zℓ = MLP (LN (zℓ′ )) + zℓ′ , ℓ = 1 . . . L                                                    (3)
                     0

     y = LN zL .                                                                                    (4)
Finally, y is linearly projected to total number of predicate relations and forms our relation classifi-
cation head.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: mRecall results on the Visual Genome (VG) dataset (the higher, the better). Context
models have additional privilege to mitigate errors propagated from classification (SGCLS) and
detection (SGDET) unlike the knowledge graph (KG) and depth-privileged models. Hence, our
major baselines for SGCLS and SGDET tasks are based on KG and depth. The best results overall
on the SGCLS and SGDET tasks are denoted by the superscript *.

                                                        PRDCLS              SGCLS               SGDET
               Model                    Privilege       mRecall@           mRecall@            mRecall@
                                                     20    50    100    20   50     100     20   50     100
 MOTIFS (Zellers et al., 2018)          context     10.8 14.0 15.3     6.3   7.7     8.2   4.2   5.7    6.6
 FREQ (Tang et al., 2019)               context     8.3 13.0 16.0      5.1   7.2     8.5   4.5   6.1    7.1
 RTN (Koner et al., 2020)               context      −     −    20.3    −    −     12.6*    −     −      −
 RU-Net (Lin et al., 2022)              context      −     −    24.7    −    −      13.9    −     −    10.1*
 VCTree (Tang et al., 2019)             context     14.0 17.9 19.4     8.2* 10.1* 10.8     5.2* 6.9*    8.0
 KERN (Chen et al., 2019a)                KG         −    17.7 19.2     −    9.4    10.0    −    6.4    7.3
 GB-NET (Zareian et al., 2020)            KG         −    19.3 20.9     −    9.6    10.2    −    6.1    8.3
 Depth-VRD (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021)    depth      16.4 20.7 22.7      −    −       −      −     −      −
 CREAM (ours)                            depth      20.3 25.8 28.1     8.0   9.7    10.5   4.0   5.2    6.5



Training. For RGB and depth feature extraction, we follow the procedure of our baseline mod-
els (Zellers et al., 2018; Sharifzadeh et al., 2021). We train our model using the Adam optimizer
(Kingma and Ba, 2015) with a batch size of 4 images and a learning rate of 1e − 3. For our trans-
former model, we use a patch size of 2, pooled    entity resolution of 8, leading to a total of 19 input
                2
tokens ((p/k) +3) where p = 8, k = 2 with embedding size of 576; we employ 6 attention heads
and 6 encoder layers. The model is trained for 45 epochs. We use cross-entropy as the loss function
L. To compare our model against previous debiased SGG models, we use a modified cross-entropy
loss that uses importance weighting for each class as proposed by Cui et al. (2019), which was
also used in Zareian et al. (2020). Specifically, we use the following class balanced cross-entropy
                        1−β
loss: LCB (p, y) = 1−β    ny L(p, y), where p denotes the predicted relation probabilities, y denotes

the ground-truth relation, ny the number of samples in the ground-truth relation y, and β denotes
the hyperparameter. β = 0 would result in the standard cross-entropy loss, whereas increasing β
strenghtens the debiasing. We used the setting from Zareian et al. (2020) for our class-balanced loss.


4    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

We use the SGG benchmark of the Visual Genome (VG) dataset (Krishna et al., 2017) for our
evaluation and the split proposed by Xu et al. (2017). We conducted our experiments on 3 tasks:
(1) predicate classification (PRDCLS), (2) scene graph classification (SGCLS), and (3) scene graph
detection (SGDET). To ensure a fair comparison against leading baselines, we created two variants
of our models: (1) CREAM and (2) CREAM (β-loss). While both the models are compared against
leading PSGGs in general, the CREAM (β-loss) uses a balanced cross-entropy loss (β-loss) as a
debasing strategy to yield a fairer comparison against leading baselines that also uses additional
debiasing strategies. We compare against PSGGs with additional context, knowledge graphs and
further modalities. We trained each of our models 5 times with different random seeds. The observed
variation in performance across training was very small with a variance of 0.20.
Results and analysis. mRecall results without using any debiasing strategy are shown in Table 1.
For a fair comparison, all the baselines that are chosen for this comparison also do not use any de-
biasing strategy. We notice that our approach, denoted as CREAM, improves over the prior state of
the art by more than 20% on the predicate classification task. For the scene graph classification and
detection tasks, our model outperforms both the depth and knowledge graph-based SGG approaches.
It can also be noticed that the models with additional context information show slightly better per-
formance on the SGCLS snd SGDET tasks. This is expected because image context can provide
additional clues to the model as it is independent of the classification score and the region proposals
from the pre-trained Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) for any given subject-object pair. On the other
hand, the extracted depth features are based on the same region proposals from Faster-RCNN for a
given subject-object pair, and hence the errors get propagated. One interesting future work direction
to enhance performance further would be to bring in context into our CREAM tokens.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: mRecall results for debiased models on Visual Genome (VG) (the higher, the better).
Context models have additional privilege to mitigate errors propagated from classification (SGCLS)
and detection (SGDET) unlike knowledge graph (KG) and depth-privileged models. Hence, our
major baseline for SGCLS and SGDET tasks is based on KG. The best results overall on the SGCLS
and SGDET tasks are denoted by the superscript *.

                                                                    PRDCLS               SGCLS                SGDET
                 Model                         Privilege            mRecall@            mRecall@             mRecall@
                                                                 20    50    100    20     50    100     20     50    100
 MOTIFS+TDE:GATE (Tang et al., 2020)            context         18.5 24.9 28.3     11.1   13.9   15.2   6.6     8.5    9.9
 VTransE+TDE:GATE (Tang et al., 2020)           context         18.9 25.3 28.4      9.8   13.1   14.7   6.3     8.5   10.2
 VCTree+TDE:SUM (Tang et al., 2020)             context         18.4 25.4 28.7      8.9   12.2   14.0   6.9     9.3   11.1
 Seq2Seq: RL-loss (Lu et al., 2021)             context         21.3 26.1 30.5     11.9* 14.7* 16.2     7.5*    9.6   12.1
 BGNN: multitask loss (Li et al., 2021)   context, resampling    −    30.4 32.9     −     14.3 16.5*     −     10.7* 12.6*
 GB-NET:β-loss (Zareian et al., 2020)             KG             −    22.1 24.0     −     12.7   13.4    −      7.1    8.5
 CREAM:β-loss (ours)                             depth          25.1 31.6 34.8     10.4   12.8   14.0   5.8     7.9    9.1


Table 3: mRecall results for PRDCLS task on Open Images v4 and v6 (the higher, the better).
Baseline results from official code are denoted by the superscript †.

                                                                         PRDCLS (v4)        PRDCLS (v6)
                                Model                      Privilege       mRecall@           mRecall@
                                                                        20   50     100    20   50     100
                MOTIFS† (Zellers et al., 2018)             context     83.6 84.2 84.4     70.3 70.5 70.5
                Depth-VRD† (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021)       depth      80.2 80.4 80.4     69.8 70.0 70.0
                CREAM(ours)                                 depth      92.2 92.4 92.4     76.0 76.2 76.3



To compare against models that additionally use unbiasing strategies, we have created a variant of
our model as shown in Table 2. While there are various debiasing strategies (Zareian et al., 2020;
Tang et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021), our motivation is to show the effectiveness of our proposed
architecture in effectively utilising relation and modality dependencies. Hence, we chose a simple
debiasing technique that uses a class-balanced cross entropy loss (β−loss). More complex debiasing
strategies may result in further improvement in performance; we leave that for a potential future
study. As discussed earlier, our biggest improvements are expected for the predicate classification
task. Table 2 confirms once more that also our debiased model outperforms prior state-of-the-art
debiased models. It should also be noticed that our model outperforms BGNN (Li et al., 2021) that
additionally does bi-level data re-sampling in addition to debiasing and using context.
Fig. 3 depicts the class-level recall performance for our CREAM model in comparison to the Depth-
VRD (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021). Both the models are trained using the VG-Depth.v2 dataset (see
below). The yellow line denotes the long-tail of under-represented classes in the VG dataset (Krishna
et al., 2017). It can be noticed that when we get closer to the tail, our CREAM model has higher
recall values per class than Depth-VRD, showing how our CREAM tokens more effectively exploit
the modality dependencies compared to prior depth-based multi-modal SGG approaches. The trend
in Fig. 3 is also confirmed by the qualitative samples in Fig. 4. While Depth-VRD captures widely
occurring relations such as ‘wearing’ and ‘on’, it fails to capture rare spatial relations in the data such
as ‘sitting on’, ‘covered in’, and the co-occurring triplet ‘Table and chair’. Our CREAM model’s
success at capturing both the rare spatial and co-occurring relations (highlighted in green) shows the
effectiveness of our Cross-Relation and Cross-Modality combined CREAM tokens.
To investigate on the generalisability of our CREAM model we further evaluate it on Open Images
v4 and v6 dataset (Kuznetsova et al., 2020). We use the same data split and backbone used by Li
et al. (2021) and compare the mRecall performance on the PRDCLS task. As depcited in Table 3
CREAM model consistently outperforms the baseline models once again proving its effectiveness.
Depth-map analysis. We analysed the significance of the depth-map quality on the SGG perfor-
mance and the importance of careful architectural design to make use of the depth map efficiently.
As depicted in Table 4a, the performance improvement for our model on VG-Depth.v2 generated us-
ing the monocular depth estimator of Yin et al. (2021) over VG-Depth.v1 (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021)
is more than 20% for all the mRecall thresholds. To the contrary, the model of Sharifzadeh et al.
(2021) shows no noticeable improvement on the high quality VG-Depth.v2 dataset. This reveals
that the improved performance of our model is not just due to the high-quality depth maps (VG-
Depth.v2) but due to our CREAM architecture, which allows to take advantage of the improved


                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       CREAM                Depth-VRD               Predicate distribution
                 1                                                                                                                                          40%
               0.9                                                                                                                                          35%


                                                                                                                                                                  Predicate distribution %
               0.8
                                                                                                                                                            30%
               0.7
 mRecall@100                                                                                                                                                25%
               0.6
               0.5                                                                                                                                          20%
               0.4                                                                                                                                          15%
               0.3
                                                                                                                                                            10%
               0.2
               0.1                                                                                                                                          5%
                 0                                                                                                                                          0%


                     hanging from


                           carrying


                          laying on
                                along


                                  says

                              across
                                     on
                                   has

                                     of


                                 with
                               above
                            holding


                         in front of
                        attached to


                       walking on
                            playing


                                   and


                         parked on
                                      at


                           between


                             against

                                 from


                              part of

                           flying in
                            wearing


                                using
                               under

                               wears


                                    for
                       standing on


                               riding

                              eating


                          watching


                         looking at
                                     in


                                  near


                      belonging to


                        covered in
                       mounted on
                                  over


                        painted on


                                     to
                            made of


                       growing on
                        walking in
                             behind

                          sitting on


                           covering


                        on back of
                           lying on
                                                                            Predicate Classes


Figure 3: Class-level recall@100 for PRDCLS. The yellow line depicts the data distribution per
predicate class. Our CREAM model, denoted using blue bars, has a higher recall than Depth-VRD
(Sharifzadeh et al., 2021) for under-represented classes.


                                                    CREAM                                                                                    CREAM
                                         Man sitting on bench                                                                        Bear has nose
                                         Man wearing shirt                                                                           Bear on bed
                                         Man wearing pant                                                                            Book on bed
                                         Man holding umbrella                                                                        Bottle on bed
                                         Mountain covered in tree                                                                    Bear holding bottle
                                         Building behind people                                                                      Paw on book
                                         Man at table                                                                                Table and chair
                                         Man at table                                                                                Curtain behind table

                                                   Depth-VRD                                                                                Depth-VRD

                                          Man holding umbrella                                                                       Bear has nose
                                          Man wearing shirt                                                                          Bear on bed
                                          Man wearing pant                                                                           Book on bed
                                          Man at table                                                                               Bottle on bed
                                          Man at table                                                                               Paw on book


Figure 4: Qualitative results for PRDCLS. The triplets correctly predicted by CREAM while
missed by Depth-VRD (Sharifzadeh et al., 2021) are highlighted in green. The CREAM model is
successful at predicting both spatially-aware scenarios such as ‘sitting on’, ‘covered in’ (left) and
relation-aware scenarios ‘and’ (right) missed by Depth-VRD.



depth maps in an effective manner. Also, our model’s results on VG-Depth.v1 reveal the quality
limitations of VG-Depth.v1, as despite the improved modeling power of our CREAM architecture,
there is no significant mRecall improvement on VG-Depth.v1.
Computational cost. We compare the computational cost of our model against leading baselines
in Table 4b. For fair comparison, all the models are timed on single NVIDIA A100 GPU with 40
gigabytes of memory. The most crucial aspect is the inference time of the model when it is deployed
in real-time scenarios. Our model is 20 times faster than GB-NET (Zareian et al., 2020) while being
significantly better at capturing under-represented classes. It also has around 35% and 3% fewer
parameters than GB-NET and Depth-VRD, respectively.

Table 4: Impact of depth-map quality and computational cost of CREAM vs. the state of the art.

               Model   mRecall@   VG-Depth.v1   VG-Depth.v2   Improvement
                         20          16.7          20.3          22%                                                 Training Time   Inference Time   #Parameters
                                                                                                    Model
CREAM (ours)             50          20.9          25.8          23%                                                  (min/epoch)      (ms/image)      (million)
                         100         22.7          28.1          24%                             GB-NET                   180              500            444
                         20          16.4          16.0           -2%                            Depth-VRD                 28              25             298
   Depth-VRD             50          20.7          20.9            1%                            CREAM (ours)              26              25             288
                         100         22.7          23.7            4%
(a) mRecall performance improvement on Visual                                                   (b) Computational cost in comparison to the state
Genome (VG) for PREDCLS (higher, the better).                                                   of the art.



                                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Ablation study. mRecall results on Visual Genome (VG) for β-loss model variants (the
higher, the better). The token design of the model variants is considerd v: visual, d: depth, s: subject,
and o: object information; ‘-’ denotes separate tokens.

                                                                      PRDCLS
                Model Variants          Model Description             mRecall@
                                                                   20   50     100
                     vso            Cross-Relation (no depth)     15.7 19.43 21.0
                   vso-dso               Cross-Relation           21.2 25.5 27.5
                   vds-vdo              Cross-Modality            17.1 21.4 22.0
                 vs-vo-ds-do             no cross tokens          16.7 20.0 21.4
                CREAM (vdso)        Cross-Relation-Modality       25.1 31.6 34.8


Ablation study. To evaluate the importance of our CREAM token design, we conducted an ex-
tensive ablation study as shown in Table 5. Here, vso represents a model variant without using the
depth modality such that every token in the sequence contains only RGB-based information about
the subject-object pair. vso-dso denotes the model that uses both depth and RGB modalities but
each token in the sequence contains either depth or RGB subject-object pair information and not
both the modalities. vds-vdo denotes a model in which each token contains information about both
depth and RGB modalities but either only subject or only object information. Finally, vs-vo-ds-do
denotes the model in which the modalities and relations are all split into separate tokens. As Table
5 shows, the removal of depth features results in the highest performance drop. Moreover, Cross-
Relation seems to be the most crucial fusion combination that outperforms other model variants.
The effectiveness of Cross-Relation fusion strengthens our claim that for effective relation detection
it is crucial to capture the dependencies between localised parts within and between entities. We can
also notice that the standard transformer token variant that does early fusion (vs-vo-ds-do) improves
only slightly over the no-depth model vso. Moreover, we find that Cross-Modality fusion (vds-vdo)
results in an improvement over no-cross tokens model. Overall, our CREAM model that exploits
Cross-Relation and Cross-Modality fusion significantly outperforms all other model variants.
Now we are ready to answer the open questions raised in the Introduction 1:
Q1. Effective way to combine different modalities in SGG: Through strong quantitative and quali-
tative results of our CREAM model discussed above, we prove that explicitly capturing the known
inductive biases is one way to effectively combine different modalities in SGG.
Q2. Better quality depth maps vs better fusion strategy: From the depth data analysis in Table 4a we
can conclude that it is crucial to have both better depth maps and better fusion strategy to improve
the SGG performance.
Q3. Boosting the coverage of under-represented classes in SGG using multi-modality alone: Our
ablation study results in Table 5 proves that multi-modality alone is not enough, effectively combin-
ing the Cross-Relation and Cross-Modality information is crucial at boosting SGGs performance on
under-represented classes.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we show that simply relying on multiple modalities is not enough to cope with under-
represented classes in SGG. Careful attention must be paid to how the modalities and features are
processed. We propose an effective way of moving towards multi-modality in SGG by introducing
CREAM tokens, which enables the model to learn richer representation by explicitly capturing the
inductive bias in an SGG set-up. We outperform leading SGG baselines by feeding CREAM tokens
to the transformer using our primal fusion technique. Through an extensive ablation study and
depth data analysis, we show the significance of our proposed approach. Though our model shows
significant performance improvements on the PREDCLS task, to further mitigate the classification
and detection errors in SGCLS and SGDET tasks we will have to bring in additional image context.
One interesting avenue for future work would be to enrich CREAM tokens with context. Another
promising research direction would be to expand our CREAM architecture to an end-to-end relation
system that unifies Multi-Modality and Cross-Modality correlations.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zit-
  nick, and Devi Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2425–2433, 2015.
Remi Cadene, Corentin Dancette, Matthieu Cord, Devi Parikh, et al. RUBi: Reducing Unimodal
  Biases for Visual Question Answering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 32, 2019.
Chun-Fu Richard Chen, Quanfu Fan, and Rameswar Panda. CrossVIT: Cross-Attention Multi-Scale
  Vision Transformer for Image Classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pages 357–366, 2021.
Tianshui Chen, Weihao Yu, Riquan Chen, and Liang Lin. Knowledge-Embedded Routing Network
  for Scene Graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pages 6163–6171, 2019a.
Yunian Chen, Yanjie Wang, Yang Zhang, and Yanwen Guo. PANet: A Context Based Predicate
  Association Network for Scene Graph Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
  Conference on Multimedia and Expo, pages 508–513, 2019b.
Yuren Cong, Wentong Liao, Hanno Ackermann, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Michael Ying Yang. Spatial-
  Temporal Transformer for Dynamic Scene Graph Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 16372–16382, 2021.
Yin Cui, Menglin Jia, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yang Song, and Serge Belongie. Class-Balanced Loss Based
  on Effective Number of Samples. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9268–9277, 2019.
Naina Dhingra, Florian Ritter, and Andreas Kunz. BGT-Net: Bidirectional GRU Transformer Net-
  work for Scene Graph Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2150–2159, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jiuxiang Gu, Handong Zhao, Zhe Lin, Sheng Li, Jianfei Cai, and Mingyang Ling. Scene Graph
   Generation with External Knowledge and Image Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1969–1978, 2019.
MD Zakir Hossain, Ferdous Sohel, Mohd Fairuz Shiratuddin, and Hamid Laga. A Comprehensive
 Survey of Deep Learning for Image Captioning. ACM Computing Surveys, 51(6):1–36, 2019.
Zih-Siou Hung, Arun Mallya, and Svetlana Lazebnik. Contextual Translation Embedding for Visual
  Relationship Detection and Scene Graph Generation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
  Machine Intelligence, 43(11):3820–3832, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Rajat Koner, Suprosanna Shit, and Volker Tresp. Relation transformer network. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.06193, 2020.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual Genome: Connecting Lan-
  guage and Vision Using Crowdsourced Dense Image Annotations. International Journal of Com-
  puter Vision, 123(1):32–73, 2017.
Ranjay Krishna, Ines Chami, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Referring Relationships. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6867–6876,
  2018.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab
  Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, et al. The open images dataset v4.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, 128(7):1956–1981, 2020.
Rongjie Li, Songyang Zhang, Bo Wan, and Xuming He. Bipartite graph network with adaptive mes-
  sage passing for unbiased scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Rongjie Li, Songyang Zhang, and Xuming He. Sgtr: End-to-end scene graph generation with trans-
  former. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, 2022.
Xin Lin, Changxing Ding, Jing Zhang, Yibing Zhan, and Dacheng Tao. Ru-net: Regularized un-
  rolling network for scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Yan-Bo Lin and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang. Audiovisual Transformer with Instance Attention for
  Audio-Visual Event Localization. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision,
  2020.
Cewu Lu, Ranjay Krishna, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual Relationship Detection with
  Language Priors. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 852–
  869, 2016.
Yichao Lu, Himanshu Rai, Jason Chang, Boris Knyazev, Guangwei Yu, Shashank Shekhar, Gra-
  ham W Taylor, and Maksims Volkovs. Context-Aware Scene Graph Generation with Seq2Seq
  Transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pages 15931–15941, 2021.
Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, Margaret Mitchell, and Ross Girshick. Seeing Through the Human
   Reporting Bias: Visual Classifiers from Noisy Human-Centric Labels. In Proceedings of the IEEE
   Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2930–2939, 2016.
Arsha Nagrani, Shan Yang, Anurag Arnab, Aren Jansen, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun. Attention
  Bottlenecks for Multimodal Fusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, 2021.
Aditya Prakash, Kashyap Chitta, and Andreas Geiger. Multi-Modal Fusion Transformer for End-to-
  End Autonomous Driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pages 7077–7087, 2021.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time
  Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 28, 2015.
Sahand Sharifzadeh, Sina Moayed Baharlou, Max Berrendorf, Rajat Koner, and Volker Tresp. Im-
  proving Visual Relation Detection using Depth Maps. In Proceedings of the 25th International
  Conference on Pattern Recognition, pages 3597–3604, 2021.
Jiaxin Shi, Hanwang Zhang, and Juanzi Li. Explainable and Explicit Visual Reasoning over Scene
   Graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
   tion, pages 8376–8384, 2019.
Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, Baoyuan Wu, Wenhan Luo, and Wei Liu. Learning to Compose
  Dynamic Tree Structures for Visual Contexts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern recognition, pages 6619–6628, 2019.
Kaihua Tang, Yulei Niu, Jianqiang Huang, Jiaxin Shi, and Hanwang Zhang. Unbiased Scene Graph
  Generation from Biased Training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3716–3725, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need. In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wenbin Wang, Ruiping Wang, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Exploring Context and Visual
 Pattern of Relationship for Scene Graph Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8188–8197, 2019.
Danfei Xu, Yuke Zhu, Christopher B Choy, and Li Fei-Fei. Scene Graph Generation by Itera-
  tive Message Passing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 5410–5419, 2017.
Hsuan-Kung Yang, An-Chieh Cheng, Kuan-Wei Ho, Tsu-Jui Fu, and Chun-Yi Lee. Visual Relation-
  ship Prediction via Label Clustering and Incorporation of Depth Information. In Proceedings of
  the European Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, 2018.
Wei Yin, Jianming Zhang, Oliver Wang, Simon Niklaus, Long Mai, Simon Chen, and Chunhua
 Shen. Learning to Recover 3D Scene Shape from a Single Image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Alireza Zareian, Svebor Karaman, and Shih-Fu Chang. Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate
  Scene Graphs. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 606–623,
  2020.
Rowan Zellers, Mark Yatskar, Sam Thomson, and Yejin Choi. Neural motifs: Scene Graph Parsing
  with Global Context. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 5831–5840, 2018.
Cheng Zou, Bohan Wang, Yue Hu, Junqi Liu, Qian Wu, Yu Zhao, Boxun Li, Chenguang Zhang, Chi
  Zhang, Yichen Wei, et al. End-to-end human object interaction detection with hoi transformer. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
This section contains additional results and analysis that were excluded from the main document
due to space constraints. At first we carry out a sensitivity analysis of the modality proportion in the
CREAM token. Then we discuss the mRecall results across model runs to show the stability of our
model. We conclude by providing the Recall results and additional qualitative samples.

A.1   S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

We conducted a modality proportion sensitivity analysis as depicted in Fig. 5 by varying the number
of projection dimensions of RGB vdim and depth ddim , which in total sum to a dimensionality of 576.
Starting with vdim = 64 and ddim = 512, the relative proportion is varied across runs by increasing
vdim by 64 and decreasing ddim by 64 incrementally. The seed of all the model variants is fixed to
0 and the resulting mRecall@20, 50, and 100 are summed to get the best overall results. In Fig. 5,
we observe that increasing vdim and reducing ddim from left to right shows an overall decreasing
trend. This trend could be attributed to the fact that the depth modality requires a higher number
of projected dimensions to represent the high-quality 3D information. Note that this hypothesis is
consistent with the increased file size of the depth maps in comparison to the RGB data. Moreover,
we observe that our CREAM architecture seems not to be particularly sensitive to the modality
proportion. We have used vdim = 64 and ddim = 512 in all our CREAM model variants.

A.2   M ODEL S TABILITY

In the main document we have reported the average of five model runs obtained by using random
seeds 0 to 4. Fig. 6 depicts the mRecall results obtained for each of those five model runs. Our
proposed CREAM model is highly stable with mRecall@20, 50, and 100 on the test set ranging
from 24.3 to 25.8, 31.2 to 32.2, and 34.2 to 35.3, respectively. The mRecall results thus have low
variances of 0.27, 0.18, and 0.17, respectively.

A.3   R ECALL R ESULTS

Though the major focus of our work is to improve the coverage of under-represented classes by
using mRecall as the evaluation metric we additionally analysed our models performance on Recall
metric. Similar to the observation of previous works Lu et al. (2021); Tang et al. (2020); Zareian
et al. (2020) we also noticed that optimising for Recall results in degradation of mRecall and vice
versa. While the optimal mRecall results were obtained at the learning rate of 1e − 3, optimal Recall
results were obtained at the learning rate of 1e − 4. Table 6 shows that our Recall results obtained
at a learning rate of 1e − 4 are also competitive with the state of the art for the PREDCLS task. At
1e − 3 learning rate we noticed around 1% drop in Recall results reported in Table 6.

A.4   VG-D EPTH . V 1 VS VG-D EPTH . V 2

Figure 7 shows “noisy” depth-map samples reported in Sharifzadeh et al. (2021). Comparing the
noisy depth maps from Sharifzadeh et al. (2021) (VG-Depth) from the second row to the corre-
sponding high-quality depth maps (VG-Depth.v2) in the bottom row.

A.5   Q UALITATIVE S AMPLES

To show the effectiveness of our method qualitatively, Fig. 8 and 9 compare scene graphs generated
by our method to those generated by the Depth-VRD Sharifzadeh et al. (2021) baseline model. For
fairness, both the models use our improved VG-Depth.v2 depth maps. Though both the models
uses the same high quality depth maps, our model can effectively capture under-represented classes
(classes represented in less than 5% of samples in the dataset) such as ‘over’, ‘sitting on’, ‘laying
on’, ‘behind’ (Fig. 8) and ‘covering’, ‘standing on’, ‘walking in’ (Fig. 9). An additional description
can be found in the respective figure caption.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                        Sensitivity Analysis
                                91

                                        90.1
   Sum of mRecall@20, 50, 100   90
                                                                        89.7                89.8
                                                                                                                                    89.4
                                89
                                                           88.4                                                                                                         88.4
                                88                                                                              88.1

                                87                                                                                                               87.2


                                86

                                85
                                      v64, d512        v128, d448   v192, d384         v256, d320           v320, d256           v384, d192
                                     𝑣64 , 𝑑512       𝑣128 , 𝑑448   𝑣192 , 𝑑384       𝑣256 , 𝑑320           𝑣320 , 𝑑256      𝑣384 , 𝑑192      𝑣v448,  d128
                                                                                                                                                448 , 𝑑128
                                                                                                                                                                   v512, d64
                                                                                                                                                                      𝑣512 , 𝑑64

                                                                                            Projection dimension



Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis by varying the modality proportion within the CREAM tokens. From left
to right vdim is incremented by 64 while ddim is decremented by 64. We plot the sum of mRecall@20, 50, and
100.

                                                                               mRecall@20          mRecall@50          mRecall@100
                                40
                                35             34.2                  34.9                            34.5                           35.3                       35.2
                                               31.2                  32.2                            31.2                            32                        31.4
                                30
                                25             24.7                  25.8                                                           25.4                       25.2
                                                                                                     24.3
 mRecall


                                20
                                15
                                10
                                 5
                                 0
                                            seed0                   seed1                           seed2                           seed3                      seed4
                                                                                             mRecall across runs



Figure 6: CREAM(β-loss): Variation across training runs. mRecall@20, 50, and 100 on the test set is
plotted for all the model variants obtained by varying the seed from 0 to 4.

                                                  Table 6: Visual Genome (VG) recall results (the higher, the better).

                                                                                             PRDCLS                               SGCLS                         SGDET
               Recall@                                                               20         50  100                    20       50  100              20       50  100
 MOTIFS Zellers et al. (2018)                                                       58.5       65.2 67.1                  32.9     35.8 36.5            21.4     27.2 30.3
 Frequency+Overlap Zellers et al. (2018)                                            53.6       60.6 62.2                  29.3     32.3 32.9            20.1     26.2 30.1
 Message Passing+ Zellers et al. (2018)                                             52.7       59.3 61.3                  31.7     34.6 35.4            14.6     20.7 24.5
 VCTree Tang et al. (2019)                                                          60.1       66.4 68.1                  35.2     38.1 38.8            22.0     27.9 31.3
 GB-NET Zareian et al. (2020)                                                        −         66.6 68.2                   −       38.0 38.8             −       26.4 30.0
 Depth-vrd Sharifzadeh et al. (2021)                                                59.4       66.2 68.0                   −        −    −               −        −    −
 CREAM                                                                              59.3       66.3 68.1                  31.3     34.5 35.3            17.0     21.9 25.0


Figure 7: Failure cases reported by Sharifzadeh et al. (2021). The second row shows the noisy depth
maps VG-Depth.v1 from Sharifzadeh et al. (2021). The bottom row represents the improved depth
map VG-Depth.v2.


                                                                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          CREAM                                                     CREAM
                                Pole of umbrella                                           Person laying on surfboard
                                Person holding dog                                         Wave behind person
                                Umbrella over man
                                Man sitting on seat


                                        Depth-VRD                                                 Depth-VRD
                                Pole of umbrella


Figure 8: Qualitative results for PRDCLS. The triplets correctly predicted by CREAM while missed by
Depth-VRD Sharifzadeh et al. (2021) are highlighted in green. The CREAM model successfully detects the
under-represented classes ‘over’, ‘sitting on’ (left) as well as ‘laying on’, ‘behind’ (right) missed by the Depth-
VRD model.


                                         CREAM                                                       CREAM
                                Man wearing pant                                           Person wearing jacket
                                Person holding pole                                        Person wearing coat
                                Snow on roof                                               Person walking in snow
                                Skier holding pole                                         Person standing on snow
                                Snow covering mountain
                                Person on ski
                                Roof of building
                                Snow covering tree

                                        Depth-VRD                                                  Depth-VRD
                                Man wearing pant                                           Person wearing jacket
                                Person holding pole                                        Person wearing coat
                                Snow on roof                                               Person in snow
                                Skier holding pole
                                Person on ski
                                Roof of building


Figure 9: Qualitative results for PRDCLS. The triplets correctly predicted by CREAM while missed by
Depth-VRD Sharifzadeh et al. (2021) are highlighted in green. Our proposed CREAM model successfully
detects the under-represented class ‘covering’ (left) missed by the Depth-VRD model. The figures on the
right show that our model can capture the descriptive under-represented classes ‘walking in’, ‘standing on’
(highlighted in green), while Depth-VRD could only relate the same pair using the highly-represented, less
descriptive relation ‘in’ (highlighted in red).


                                                         15
