Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


FAST AND P RECISE : A DJUSTING P LANNING H ORIZON
WITH A DAPTIVE S UBGOAL S EARCH

 Michał Zawalski ∗                              Michał Tyrolski ∗                    Konrad Czechowski ∗
 University of Warsaw                           University of Warsaw                 University of Warsaw
 m.zawalski@uw.edu.pl                           michal.tyrolski@                     k.czechowski@
                                                gmail.com                            mimuw.edu.pl

 Tomasz Odrzygóźdź                   Damian Stachura                     Piotr Pi˛ekos
 IDEAS NCBR                            Jagiellonian University             KAUST†
 tomaszo@impan.pl                      damian.stachura1@                   piotrpiekos@gmail.com
                                       gmail.com

 Yuhuai Wu                            Łukasz Kuciński                     Piotr Miłoś
 Google Research                      Polish Academy of Sciences           Ideas NCBR,
 & Stanford University                lkucinski@impan.pl                   Polish Academy of Sciences,
 yuhuai@google.com                                                         deepsense.ai
                                                                           pmilos@impan.pl



                                                 A BSTRACT
             Complex reasoning problems contain states that vary in the computational cost
             required to determine the right action plan. To take advantage of this property,
             we propose Adaptive Subgoal Search (AdaSubS), a search method that adaptively
             adjusts the planning horizon. To this end, AdaSubS generates diverse sets of sub-
             goals at different distances. A verification mechanism is employed to filter out
             unreachable subgoals swiftly, making it possible to focus on feasible further sub-
             goals. In this way, AdaSubS benefits from the efficiency of planning with longer-
             term subgoals and the fine control with shorter-term ones, and thus scales well
             to difficult planning problems. We show that AdaSubS significantly surpasses hi-
             erarchical planning algorithms on three complex reasoning tasks: Sokoban, the
             Rubik’s Cube, and the inequality-proving benchmark INT.


1       I NTRODUCTION
When solving hard problems, people often try to decompose them into smaller parts that are typically
easier to complete (Hollerman et al., 2000). Similarly, subgoal search methods aim to solve complex
tasks by considering intermediate subgoals leading towards the main goal. Besides their intuitive
appeal, such approaches offer many practical advantages. Most notably, they enable deeper search
within a smaller computational budget and reduce the negative impact of approximation errors.
Subgoal search methods powered by deep learning have shown promising results for continuous
control tasks, such as robotic arm manipulation (Nair & Finn, 2020; Jayaraman et al., 2019; Fang
et al., 2019) and navigation (Kim et al., 2019; Savinov et al., 2018). Recently, Czechowski et al.
(2021) showed that the usage of a subgoal generator can significantly improve search efficiency on
discrete domains with high combinatorial complexity.
This paper uses Czechowski et al. (2021) as a starting point and pushes forward, building upon the
following observation: many complex reasoning problems contain states that vary in complexity,
measured by the computational cost required to determine the right action plan. To illustrate this,
imagine driving a car. When traversing a narrow, winding street, it is crucial to focus on the closest
events: the next turn, the next car to avoid, etc. However, after entering a straight, empty street, it
    ∗
        equal contribution; Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023, notable-top-5%.
    †
        Work done while at the University of Warsaw


                                                        1
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


is enough to think about reaching its far end. This suggests that careful balancing of the subgoal
distance is desirable: this involves selecting longer-term subgoals, if possible, to advance faster
towards the goal, and choosing shorter-term subgoals to power through the harder states. Hence, the
question arises whether it is possible and, if so, how to incorporate this adaptive subgoal generation
procedure into subgoal search methods. In this paper, we answer this question affirmatively.
We propose a novel planning algorithm Adap-
tive Subgoal Search (AdaSubS), which adaptively
chooses from subgoals with different horizons. Our
method benefits both from the efficiency of planning
with longer-term subgoals and from the reliability of
shorter-term ones. AdaSubS prioritizes further dis-
tances, retracting to shorter ranges only when stuck.
Additionally, we introduce a verifier network, which An illustrative example of adaptive planning. The
                                                      planner may choose long-distance subgoals in the
assesses whether the proposed subgoal is valid and easier areas (e.g. the left most part) and use short
reachable. The verifier makes it possible to effi- distances in the hard areas (e.g. middle part).
ciently discard faulty subgoals, which are common
and more costly to detect in longer horizons. AdaSubS is a data-driven algorithm whose key com-
ponents are implemented as learnable deep models. In most cases, we use general-purpose trans-
former architectures to model subgoal generators and the verifier networks. We train those models
on offline data.
We show the effectiveness of AdaSubS in three challenging domains: Sokoban, Rubik’s Cube, and
the inequality theorem prover INT (Wu et al., 2021). AdaSubS significantly surpasses hierarchical
planning algorithms and sets a new state-of-the-art on INT.
Our main contributions are:

    1. We propose Adaptive Subgoal Search (AdaSubS), a new algorithm that adjusts the planning
       horizon to take into account the varying complexity of the state space.
    2. We present a comprehensive study of adaptive methods, showing that they outperform similar
       algorithms without adaptation. Amongst these, AdaSubS is the best choice across environments
       and planning budgets.
    3. We also observe a strong indication of out-of-distribution generalization. AdaSubS trained on
       the proof of length 15 in INT (longest considered in the literature so far) retains more than 50%
       of its performance when the proof length is increased two-fold.

The code of our method is available at https://github.com/AdaptiveSubgoalSearch/adaptive_subs.


2     R ELATED WORK

The combination of planning algorithms with deep learning is an active area of research. It provided
impressive results e.g., in automated theorem proving (Polu & Sutskever, 2020), chess and Go (Sil-
ver et al., 2017), Atari benchmark (Schrittwieser et al., 2019), and video compression (Mandhane
et al., 2022).
In the field of hierarchical planning, the majority of deep-learning-based methods have focused on
visual domains (Kim et al., 2019; Pertsch et al., 2020a; Jayaraman et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2019) or
on landmark-based navigation methods (Liu et al., 2020a; Gao et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020) . This
body of work often relies on variational autoencoders for the compression of visual observations and
uses planning mechanisms suitable for continuous control settings.
There exist many approaches to hierarchical planning utilizing different temporal distances. Kim
et al. (2019) and Pertsch et al. (2020b) use hierarchical variational models to learn the temporal
structure of tasks by reconstructing the visual state sequences. Pertsch et al. (2020a); Parascandolo
et al. (2020); Jurgenson et al. (2020) recursively construct a plan by generating subgoals in the
middle between the existing ones. Allen et al. (2021) generate macro-actions that help to speed-up
the search. This differs from our work, as we use learning to generate subgoals (as opposed to action
sequences) and the process is agnostic with respect to the size of the action space. These works have
been shown to work on domains with limited combinatorial complexity.


                                                    2
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


Recently, Czechowski et al. (2021) has shown how combinatorially complex domains can be treated
with a hierarchical planning method. Their approach shares similarities with our Adaptive Subgoal
Search; however, it cannot address variable environment complexity. By using the mechanism of
adaptive selection of the subgoal generation distance and verifier, we successfully tackle this prob-
lem, confirmed by significant performance gains. Our verifier is based on ideas similar to Cobbe
et al. (2021); Kurutach et al. (2018); Ahn et al. (2022).
Our approach relates to established search algorithms (Cormen et al., 2009; Russell & Norvig, 2010),
such as Best First Search or A*. Adaptivity techniques in the classical setup are discussed in Fickert
(2022). Koenig & Likhachev (2006) propose an adaptive mechanism to improve A* by updating
the goal-distance heuristic with local search. AdaSubS instead uses a fixed heuristic and adapts to
the local complexity by alternating between subgoal distances. Domain-independent PDDL-based
planners (McDermott et al., 1998) do not use training and attempt to solve problems in a zero-shot
manner. Thus, they indicate a lower bound on performance. On the other hand, there are domain-
specific methods (Korf, 1997; Büchner et al., 2022; Muppasani et al., 2022). Due to their focus, they
indicate an upper bound.
AdaSubS relates to multi-queue methods (see Richter & Westphal (2010); Helmert (2006)), which
alternate between multiple heuristics. Some of our planners, e.g., IterativeMixing or Longest-first,
can be viewed through the lens of this approach in the sense that we could keep the priority queues
for each generator separate (but with the same heuristic being a value function) and have an alterna-
tion mechanism between them. The key difference lies in the expansion phase: we expand subgoals
instead of children and only the generator associated with the currently selected queue is used. 1
Different instances of Sokoban, Rubik’s Cube, and INT can be viewed as tasks with varying degrees
of difficulty. Consequently, AdaSubS benefits from sharing data between these instances in a manner
typical to multitask learning (Caruana, 1998). In particular, we use a goal-conditioned policy which
is trained similarly as in Andrychowicz et al. (2020) or Kaelbling (1993). Additionally, the out-of-
distribution generalization of AdaSubS hints at strong meta-learning capabilities of the method (Yu
et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Hessel et al., 2019).

3    M ETHOD
For this work, we propose Adaptive Subgoal Search (AdaSubS), a subgoal-based search algorithm
designed to solve tasks that can be formulated as a search over a graph with a known transition
model. AdaSubS is the best choice stemming from a careful study of methods based on the principle
of mixing subgoal distances; see Section 4.4 for their definitions and empirical comparisons.
AdaSubS (see Algorithm 1) utilizes the following key compo-
nents: subgoal generators, verifier, conditional low-level policy
(CLLP), and value function. These components are implemented
using trained neural networks (see Appendix B). To solve a task,
AdaSubS iteratively builds a tree of subgoals reachable from the
initial state until the target state is reached or the search budget
is depleted. In each iteration, it chooses a node in the tree that is
expanded by one of the generators. The chosen generator creates
a few subgoal candidates, i.e., states expected to be a few steps
closer to the target than the current node. For each of them, we
use the verifier and CLLP to check whether they are valid and
reachable within a few steps. For the correct subgoals, we com-
pute their value function, place them in the search tree, and the
next iteration follows (see Figure 1).
AdaSubS follows the general structure of Best-First Search
(BestFS); thus, the key design decision is how we prioritize nodes
to expand and choose generators to produce subgoals. We defer
the answer to these questions after providing details of the algo- Figure 1: An example iteration of
rithm components (see also Appendix G and the flowchart there). the search performed by AdaSubS.
  1
    For search engines using multi-queues, see Fast downward https://www.fast-downward.org/;
LAPKT https://github.com/LAPKT-dev/LAPKT-public. For PDDL generators, see https:
//github.com/AI-Planning/pddl-generators


                                                    3
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


Subgoal generators. The subgoal generator, or more precisely the k-subgoal generator, takes a state
as input and returns a diverse set of new candidate states expected to be k step closer to the solution.
The key trade-off, which AdaSubS needs to address, is that further subgoals, i.e., those for higher
values of k, advance faster towards the target but are also increasingly harder to generate and verify.
We typically use a few (e.g., 3) generators with a list of k chosen basing on experiments, namely
for INT [3, 2, 1], Rubik [4, 3, 2] and Sokoban [8, 4, 2]. Note that this is the only component of
AdaSubS that outputs a set of predictions.
Conditional low-level policy (CLLP). CLLP returns a path of low-level actions between two states
(see Algorithm 2). CLLP calls iteratively a conditional low-level policy network (PN). PN takes as
input the current and target states and returns an action. It is possible that CLLP is not able to reach
the target, in which case an empty sequence is returned. The role of CLLP is two-fold: it serves
as a mechanism allowing AdaSubS to transition between subgoals, and together with the verifier
network, it is used in the subgoal verification algorithm (see Algorithm 3).
Verifier. The verifier network is used in the verification algorithm (see Algorithm 3), to answer the
following binary classification question: given a starting state and a goal state, is it possible to reach
the latter from the former using conditional low-level policy? Computationally, the evaluation of the
verifier network is faster than CLLP. However, since the verifier is a binary classifier, we expect two
types of error to occur: accept invalid subgoals or reject valid subgoals. The verification algorithm
accepts a subgoal if the verifier network values are above a certain threshold (likewise, they are
rejected if the value is below another threshold), see tlo and thi in Algorithm 3. In the remaining
case, the algorithm falls back on CLLP to decide whether to keep or discard a given subgoal.
Value function. The value function is a neural network that estimates the negative distance between
the current and goal states. The planner uses this information to select the next node to expand.
Adaptive Subgoal Search. The particular way in which AdaSubS chooses nodes to expand and a
generator to produce subgoals (see highlighted lines in Algorithm 1) implements an adaptive mech-
anism that adjusts the planning horizon. The key difficulty to tackle here is that further subgoals,
despite being capable of advancing the search faster, are more likely to be faulty. Nevertheless, we
assume an optimistic approach prioritizing the longer distances (e.g., higher k). If the search using
the long steps gets stuck, the planner retracts and expands the most promising, high-value nodes
with closer, more conservative subgoals. The verifier network helps in mitigating the risks of this
strategy, as it allows for the efficient rejection of faulty subgoals. This way, by traversing easier
parts using fast long-distance subgoals and conservative ones in harder parts, AdaSubS adapts to the
variable complexity of the environment.
Algorithm 1 presents a simple implementation of this approach. The nodes in the search tree are
placed in a max-priority queue T with keys, being the pairs (k, v) of the next subgoal distance and its
estimated value, sorted in lexicographical order. In this way, Algorithm 1 uses the highest k possible,
searching with the BestFS strategy over values. If for a given k, all generated subgoals are invalid
(faulty or unreachable), Algorithm 1 will expand for shorter distances. If successful, we go back to
generating with the highest value of k. After reaching the target states, AdaSubS reconstructs the
path of subgoals and fills it with low-level actions; see function LL_PATH in Algorithm 4.
With a slight modification, AdaSubS can be guaranteed to find a solution to any given problem,
provided there is a large enough computational budget. See Appendix G.1 for details.
3.1   T RAINING OBJECTIVES

The components of AdaSubS are trained using a dataset of offline trajectories of subsequent states
and actions: (s0 , a0 ), . . . , (sn−1 , an−1 ), sn . We do not assume that they are perfect; for some of our
environments, even randomly generated trajectories may turn out to be sufficient. Details on how
the data is collected for each domain can be found in Section 4.1 and Appendix B.
Provided with such data, we train the k-generators to map si onto si+k . The value function is trained
to map si onto (i − n). CLLP is trained to map (si , si+d ) onto ai for every d ≤ kmax (kmax is the
maximal distance of the subgoal generators used).
AdaSubS still works, albeit much worse if we disable the verifier network (e.g., by setting thi = 1
and tlo = 0 in Algorithm 3). However, it is a useful setup to gather a dataset of subgoals and their
reachability verified by CLLP. This dataset is used to train the verifier network, see Appendix D.


                                                     4
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


Algorithm 1 Adaptive Subgoal Search                             Algorithm 2 Conditional low-level policy
 Requires:                 C1           max number of nodes        Requires:        C2 steps limit
                           V            value function network                       π    conditional low-level
                  ρk0 , . . . , ρkm subgoal generators                                    policy network
                      S OLVED           predicate of solution                       M model of the environment
    function SOLVE(s0 )                                             function GET _ PATH(s0 , subgoal)
       T ← ∅ ▷ priority queue with lexicographic order                 step ← 0, s ← s0
       parents ← {}                                                    action_path ← []
       for k in k0 , . . . , km do                                     while step < C2 do
           T.PUSH(((k, V (s0 )), s0 ))                                     action ← π.PREDICT(s, subgoal)
       seen.ADD(s0 )                              ▷ seen is a set          action_path.APPEND(action)
       while 0 < LEN(T) and LEN(seen) < C1 do                              s ← M.NEXT _ STATE(s, action)
           (k, _), s ← T.EXTRACT _ MAX()                                   if s = subgoal then
           subgoals ← ρk (s)                                                    return action_path               ▷ success
           for s′ in subgoals do                                           step ← step + 1
               if s′ in seen then continue                             return []                  ▷ subgoal is unreachable
               if not IS _ VALID(s, s′ ) then
                    continue                                      Algorithm 3 Verification algorithm
               seen.ADD(s′ )
               parents[s′ ] ← s                                    Requires:         v    verifier network
               for k in k0 , . . . , km do                                          thi upper threshold
                    T.PUSH(((k, V (s′ )), s′ ))                                     tlo lower threshold
               if SOLVED(s ) then′                                  function  IS _ VALID (s, s′ )
                                                                                 ′
                                           ′
                    return LL _ PATH(s , parents)                      if v(s, s ) > thi then return True
                                ▷ get low-level path, see Alg. 4       else if v(s, s′ ) < tlo then return False
       return False                                                    return GET _ PATH(s, s′ ) ̸= []

For INT and Rubik’s Cube, we use transformer models for all the key components. For the Sokoban,
we utilize convolutional networks, for details see Appendix B.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We empirically demonstrate the efficiency of Adaptive Subgoal Search on three complex reasoning
domains: Sokoban, Rubik’s Cube, and the inequality proving benchmark INT (Wu et al., 2021).
We demonstrate that AdaSubS is the best choice in a family of adaptive methods. Interestingly,
even weaker methods in this class also outperform non-adaptive baselines. Finally, we show that
AdaSubS has strong out-of-distribution generalization properties on INT.
As the performance metric, we use the success rate, defined as the fraction of solved problem in-
stances. The computational budget is defined as the graph size, i.e., the number of nodes visited
during the search and evaluated with a neural network (subgoal generator, value function, verifier,
or conditional low-level policy). In Appendix C we provide details concerning the number of neural
network calls, wall-time evaluations and memory usage.

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL DOMAINS AND DATASETS

Sokoban is a puzzle in which the goal is to push boxes on target locations. It is a popular testing
ground for classical planning methods (Lipovetzky & Geffner, 2012), and deep-learning approaches
(Guez et al., 2019; Miłoś et al., 2019). Sokoban is considered to be hard (Fern et al., 2011) due to
its combinatorial complexity. Finding a solution for a given Sokoban board is an NP-hard problem.
In our experiments we used 12 × 12 Sokoban boards with four boxes.
Rubik’s Cube is a famous 3D puzzle with over 4.3 × 1019 possible configurations (Korf, 1997).
Recently Agostinelli et al. (2019); Czechowski et al. (2021) have developed methods for solving
Rubik’s Cube using neural networks.
INT is a benchmark for automated theorem proving proposed by (Wu et al., 2021). It consists of
a generator of mathematical inequalities and a tool for proof verification. An action (proof step) in
INT is a string containing an axiom and a specification of its input entities, making the action space
effectively infinite and thus challenging search algorithms.


                                                            5
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


To collect offline trajectories datasets for Rubik’s Cube, we generate random paths of length 20
starting from the solved cube and take them in reversed order. For INT we use the generator provided
by Wu et al. (2021). For Sokoban, we use the expert data generated by a reinforcement learning agent
(Miłoś et al., 2019). Detailed information is contained in Appendix D.

4.2   P ROTOCOL AND BASELINES

Our protocol consists of three stages. In the first one, an offline dataset is prepared; see Section 4.1
and Appendix D. Secondly, we use this dataset to train the learnable components of AdaSubS: the
family of subgoal generators, verifier network, and value network, see Section 3.1. Evaluation is the
final step in which the algorithm’s performance is verified. We measure its success rate using 1000
instances of a problem for each domain.
As baselines, we use BestFS and kSubS, both with the same models’ checkpoints as AdaSubS. The
former is a well-known class of search algorithms (including A∗ ), which, among others, performs
strongly on problems with high combinatorial complexity (Pearl, 1984), achieves state-of-the-art
results in theorem proving (Polu & Sutskever, 2020), and strong results on Rubik’s Cube (Agostinelli
et al., 2019; Czechowski et al., 2021). BestFS baseline selects actions with a trained policy network.
kSubS is the first general learned hierarchical planning algorithm proven to work on complex reason-
ing domains (Czechowski et al., 2021) (called BF-kSubS there), attaining good results on Sokoban
and Rubik’s Cube, and INT. kSubS can be view as a non-adaptive version of AdaSubS realized by a
suitable hyperparameters choice: a single subgoal generator and inactive verifier (tlo = 0,thi = 1).
For details on the hyperparameter choice for our method and the baselines, see Appendix F. For a
more detailed description of the baselines, see Appendix E.

4.3   M AIN RESULTS : IN - AND OUT- OF DISTRIBUTION PERFORMANCE


Figure 2: Success rates of AdaSubS, kSubS, and BestFS expressed in terms of graph size. The figure in the
bottom right shows the out-of-distribution performance of methods evaluated on INT with proof length 20 but
trained on length 15. The remaining figures present in-distribution performance. The results were measured on
a fixed set of 1000 problems for each domain. Shaded areas indicate 95% confidence intervals.

AdaSubS shows strong in- and out- of distribution performance. The results for the former regime
are presented in Figure 2, which shows that AdaSubS is able to make use of search capacity in the
most effective manner, practically dominating other methods across the graph size spectrum. Taking
a closer look at the low computational budgets, one can observe that AdaSubS achieves significantly


                                                     6
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


positive success rates while the competing methods struggle. Perhaps the most striking difference
is observed for INT, where at the budget of 50 nodes AdaSubS achieves around 60% success rate,
while kSubS has a success rate close to zero and BestFS does not exceed 10%. This is particularly
impressive since the budget of 50 nodes is only slightly larger than three times the considered proof
length. To summarize, AdaSubS performs well in low computational regimes, which can be helpful
in systems that need to solve search problems under compute or memory constraints.
At the far end of the computational budget spectrum, AdaSubS still performs the best, achieving
above 90% performance in each environment (∼ 95% for INT, 100% for Rubik’s Cube, and 93%
for Sokoban). Importantly, when success rates are high, and consequently the absolute differences
between methods’ results seem to be low, it is instructive to think about failure rates. For instance,
in the case of INT (the proof length 15), the failure rate of kSubS is 9%, almost twice the failure rate
of AdaSubS. For more results on low and high budgets, see Tables 10-12 in Appendix H.4.
For the out-of-distribution analysis, we used INT, an environment designed to study this phe-
nomenon. We investigate how methods trained on the proofs of length 15 perform on problems with
longer proofs (see Figure 3). The length 15 is the longest considered in the literature (Czechowski
et al., 2021). However, we go much further, studying proof lengths up to 28. AdaSubS retains more
than 50% of its performance, suffering a relatively slow decay of 3.5% (on average) per one step
of the proof. This stands in stark contrast to kSubS, which already loses half of its performance at
length 21. AdaSubS not only outperforms kSubS at each difficulty level but also achieves the most
significant advantage in the hardest problems. Additionally, we provide a full profile of the success
rate with respect to the graph size for proof length 20; see the bottom right-hand corner of Figure 2.
AdaSubS performs much better than the baselines, with the biggest advantage for large budgets.
Results for the other environments, namely Sokoban and Rubik, are included in Appendix K.


Figure 3: Out-of-distribution performance of AdaSubS and kSubS for long proofs in INT with budget of 5000
nodes. Both methods were trained on proofs of length 15. Error bars correspond to 95% confidence intervals.

The performance boost of AdaSubS over the baselines stems from two components: the verifier and
the adaptativeness of subgoal selection. The former makes it possible to assign a bigger fraction of
a computational budget on search by recovering a part of it from CLLP. This, in principle, could
already provide significant gain when using the method. However, as shown in Table 1 and Tables
10-12 in Appendix H.4, the verifier helps, but only to a limited degree. Consequently, the majority
of the improvement stems from the algorithmic novelty offered by the adaptive procedure. The
adaptivity mechanism in AdaSubS creates this interesting dynamic that incentives the method to be
optimistic about choosing subgoal distances while providing a safety net in case this optimism fails.
How it works in practice can clearly be seen in Sokoban, where AdaSubS uses 8-subgoals 91.8% of
the time, 4-subgoals 7.4% of the time, and 2-subgoals the remaining 0.8% of the time2 .
As a final note, Figure 2 can be used to infer the computational budget required for achieving a
certain success rate. Additionally, the ratio of success rate to graph size can measure the efficiency
   2
     Additionally, the 8-generator, the 4-generator, and the 2-generator generate subgoals that are on average
6.9, 3.9, and 2.0 steps away, respectively. For AdaSubS parameters, see Table 7 in Appendix F.


                                                      7
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


of the chosen budget, while the derivative of the success rate with respect to graph size provides the
marginal utility of the increase in the budget.

4.4      D EVELOPING ADAPTIVE SEARCH METHODS

In this section, we present a comprehensive empirical study of four adaptive methods. This en-
ables us to draw two main conclusions: adaptive search methods outperform non-adaptive ones, and
Longest-first (on which AdaSubS is based) is the most efficient adaptive procedure. We present full
results for INT, the hardest environment, and shortened results for Rubik and Sokoban, see Table 1.
The complete set of numerical results with extended discussion can be found in Appendix H.
The four adaptive methods presented in this section are implemented using the search method3 .
Their adaptivity mechanism is defined by setting the way the subgoals are generated and the order
in which the states are processed4 . This happens in two distinguished lines in Algorithm 1 and
changing them determines how the search prioritizes various distances.

                                              INT                                                        Rubik (with verifier)
                                           Small budget (50 nodes) Large budget (1000 nodes)                       400 nodes 6000 nodes
                                           with verifier   without   with verifier   without   BestFS                0.0%         1.8%
                                                                                               kSubS                28.8%         98.6%
BestFS                                           -         1.7%            -         36.7%     MixSubS              49.1%         99.2%
                  k=4                         2.2%         0.1%        82.4%         83.0%     Iterative mixing     50.6%         99.1%
                  k=3                         4.0%         0.2%        89.6%         90.7%     Strongest-first      33.4%         99.0%
kSubS                                                                                          Longest-first        58.0%         99.2%
                  k=2                         2.1%         0.5%        89.8%         91.7%
                  k=1                         0.0%         0.0%        34.7%         46.0%
                  k = [4, 3, 2]               0.0%          0.0%       94.6%         95.0%        Sokoban (small budget, 100 nodes)
MixSubS           k = [3, 2, 1]               0.0%          0.0%       92.2%         92.9%
                  k = [3, 2]                 17.0%         14.8%       92.2%         93.5%                        with verifier   without
                 iterations = [1, 1, 1]      32.0%         30.1%       87.0%         88.6%     BestFS                  -          45.9%
Iterative mixing iterations = [10, 1, 1]     43.0%         44.8%       95.1%         96.0%     kSubS                26.0%         4.7%
                 iterations = [4, 2, 1]      54.0%         52.1%       93.6%         95.5%     MixSubS              52.7%         37.7%
                                                                                               Iterative mixing     64.5%         52.6%
Strongest-first                              39.5%         40.8%       88.5%         89.8%
                                                                                               Strongest-first      54.6%         41.9%
Longest-first                                59.0%         51.5%       95.7%         95.5%     Longest-first        72.2%         63.4%


Table 1: (left) Results for the INT. For each case, unless stated otherwise, the distances of subgoal generators
are k = [3, 2, 1]. (right) Shortened results for Rubik and Sokoban, for complete results see Table 11 and Table
12. The results were obtained on 1000 problems each, which yields ±3% Bernoulli 95% confidence intervals.
Specifically, we designed and tested the following methods: MixSubS, Iterative mixing, Strongest-
first, Longest-first. Each method uses a set of n generators ρk1 , . . . , ρkn trained to produce subgoals
on different distances k1 < . . . < kn (recall Section 3.1 for training details). A more detailed
description of the methods (and pseudocodes) can be found in Appendix H.
   • MixSubS is the simplest approach, in which for each processed state we generate one subgoal
     from each generator ρki (subgoals ← ∪nj=1 ρkj (s)). In each iteration, MixSubS chooses a
     state with the highest value estimation V (s) to process.
   • Iterative Mixing is similar to MixSubS and enables for advanced schedules of generators to
     be used. In the consecutive iterations, the i-th generator is used to expand li nodes before
     switching to the next generator. This allows us to flexibly prioritize the better generators, but at
     the cost of tuning additional hyperparameters l1 , . . . , ln . For these reasons, it is not practical,
     but useful as a reference point.
   • Strongest-first uses one generator at a time (subgoals ← ρkℓ (s)), where kℓ is the longest
     distance not previously used in s. In each iteration, Strongest-first chooses a state with the
     highest value estimation V (s) to process.
   • Longest-first prioritizes long subgoals over the whole search procedure. Only if the queue does
     not contain any nodes with the highest k, it uses subgoals of lower distances. The nodes are
     processed in the order of their value estimation V (s).
    3
      Adaptivity may also be implemented using the subgoal generator. We considered various approaches in
this category, however, they did not perform better than the non-adaptive baseline kSubS, see Appendix H.3.
We speculate that assessing the state difficulty is a hard learning problem that is easier to handle via search.
    4
      For similar considerations in classical planning, see multi-heuristic best-first search (Helmert, 2006).


                                                                     8
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


The high-level empirical conclusion is that the performance of methods is roughly ordered as fol-
lows: Longest-first > Iterative mixing > MixSubS > Strongest-first > kSubS > BestFS.
In more detail, already the simple MixSubS works better than the non-adaptive baselines. In par-
ticular, it can outperform the maximum of performances of kSubS for each k. This is in line with
the intuition that our mixing mechanism can elicit benefits of various distances while avoiding their
drawbacks. We conjecture that whenever a single generator begins to struggle, the search advances
with the help of another generator, allowing for stable progress. Iterative mixing is able to exhibit
strong performance; however, it needs tedious schedule tuning for each domain.
Strongest-first and Longest-first implement bias towards longer distances. Even though they are
quite similar, they display a large performance difference. We speculate that when Strongest-first
encounters an area with falsely large value estimates, it wastes a lot of compute to examine it with
all subgoal distances. On the other hand, Longest-first first explores other areas before using shorter
subgoals and thus is able to avoid this problem. We stress that these effects are far from being
obvious; however, they occur robustly across our test scenarios.
The verifier is beneficial on small budgets, especially when long subgoals are used. For large bud-
gets, gains diminish. However, a properly tuned verifier never decreases the results significantly.



5   L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Determinism, access to model dynamics Our main focus is combinatorially complex domains.
There are many applications of interest in which we can assume access to underlying dynamics and
determinism (for example Automated Theorem Proving). Nevertheless, it is an interesting future
direction to adjust our method to stochastic domains and learned models.
Reliance on the offline data In our experiments, we need offline datasets of successful trajectories.
We leave for future work developing an algorithm based on the expert iteration paradigm.
Path optimization The goal of our algorithm is to find any path leading to the solution. In many
real-world problems, it is also important to find a short path or one with a high reward (see Appendix
I for optimality measures for Sokoban).
Completeness and memory constraints Our algorithm is not guaranteed to find a solution. We
found it is not problematic in practice. If such a property is required, it can be assured by a simple
change, see Appendix G.1. However, since AdaSubS keeps a list of visited nodes (see Algorithm
1) and caches some computations (see Algorithm 4), it requires memory proportional to the search
budget, which can grow up to the size of the state space when seeking completeness.
Adversarial configuration The performance of AdaSubS can deteriorate when the ability to train
its components is reduced and the environment is hard. For example, ’walk-the-line’ environment
(with states either lying on a unique solving trajectory or leading to deadstates) and no training data.
Combine with recursive search methods In some domains, one can generate useful subgoals for
long distances and recursively split the problem (Pertsch et al., 2020a; Parascandolo et al., 2020;
Jurgenson et al., 2020). It would be interesting to propose an algorithm that automatically detects
when such an approach is possible and combine two ways (our and recursive) of generating subgoals.



6   C ONCLUSIONS

We study planning methods that adapt to the local complexity of a solved problem. We concentrate
on the adaptive selection of the subgoal distance realized by mixing various subgoal generators. We
prove that methods based on this principle outperform non-adaptive counterparts They can tackle
complex reasoning tasks as demonstrated on Sokoban, the Rubik’s Cube, and INT. Our main al-
gorithm, AdaSubS, is the best of the tested choices across all environments and search budgets.
Interestingly, AdaSubS exhibits high out-of-distribution generalization capability, retaining much of
its performance for instances of harder problems on INT than it was trained for.


                                                   9
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING

The work of Michał Zawalski and Piotr Miłoś was supported by the Polish National Science Center
grant 2021/43/O/ST6/02478. This research was supported by the PL-Grid infrastructure. Our exper-
iments were managed using https://neptune.ai. We would like to thant the Neptune team
for providing us access to the team version and technical support.


R EFERENCES
Forest Agostinelli, Stephen McAleer, Alexander Shmakov, and Pierre Baldi. Solving the rubik’s
  cube with deep reinforcement learning and search. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(8):356–363,
  2019.

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Ju-
 lian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kan-
 ishka Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan,
 Alexander Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, and Mengyuan
 Yan. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, 2022. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691.

Cameron Allen, Michael Katz, Tim Klinger, George Konidaris, Matthew Riemer, and Gerald
  Tesauro. Efficient black-box planning using macro-actions with focused effects. IJCAI-21, 2021.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stanczyk, Manu Orsini, Sertan Girgin, Raphaël
 Marinier, Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain Gelly,
 and Olivier Bachem. What matters in on-policy reinforcement learning? A large-scale empirical
 study. CoRR, abs/2006.05990, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.05990.

Clemens Büchner, Patrick Ferber, Jendrik Seipp, and Malte Helmert. A comparison of ab-
  straction heuristics for rubik’s cube. In ICAPS 2022 Workshop on Heuristics and Search for
  Domain-independent Planning, 2022.

Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Springer, 1998.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher
  Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Thomas H Cormen, Charles E Leiserson, Ronald L Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to
  algorithms. MIT press, 2009.

Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Marek Zbysiński, Michał Zawalski, Krzysztof Olejnik,
  Yuhuai Wu, Łukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miłoś. Subgoal search for complex reasoning tasks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:624–638, 2021.

Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. RL2 : Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.

Kuan Fang, Yuke Zhu, Animesh Garg, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei. Dynamics learning with
  cascaded variational inference for multi-step manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13395,
  2019.

Alan Fern, Roni Khardon, and Prasad Tadepalli. The first learning track of the international planning
  competition. Machine Learning, 84(1-2):81–107, 2011.

Maximilian Fickert. Adaptive search techniques in ai planning and heuristic search. 2022.


                                                 10
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


Wei Gao, David Hsu, Wee Sun Lee, Shengmei Shen, and Karthikk Subramanian. Intention-net:
 Integrating planning and deep learning for goal-directed autonomous navigation. In 1st Annual
 Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2017, Mountain View, California, USA, November 13-15,
 2017, Proceedings, volume 78 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 185–194.
 PMLR, 2017. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v78/gao17a.html.
Arthur Guez, Mehdi Mirza, Karol Gregor, Rishabh Kabra, Sébastien Racanière, Théophane Weber,
  David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Laurent Orseau, Tom Eccles, et al. An investigation of model-free
  planning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2464–2473. PMLR, 2019.
Malte Helmert. The fast downward planning system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 26:
 191–246, 2006.
Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado van
 Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3796–3803, 2019.
Jeffrey R Hollerman, Leon Tremblay, and Wolfram Schultz. Involvement of basal ganglia and
   orbitofrontal cortex in goal-directed behavior. Progress in brain research, 126:193–215, 2000.
Dinesh Jayaraman, Frederik Ebert, Alexei A. Efros, and Sergey Levine. Time-agnostic pre-
  diction: Predicting predictable video frames. In 7th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SyzVb3CcFX.
Tom Jurgenson, Or Avner, Edward Groshev, and Aviv Tamar. Sub-goal trees a framework for goal-
  based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5020–5030.
  PMLR, 2020.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In Ruzena Bajcsy (ed.), Proceedings of the
  13th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Chambéry, France, August 28 -
  September 3, 1993, pp. 1094–1099. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
Taesup Kim, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio. Variational temporal abstraction. In Hanna M.
  Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver,
  BC, Canada, pp. 11566–11575, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2019/hash/b5d3ad899f70013367f24e0b1fa75944-Abstract.html.
Sven Koenig and Maxim Likhachev. Real-time adaptive a. In Proceedings of the fifth international
  joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 281–288, 2006.
Richard E Korf. Finding optimal solutions to rubik’s cube using pattern databases. In AAAI/IAAI,
  pp. 700–705, 1997.
Thanard Kurutach, Aviv Tamar, Ge Yang, Stuart J. Russell, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning
  plannable representations with causal infogan. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo
  Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pp.
  8747–8758, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/
  08aac6ac98e59e523995c161e57875f5-Abstract.html.
Nir Lipovetzky and Hector Geffner. Width and serialization of classical planning problems. In ECAI
  2012, pp. 540–545. IOS Press, 2012.
Kara Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Christine Tung, Pieter Abbeel, and Aviv Tamar. Hallucinative
  topological memory for zero-shot visual planning. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6259–6270. PMLR, 2020a. URL http:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v119/liu20h.html.


                                               11
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis,
  and Luke Zettlemoyer. Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine translation. CoRR,
  abs/2001.08210, 2020b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08210.
Amol Mandhane, Anton Zhernov, Maribeth Rauh, Chenjie Gu, Miaosen Wang, Flora Xue, Wendy
 Shang, Derek Pang, Rene Claus, Ching-Han Chiang, et al. Muzero with self-competition for rate
 control in vp9 video compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06626, 2022.
Drew McDermott, Malik Ghallab, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, Ashwin Ram, Manuela Veloso,
  Daniel Weld, and David Wilkins. PDDL - The Planning Domain Definition Language, 1998.
Piotr Miłoś, Łukasz Kuciński, Konrad Czechowski, Piotr Kozakowski, and Maciek Klimek.
  Uncertainty-sensitive learning and planning with ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09996,
  2019.
Bharath Muppasani, Vishal Pallagani, Kausik Lakkaraju, Biplav Srivastava, and Forest Agostinelli.
  Solving the rubik’s cube with a pddl planner. 2022.
Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1gzR2VKDH.
Giambattista Parascandolo, Lars Buesing, Josh Merel, Leonard Hasenclever, John Aslanides, Jes-
  sica B Hamrick, Nicolas Heess, Alexander Neitz, and Theophane Weber. Divide-and-conquer
  monte carlo tree search for goal-directed planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11410, 2020.
Judea Pearl. Heuristics: intelligent search strategies for computer problem solving. Addison-Wesley
  Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1984.
Karl Pertsch, Oleh Rybkin, Frederik Ebert, Shenghao Zhou, Dinesh Jayaraman, Chelsea Finn,
  and Sergey Levine. Long-horizon visual planning with goal-conditioned hierarchical pre-
  dictors.   In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Bal-
  can, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December
  6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/
  hash/c8d3a760ebab631565f8509d84b3b3f1-Abstract.html.
Karl Pertsch, Oleh Rybkin, Jingyun Yang, Shenghao Zhou, Konstantinos G. Derpanis, Kostas Dani-
  ilidis, Joseph J. Lim, and Andrew Jaegle. Keyframing the future: Keyframe discovery for visual
  prediction and planning. In Alexandre M. Bayen, Ali Jadbabaie, George J. Pappas, Pablo A. Par-
  rilo, Benjamin Recht, Claire J. Tomlin, and Melanie N. Zeilinger (eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd
  Annual Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control, L4DC 2020, Online Event, Berkeley,
  CA, USA, 11-12 June 2020, volume 120 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 969–
  979. PMLR, 2020b. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v120/pertsch20a.
  html.
Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
Silvia Richter and Matthias Westphal. The lama planner: Guiding cost-based anytime planning with
   landmarks. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 39:127–177, 2010.
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial intelligence: A modern approach. ed. 3. 2010.
Nikolay Savinov, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric topological memory for
  navigation. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver,
  BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SygwwGbRW.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  and David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. ArXiv,
  abs/1911.08265, 2019.


                                                12
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Karen
  Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforce-
  ment learning algorithm. ArXiv, abs/1712.01815, 2017.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Yuhuai Wu, Albert Q. Jiang, Jimmy Ba, and Roger Baker Grosse. INT: an inequality benchmark
  for evaluating generalization in theorem proving. In 9th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=O6LPudowNQm.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Lunjun Zhang, Ge Yang, and Bradly C. Stadie. World model as a graph: Learning latent land-
  marks for planning. CoRR, abs/2011.12491, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.
  12491.


                                              13
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


A     L OW- LEVEL PATH FUNCTION
The low-level path function (see LL_PATH, Algorithm 4) computes a path from the starting state
to the goal state in the environment using low-level actions. However, it not only responsible for re-
turning the path but also for checking false positive errors of the verifier. Specifically, the verifier can
accept an unreachable state in Algorithm 3 and then wrongly include it in the solution path. Thus,
LL_PATH has to construct a low-level path and confirm that every step on the way is achievable.

Algorithm 4 Low-level path


    function LL _ PATH(s, parents)
        ▷ parents is the dictionary of parent nodes in the subgoal tree. (S,C) ∈ parents means that
    C is a subgoal for state S
        path ← []
        while s in parents.KEYS() do
            subgoal_path ← GET _ PATH(parents[s], s)                               ▷ see Algorithm 2.
                                ▷ In practice, to reduce the number of neural network calls, we cache
                                ▷ the results of the GET_PATH calls in Alg 1 and reterive them here.
            if subgoal_path = [] then return False                            ▷ mistake of the verifier
            path ← concatenate(subgoal_path, path)
            s ← parents[s]
        return path


                                                    14
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


B     T RAINING DETAILS
B.1   A RCHITECTURES

INT and Rubik’s cube. All components of AdaSubS utilize the same architecture. Specifically, we
used mBart, a transformer from the HuggingFace library (see (Liu et al., 2020b)). To make training
of the model and the inference faster we reduced the number of parameters: we used 45M learned
parameters instead of 680M in the original implementation. We used 6 layers of encoder and 6 layers
of decoder. The dimension of the model was set to 512 and the number of attention heads to 8. We
adjusted the size of the inner layer of position-wise fully connected to 2048. During the inference,
we used beam search with width 16 for INT and width 32 for Rubik’s Cube. Our implementation of
the model follows (Czechowski et al., 2021, Appendix B.1)
Sokoban. We used four convolutional neural networks: the subgoal generator, conditional low-
level policy, value, and the verifier. They all share the same architecture with a different last layer,
depending on the type of output. Each model had 7 convolutional layers with kernel size (3,3)
and 64 channels. Conditional low-level policy and verifier need two Sokoban boards as an input,
so for these networks we concatenate them (across the last, depth dimension) and we treat two
boards as one tensor. For the value function on top of a stack of convolutional layers there is a fully
connected layer with 150 outputs representing 150 distances to the goal or. CLLP has analogous
final layers with the one exception that there are only two classes: determining whether it is possible
to reach a subgoal by CLLP or not. The network used for generatiing subgoals returns two outputs:
distribution over possible modifications of a given state, and prediction whether a modified state is
a good subgoal. The first output is obtained with a fully connected layer, the second with global
average pooling followed by a fully connected layer. Generation of a single subgoal is realised as
a sequence of calls to this network. We start from a given state and iteratively apply modifications
with high probability assigned by the first head of the network, until the second head predict that no
more iterations are needed. (see also Appendix G.1)

B.2   T RAINING PIPELINE

To ensure a fair comparison with (Czechowski et al., 2021) we followed their settings for a training
pipeline.
INT and Rubik’s Cube. To train the models we used the training pipeline from the HuggingFace
library (Liu et al., 2020b). We trained our models from scratch without using any pretrained check-
points. The size of the training batch was 32, the dropout was set to 0.1, and there was no label
smoothing. We used the Adam optimizer with the following parameters: β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999,
ϵ = 10−8 . We applied the warm-up learning schedule with 4000 warm-up steps and a peak learning
rate of 3 · 10−4 . For inference in INT, we used temperature 1 and for Rubik’s Cube to 0.5 (the
optimal value was chosen experimentally).
Sokoban. To train of all networks we used a supervised setting with learning rate 10−4 and trained
for 200 epochs. We used the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and ϵ = 10−7 .

B.3   DATASETS

For dataset used to train all the network see Appendix D.


                                                  15
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


C     C OMPUTATIONAL BUDGET ANALYSIS
The default metric of the graph size that we use for comparisons counts all the states visited during
the search, both high-level subgoals and intermediate states passed by the CLLP. It is a good estimate
of the number of steps the algorithm takes to solve the given problem. For completeness, in this
section, we analyze the total number of calls to every learned component of the pipeline for AdaSubS
and the baseline kSubS.
Since all of the main components are deep neural networks, their evaluation time dominates the
computational budget. Tables 3, 2 and 4 present the average number of calls to each component in
1000 test episodes, fixed for all the methods. That indicates which component consumes the largest
part of the computational budget. The results are presented for different numbers of beams (see
Appendix G.1) used for sampling predictions from the subgoal generators, the only component that
outputs a set of predictions. The default number of beams was 16 for Sokoban and INT, and 32 for
the Rubik’s Cube (see Appendix F for the complete list of the parameters).
As the tables show, not only does AdaSubS solve more problems within smaller search graphs but
also calls each component fewer times, which results in faster inference.
In the Rubik’s Cube, the calls to the generators dominate the computations. However, when using
smaller beams, this number can be significantly reduced while preserving the high success rate.
In all the environments, AdaSubS is less sensitive to reducing the number of beams than kSubS
in terms of performance. This is the case since in AdaSubS every single generator creates fewer
subgoal candidates (see Tables 7-9), and thus it does not require a wide beam search. Therefore, by
reducing the number of beams, AdaSubS can provide strong results within a much shorter time.
In Rubik’s Cube and Sokoban, using the verifier in AdaSubS significantly reduces the number of
calls to the low-level policy. However, in INT this is not the case. In most cases when kSubS fails
to find a solution, at some point it cannot create any valid subgoal, and thus the search ends early.
AdaSubS does not suffer from this issue, since it uses more generators. Thus, it counts the calls even
from hard instances that require much larger graphs.
As shown in Table 5, if we count the calls only for the tasks solved by both methods, AdaSubS
provides an advantage. Therefore, AdaSubS indeed provides better results within a smaller compu-
tational budget compared to kSubS.

          Environment                                     Rubik’s Cube
          Variant              kSubS      kSubS    AdaSubS AdaSubS AdaSubS AdaSubS
                             (32 beams) (4 beams) (32 beams) (8 beams) (4 beams) (2 beams)
          Success rate          98.8        97.1          99.2      99.2         99        98.5
          Generator calls       6085        852           8872      2205       1244        680
          Verifier calls          0           0            277       275        311        340
          Policy calls          1330        1526           352       350        395        446
          Value calls            259         285           163       162        181        197
          Total calls          7675        2664        9666        2994     2133     1665
          Wall-time           86.3 sec    49.9 sec    96.1 sec    49.2 sec 47.3 sec 37.3 sec

Table 2: Comparison of the average number of calls to the generator, verifier, policy, and value networks for
different numbers of beams (width of beam search in subgoal generation)) and the average wall time. Results
were obtained using fixed 1000 instances of Rubik’s Cube


C.1    M EMORY USAGE

AdaSubS keeps track of the search tree composed of high-level nodes. Thus, the amount of required
memory grows linearly with the search budget. However, if we use longer subgoals, the tree is
sparse because we do not store the nodes visited by the low-level policy.
Note that the BestFS baseline, which uses only low-level steps, usually requires much larger memory
because it must record every step. In practice, when evaluating the BestFS baseline in the INT


                                                     16
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


environment, we often had problems with experiments crashing because of exceeding the memory
limit on the machine. We never observed similar issues when running AdaSubS.

          Environment                                         Sokoban
          Variant               kSubS      kSubS     kSubS    AdaSubS AdaSubS AdaSubS
                              (16 beams) (8 beams) (4 beams) (16 beams) (8 beams) (4 beams)
          Success rate          84.4          84.6          82.3          94            94            94.1
          Generator calls       2500          1281           746          3389          1692          848
          Verifier calls          0             0             0            211           211          212
          Policy calls          4576          4693          5554           248           247          247
          Value calls            183           187           216           82            82           82
          Total calls           7260       6161             6301          3931      2233     1391
          Wall-time            48.7 sec   36.6 sec          33.6          54.4     39.3 sec 30.6 sec

Table 3: Comparison of the average number of calls to generator, verifier, policy, and value networks for
different number of beams (width of beam search in subgoal generation)) and the average wall-time. Results
were obtained using fixed 1000 instances of Sokoban


                Environment                                        INT
                Variant              kSubS      kSubS    AdaSubS AdaSubS AdaSubS
                                   (16 beams) (4 beams) (16 beams) (8 beams) (4 beams)
                Success rate           90.7          89.7           96           96            95.3
                Generator calls        107           26.0          362           166           76.3
                Verifier calls          0             0            67.9          62.2          57.2
                Policy calls           378           366           801           738           659
                Value calls            6.9           6.6           14.0          13.0          11.9
                Total calls           492         399           1245             974      805
                Wall-time           15.3 sec    12.1 sec       43.8 sec        31.9 sec 31.1 sec

Table 4: Comparison of the average number of calls to generator, verifier, policy, and value networks for
different number of beams (width of beam search in subgoal generation)) and the average wall-time. Results
were obtained using fixed 1000 instances of INT problems.


                                    Environment                    INT
                                    Variant                 kSubS AdaSubS
                                    Generator calls 93.4              102
                                    Verifier calls    0               19
                                    Policy calls    328               300
                                    Value calls      6.2              5.6
                                    Total calls             428       427

Table 5: Comparison of the average number of calls to generator, verifier, policy, and value networks for
problems solved by both methods for INT environment.


                                                       17
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


D     DATASETS AND DATA PROCESSING
Sokoban. To collect offline data for Sokoban we used an MCTS-based RL agent from (Miłoś et al.,
2019). In effect, the dataset consisted of all successful trajectories obtained by the agent: 154000
trajectories for 12x12 boards with four boxes. We use 15% of states from each trajectory to create
the training dataset D. We performed the split of dataset D into two parts of equal size: D1 and
D2 . The former was used to train the subgoal generators and conditional low-level policy, while
the latter was used to train the verifier network. This split mitigates the possibility of the verifier’s
over-optimism concerning the probability of achieving subgoals by CLLP.
INT. We represent both states and actions as strings. For states, we used an internal INT tool for such
representation. For actions, we concatenate one token representing the axiom and the arguments for
this axiom (tokenized mathematical expressions) following (Czechowski et al., 2021).
To generate the dataset of successful trajectories we used the configurable generator of inequalities
from the INT benchmark (see (Wu et al., 2021)). We adjusted it to construct trajectories of length
15 with all available axioms. The dataset used for our experiments consisted of 2 · 106 trajectories.
Rubik’s Cube. To construct a single successful trajectory we performed 20 random permutations on
an initially solved Rubik’s Cube and took the reverse of this sequence, replacing each move with its
reverse. Using this procedure we collected 107 trajectories. Such solutions are usually sub-optimal,
since random moves are not guaranteed to increase the distance from the solution. They can even
make loops in the trajectories.

D.1   DATASET FOR VERIFIER

The verifier answers the question of whether a given subgoal is reachable by the CLLP. Thus, the
dataset for training this component cannot be simply extracted from the offline trajectories.
To get the training samples for the Rubik’s Cube and INT, we run AdaSubS without the verifier. In
other words, we set thi = 1 and tlo = 0, which essentially means that the reachability of all the
subgoal candidates is checked solely by CLLP. During the searching, the generators create subgoal
candidates, which are then verified by CLLP. Therefore, after working on some problem instances,
we obtain a reach dataset of valid and not valid subgoals, marked by CLLP.
For the experiments in Sokoban, the limitation of the size of the offline dataset is an important factor
for the final performance. Therefore, to ensure a fair comparison of AdaSubS with baselines, we do
not generate additional solutions. Instead, we split the dataset as described above into D1 and D2
and used only D2 to generate data for the verifier. From every trajectory in D2 , we sample some
root states. For every such state, we use the subgoal generators to predict subgoal candidates. Then,
CLLP checks the validity of each of them and we include them in the verifier training dataset.
After collection, it is essential to balance the dataset. Easy instances with short solutions provide
fewer datapoints than hard tasks that require a deep search. Thus, it may happen that a substantial
fraction of data collected this way comes from a single instance, reducing the diversity of the dataset.
We have observed such issues, particularly in the INT environment. To prevent this, during the
collection of the data for INT, we limit the datapoints that can be collected from a single problem
instance to at most 100. This way, we collected about 5 · 106 training samples for the verifier for
each domain.


                                                   18
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


E    BASELINES
As baselines, we use BestFS and BF-kSubS.
BestFS is a well-known class of search algorithms (including A∗ ), which, among others, performs
well on problems with high combinatorial complexity (Pearl, 1984), achieves state-of-the-art results
in theorem proving (Polu & Sutskever, 2020), and strong results on Rubik’s Cube (Agostinelli et al.,
2019; Czechowski et al., 2021).
Similarly to AdaSubS, BestFS iteratively expands the graph of visited states by choosing nodes with
the highest value and adding its children to the priority queue. However, instead of using children
from the subgoal tree, it uses direct neighbors in the environment space. In other words, we use a
single policy network to generate neighbor subgoals in the distance of 1 action from a given node
and treat it as a new subgoal. One can implement BestFS by replacing the call to a subgoal generator
ρk in Algorithm 1 with ρBF S .
The implementation of ρBF S differs slightly between environments. In Rubik’s Cube, ρBF S for
each action estimates the probability that it leads to the solution. In every iteration, we take the top
3 predictions. In Sokoban, we use the same training objective, but instead of taking a fixed number
of actions, we take the smallest subset of actions with estimated probabilities summing to at least
98%. For INT, we use beam search to generate high-probability actions. This is necessary since in
INT the actions are represented as sequences.

Algorithm 5 BestFS
 Requires:          V       value function network
                 ρBF S      policy
                S OLVED predicate of solution
  function SOLVE(s0 )
     T←∅                                                                               ▷ priority queue
     parents ← {}
     T.PUSH((V (s0 ), s0 ))
     seen.ADD(s0 )                                                                      ▷ seen is a set
     while 0 < LEN(T) and LEN(seen) < C1 do
         _, s ← T.EXTRACT _ MAX()
         actions ← ρBF S (s)
         for a in actions do
             s′ ← ENV _ STEP(s, a)
             if s′ in seen then
                  continue
             if not IS _ VALID(s, s′ ) then
                  continue
             seen.ADD(s′ )
             parents[s′ ] ← s
             T.PUSH((V (s′ ), s′ ))
             if SOLVED(s′ ) then
                  return LL _ PATH(s′ , parents)
                                                                       ▷ get low-level path, see Alg. 4
      return False


BF-kSubS is the first, according to our knowledge, general learned hierarchical planning algorithm
shown to work on complex reasoning domains (Czechowski et al., 2021), attaining strong results
on Sokoban and Rubik’s Cube and state-of-the-art results on INT. BF-kSubS is a special case of
AdaSubS with the following hyperparameters choice: a single subgoal generator and inactive verifier
(with tlo = 0 and thi = 1) in Algorithm 3).


                                                  19
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


F     H YPERPARAMETERS

                Environment                     Sokoban        Rubik’s Cube        INT
                                                       −4               −4
                learning rate                     10               3 · 10        3 · 10−4
                learning rate warmup steps          -                4000          4000
                batch size                         32                  32            32
                kernel size                       [3, 3]                -             -
                weight decay                      10−4                  -             -
                dropout                             -                 0.1           0.1

                              Table 6: Hyperparameters used for training.


             Environment                                              Sokoban
             Method                                     kSubS      MixSubS      AdaSubS (ours)
             number of subgoals                               4         1              1
             number of beams                                 16        16             16
             beam search temperature                          1         1              1
             k-generators                                     8     [8, 4, 2]      [8, 4, 2]
             number of steps to check (C2 )                  10    [10, 6, 4]     [10, 6, 4]
             max steps in solution check                      -        18             18
             max nodes in search tree (C1 )                 5000     5000           5000
             acceptance threshold of verifier (thi )          -       0.99           0.99
             rejection threshold of verifier (tlo )           -        0.1            0.1

                Table 7: Hyperparameters used for evaluation in the Sokoban environment.


             Environment                                           the Rubik’s Cube
             Method                                     kSubS      MixSubS      AdaSubS (ours)
             number of subgoals                               3        1              1
             number of beams                                 32       32             32
             beam search temperature                         0.5      0.5            0.5
             k-generators                                     4      [4, 3]       [4, 3, 2]
             number of steps to check (C2 )                   4      [4, 3]       [4, 3, 2]
             max steps in solution check                      -        4              4
             max nodes in search tree (C1 )                 5000     5000           5000
             acceptance threshold of verifier (thi )          -     0.995           0.995
             rejection threshold of verifier (tlo )           -     0.0005         0.0005

             Table 8: Hyperparameters used for evaluation in the Rubik’s Cube environment.

Most of the hyperparameters, both for training and evaluation, are either default or have little impact
on the performance of the algorithms. The values are in line with (Czechowski et al., 2021), which
ensures fair comparison.
The parameter C1 (see Algorithm 1) controls the number of high-level nodes in the search tree. It is
lower than the actual graph size that we use for comparisons since it counts neither the intermediate
states visited by CLLP nor the subgoals that turned out to be invalid. That hyperparameter was
chosen to enable all the algorithms evaluated to reach the graph size values used for comparison in
Figure 2 and others in Section 4.

F.1   T UNING THE HYPERPARAMETERS

The most important training hyperparameter that has to be tuned is the learning rate. To do this,
we compared the prediction accuracy for ten training runs corresponding to ten learning rates in


                                                  20
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


             Environment                                              INT
             Method                                    kSubS    MixSubS      AdaSubS (ours)
             number of subgoals                           4          2             3
             number of beams                             16         16            16
             beam search temperature                      1          1             1
             k-generators                                 3      [3, 2, 1]     [3, 2, 1]
             number of steps to check (C2 )               3      [3, 2, 1]     [3, 2, 1]
             max steps in solution check                  -          5             5
             max nodes in search tree (C1 )             400        400           400
             acceptance threshold of verifier (thi )      -          1             1
             rejection threshold of verifier (tlo )       -        0.1            0.1

                  Table 9: Hyperparameters used for evaluation in the INT environment.


the range [10−5 ; 10−3 ]. We shared the training hyperparameters across all the components for each
environment, as they share the same network architecture.
In evaluation, the most important hyperparameter of AdaSubS is the set of k-generators. To select
the set for Sokoban, we started with small values of k (e.g., 1 or 2) and increased k multiplicatively,
doubling it as long as the new set of generators performed better. We used a similar procedure
in Rubik’s Cube and INT, but due to the bounds on the optimal path length (at most 26 and 15,
respectively), we increased k additively (incrementing k by one). This way, we have chosen k =
[8, 4, 2] for Sokoban, k = [4, 3, 2] for Rubik’s Cube, and k = [3, 2, 1] for INT. When evaluating a
set of generators, we also need to set the number of subgoals each generator should output. Thus,
each time we tried three different values ({1, 2, 3} for Rubik’s Cube and Sokoban, {2, 3, 4} for INT)
and used the one that resulted in the highest success rate. We ran the evaluation pipeline 15 times to
tune that parameter. The other parameters have rather minor impact on the results, and thus we did
not tune them extensively.
For kSubS, we took the values of k used in (Czechowski et al., 2021) for Rubik’s Cube and INT. For
Sokoban, we use k = 8 since it outperforms k = 4 proposed in this work.
In the case of the verifier thresholds, we want high precision and high recall (see discussion in
Section 4.5). While "loose" thresholds increase the processing speed, "tight" thresholds usually
result in higher solved rates. To solve this trade-off, we propose to set the thresholds giving roughly
99% recall for the lower threshold and 99% precision for the upper. After estimating the parameters
of the verifiers, it turned out that in the case of Sokoban, Rubik’s Cube, and INT, the thresholds
should be in the intervals [0; 0.1] and [0.9; 1]. The final values were determined by running a grid
search over five values in each interval. That required running the evaluation about 25 times. Note
that since the verifier is used to increase the processing speed, it is enough to tune the thresholds
only for the final version of the pipeline.
We train INT and Rubik’s Cube components on a single GPU for about three days. The components
for Sokoban are trained on CPUs for about a day. The evaluations in all the environments were
also performed on CPU nodes. See Appendix J for the details of the actual infrastructure used in
this project. Therefore, to properly tune the parameters, requires ten training runs on GPU and 40
evaluations on CPU nodes for each environment.


                                                  21
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


G     C OMPONENTS OF A DA S UB S

G.1    S UBGOAL GENERATORS

The main purpose of the subgoal generator is to propose subgoal candidates in every iteration of the
planner loop. That is, given the current state s of the environment it should output other states that
are a few steps closer to goal g.
We train a k-generator by extracting training data from successful trajectories. Let s0 , s1 , . . . , sn be
a trajectory that leads to the goal sn . For every state si we train the k-generator network to output
the state si+k , exactly k steps ahead. Provided with a dataset of trajectories, this is a supervised
objective. Clearly, a state that is k steps ahead does not need to be exactly k steps closer to the
solution, especially if the trajectories include noise or exploration. However, it is guaranteed to be
at most k steps closer, which enables reliable limits to be set for checking reachability.
In a simple approach, k is a hyperparameter that needs to be fixed, as proposed by (Czechowski
et al., 2021). However, this is a strong limitation if the environment exhibits a variable complex-
ity problem. Therefore, AdaSubS instead uses a set of generators, trained for different values of
k. This way, the planner can adjust the expansion to match the local complexity of the problem.
Additionally, training a set of generators can be easily parallelized.
For our generators, we use the transformer architecture. The input state is encoded as a sequence
of tokens, as described in (Czechowski et al., 2021, Appendix C). The network produces another
sequence of tokens on the output, which is then decoded to a subgoal state. The output sequence
is optimized for the highest joint probability with beam search: the consecutive tokens are sampled
iteratively and a fixed number of locally best sequences passes to the next iteration. This way, the
generator enables sampling of a diverse set of subgoals by adjusting the beam width and sampling
temperature. The exact number of the subgoals that the generators output are given in Appendix F.
As noted in Section 3.1, for the Sokoban environment instead of transformers we use simple con-
volutional networks. In this domain, the subgoal is created by a sequence of changes to the input
state. The generator network is trained to predict the probability of changing every pixel. Then, the
subgoals are obtained as a sequence of modifications that maximize joint probability. For simplicity,
in AdaSubS we use beam search for all domains, including Sokoban.
During the inference, the generators output a limited set of subgoals to explore. Thus, if the genera-
tors are not trained well enough, even with an infinite computational budget, the search may fail to
find a solution to the given problem, even if one exists. However, with a slight modification, Ada-
SubS can be guaranteed to find a solution to any given problem (or correctly report that the solution
does not exist). We achieve that by adding an exhaustive single-step policy as the last generator. It
would populate an empty queue with all children of the highest valued but not yet expanded node.
Note that such a modification never decreases the score since the dummy generator is only used
when a search is about to fail. In practice, this type of modification is not necessary to obtain strong
results.


G.2    C ONDITIONAL LOW- LEVEL POLICY (CLLP)

If we want to add a subgoal candidate to our search tree, we need to check whether it is reachable
from the current state. This can be done using CLLP – a mapping that given a state and a subgoal
produces a sequence of actions that connects those configurations, or claims that there is no such
configuration. Specifically, the policy network, given the state and subgoal, iteratively selects the
best action and executes it until the subgoal is reached or a threshold number of steps is exceeded,
as shown in Algorithm 2.
CLLP is trained to imitate the policy that collected the training data. For every pair of states si , sj
that are located at most d steps from each other, it is trained to predict action ai , taken in state si .
Such action may not be optimal but usually it leads closer to sj . The threshold d controls the range
of the policy, as it is trained to connect states that are at most d steps away. Thus, it is essential to
set the hyperparameter d to a value that is greater than the distances of all the generators used.


                                                    22
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


It is essential that the policy can successfully reach the correct subgoals, as it is a necessary condition
for adding them to the search tree. The training metrics show that in all our environments the policy
can reach more than 95% of correct subgoals. This percentage is even higher for short distances.

G.3    V ERIFIER

To check whether a k-subgoal is reachable with the conditional policy, we need to call it up to k
times. If we decide to use generators with long horizons, it becomes a significant computational
cost. To mitigate this issue, we use the verifier that estimates the validity of a subgoal candidate
in a single call. During the search, the generated subgoal candidates are evaluated by the verifier.
For each of them, it estimates whether they are valid and outputs its confidence. If the returned
confidence exceeds a fixed threshold, we do not run the costly check with the conditional policy. We
perform such a check only in case the verifier is uncertain (see Algorithm 3).
At the end of the search, when a solving trajectory is found, we need to find the paths between all
the pairs of consecutive subgoals that were omitted due to the verifier (see Algorithm 4). Since the
length of the final trajectory is usually much smaller than the search tree, that final check requires
much less computations.
It should be noted that the verifier estimates validity with respect to the conditional policy that is
used. In case a valid subgoal is generated but the policy cannot reach it for some reason, it cannot be
used to build the search tree anyway, for no solution that uses it can be generated in the final phase.
Thus, the verifier should be trained to predict whether the CLLP that is used can reach the subgoal,
rather than whether it is reachable by an optimal policy.
To train the verifier, we run our pipeline on some problem instances. All the subgoals created by
the generators are validated with CLLP. This way, eventually we obtain a dataset of reachable and
unreachable subgoal candidates. We train the verifier network to fit that data. Unlike the other
components, training the verifier does not require access to any trajectories, only to a number of
problem instances.

G.4    VALUE FUNCTION .

The value function V : S → R estimates the negative distance between the current state s and
the goal state g. During the search, this information is used to select the most promising nodes to
expand. For every trajectory s0 , . . . , sn in the dataset it is trained to output i − n given si . We opted
for a simple training objective but any value function can be used in the algorithm.

G.5    Q UALITY OF A DA S UB S COMPONENTS

The effectiveness of AdaSubS depends on the quality of
its trainable components: below we present an analysis of
generators and verifiers.
Generator: k trade-off. The quality of generators dete-
riorates when k is increased. In Sokoban, nearly 90%
of subgoals created with the 4-generator are valid (ac-
cording to CLLP). However at the same time for the 16-
generator, this figure drops to 50%. Similarly, in Rubik’s
Cube, about 82% of subgoals proposed by the 4-generator
are valid, while the 3-generator has over 99% accuracy.
On the other hand, longer distances are beneficial to the
search as they make it possible to build sparser search Figure 4: Comparison of success rates
trees and achieve a solution faster. It turns out that the for different subgoal generators for
optimal choice of k depends on the search budget. It pays Sokoban. AdaSubS-k describes using a
to be optimistic (i.e., choose long distances) for small single generator with distance k.
budgets, while more prudent choices have the upper hand
when more compute is available. Crucially, AdaSubS with multiple generators successfully resolves
the trade-off, outperforming every single generator, see Figure 4.


                                                     23
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


Verifier: precision and recall For each subgoal, the verifier outputs a classification probability p,
which is used to accept the subgoal (if p > thi ), reject the subgoal (if p < tlo ) or to pass to the
further verification (if p ∈ [tlo , thi ]) by CLLP. For the acceptance task, we require high precision, as
one false positive can lead to the failure of the whole search procedure. This leads to a high value
for the corresponding parameter thi (e.g. for Sokoban thi = 0.99, which corresponds to a precision
rate of 97%). For the rejection task, we do not wish to reject true positives. In other words, we aim
for high recall. In this case, errors usually increase the search cost; the corresponding parameter tlo
is set to tlo = 0.1 for Sokoban (this gives the recall of 99%). Additionally, for the verifier to be
useful, we need to avoid passing subgoals to the further verification p ∈ [tlo , thi ]. It turns out that
for the thresholds selected, the verifier is able to assess 70% states without the assistance of CLLP.

G.6    A DAPTIVE S UBGOAL S EARCH FLOWCHART


                                                   24
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


H     D EVELOPING ADAPTIVE SEARCH METHODS

There are many natural ways to incorporate adaptivity into the subgoal search pipeline. We exper-
imented with several designs to find one that gives strong results in any domain. Here we provide
a detailed description of all the variants tested and the numerical results of their evaluation in our
environments. Their implementations can be found in Section H.2.
An adaptive algorithm should adjust the complexity of the proposed subgoals to the local complexity
of the environment in the neighbourhood of the processed state. This can be realized using the
following two approaches:

       • Use an adaptive planner that provides a list of k-generators, the most promising node in
         every step selects and a generator to expand it.
       • Use an adaptive subgoal generator that instead of proposing fixed-distance subgoals learns
         to automatically adjust the distance.

H.1   A DAPTIVE PLANNERS

When implementing adaptivity with the planner, we need to specify a list of k-generators
ρk0 , . . . , ρkm . In every iteration, the algorithm will select a node to expand and generators from
the list that will create the new subgoals. This way, it can directly control the complexity of the
subgoals and adapt to the current state and progress of the search.
MixSubS. Given a list of trained k-generators, a simple approach is to call all of them each time a
node is expanded. In every iteration, we choose the node with the highest value in the tree and add
subgoals proposed by each generator ρk0 to ρkm . See Algorithm 6 for the implementation.
Observe that in the easy areas of the environment the search will progress fast, since the furthest
subgoal will most likely have the highest value, so it will be chosen as the next node to expand.
On the other hand, in the hard parts the shortest generators are more likely to provide subgoals that
advance towards the target at least a step.
This method already achieve superior results compared to single generators, both on small and large
budget. In the Rubik environment, it even reaches 100% solved cubes. MixSubS provides the
advantage of planning with different horizons, but at the same time, it produces many unnecessary
nodes in the easy areas, while taking only long steps is sufficient to solve the task. Additionally, one
may want to prioritize the generators that perform better, which cannot be done with this method.
Iterative mixing. In this approach, we specify a number of iterations li for each generator ρki . We
use ρk0 to expand the highest-valued nodes in the first l0 iterations. Then, we use ρk1 to expand
the best nodes in the following l1 iterations and the procedure follows for the consecutive genera-
tors. After finishing with the last one, we start again from the beginning. See Algorithm 7 for the
implementation.
This algorithm offers the flexibility of specifying the exact number of iterations for each genera-
tor, which forms an explicit prioritization. It can resemble some of the listed algorithms for care-
fully chosen li . However, tuning the number of iterations requires much more effort than the other
parameter-free algorithms do. Therefore, we experimented with another two mixing approaches that
select the generator automatically in every iteration.
Strongest-first. Another natural implementation of the planner is to choose the node with the high-
est value and expand it with the longest generator that was not used there yet. See Algorithm 8 for
the implementation. While this greedy approach maintain clear advantage over single generators, it
is outperformed by most of the mixing methods, even the simple mixes. We hypothesize that this
method is more sensitive to the errors of the value function – if the search enters an area that the
value function estimates too optimistically, it spends too much time trying to exploit it.
Longest-first (used by AdaSubS). This method in every iteration selects the longest generator that
has at least one node to expand and highest-valued node for that generator in the queue. This way,
it explicitly prioritizes using the longest generators and turns to the shorter only when the search
is stuck. See Algorithm 9 for the implementation. As shown in the tables below, this method
outperforms all other designs, in all the environments and within all budget constraints. It prioritizes


                                                  25
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


the better generators, but does not require any additional hyperparameters to by specified. Therefore,
we consider it the best mixing algorithm and use in AdaSubS as the default planner.


H.2    A DAPTIVE PLANNERS IMPLEMENTATIONS

In this section we provide the implementations of the planners. The lines highlighted in blue indicate
the differences with the AdaSubS code. All the methods require specifying the list of generators
ρk0 , . . . , ρkm . The Iterative mixing planner additionally requires a list of iterations l0 , . . . , lm .


Algorithm 6 MixSubS                                           Algorithm 7 Iterative mixing
  function SOLVE(s0 )                                           function SOLVE(s0 )
     T←∅                                   ▷ priority queue         Tki ← ∅                          ▷ m + 1 priority queues
     parents ← {}                                                   parents ← {}
     T.PUSH((V (s0 ), s0 ))                                         for k in k0 , . . . , km do
     seen.ADD(s0 )                                                      Tk .PUSH((V (s0 ), s0 ))
     while 0 < LEN(T) and LEN(seen) < C1 do                         seen.ADD(s0 )
         _, s ← T.EXTRACT _ MAX()                                   cnt ← 0                              ▷ Iterations counter
         subgoals ← {ρk1 (s), . . . , ρkm (s)}                      id ← 0                             ▷ Current generator id
         for s′ in subgoals do                                      while 0 < LEN(T) and LEN(seen) < C1 do
             if s′ in seen then continue                                if cnt = lid or LEN(Tkid ) = 0 then
             if not IS _ VALID(s, s′ ) then                                  id ← (id + 1)%(m + 1), cnt ← 0
                 continue
                                                                        cnt ← cnt + 1
             seen.ADD(s′ )
                                                                        _, s ← Tkid .EXTRACT _ MAX()
             parents[s′ ] ← s
                                                                        subgoals ← ρkid (s)
             T.PUSH((V (s′ ), s′ ))
                                                                        for s′ in subgoals do
             if SOLVED(s′ ) then
                                                                             if s′ in seen then continue
                 return LL _ PATH(s′ , parents)
                                                                             if not IS _ VALID(s, s′ ) then
     return False                                                                continue
                                                                             seen.ADD(s′ )
                                                                             parents[s′ ] ← s
                                                                             for k in k0 , . . . , km do
                                                                                 Tk .PUSH((V (s′ ), s′ ))
                                                                        if SOLVED(s′ ) then
                                                                             return LL _ PATH(s′ , parents)
                                                                return False


Algorithm 8 Strongest-first                                   Algorithm 9 Longest-first
  function SOLVE(s0 )                                           function SOLVE(s0 )
     T ← ∅ ▷ priority queue with lexicographic order               T ← ∅ ▷ priority queue with lexicographic order
     parents ← {}                                                  parents ← {}
     for k in k0 , . . . , km do                                   for k in k0 , . . . , km do
         T.PUSH(((V (s0 ), k), s0 ))                                   T.PUSH(((k, V (s0 )), s0 ))
     seen.ADD(s0 )                                                 seen.ADD(s0 )
     while 0 < LEN(T) and LEN(seen) < C1 do                        while 0 < LEN(T) and LEN(seen) < C1 do
         (_, k), s ← T.EXTRACT _ MAX()                                 (k, _), s ← T.EXTRACT _ MAX()
         subgoals ← ρk (s)                                             subgoals ← ρk (s)
         for s′ in subgoals do                                         for s′ in subgoals do
             if s′ in seen then continue                                   if s′ in seen then continue
             if not IS _ VALID(s, s′ ) then                                if not IS _ VALID(s, s′ ) then
                  continue                                                      continue
             seen.ADD(s′ )                                                 seen.ADD(s′ )
             parents[s′ ] ← s                                              parents[s′ ] ← s
             for k in k0 , . . . , km do                                   for k in k0 , . . . , km do
                  T.PUSH(((V (s′ ), k), s′ ))                                   T.PUSH(((k, V (s′ )), s′ ))
             if SOLVED(s′ ) then                                           if SOLVED(s′ ) then
                  return LL _ PATH(s′ , parents)                                return LL _ PATH(s′ , parents)
     return False                                                  return False


                                                       26
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


H.3    A DAPTIVE GENERATORS

A k-generator is trained to propose subgoals that should be exactly k steps ahead. However, instead
of matching a fixed distance, it can opt for long subgoals when the next steps are clear and short
when difficulties appear, or both if it is not certain.
Implementing this idea requires changing the training of the generator. Given a training trajectory,
for each state si we need to select the target state st(i) that should be the output of the generator. We
tested a few methods that select this target.
Longest-reachable We use the low-level conditional policy to estimate the local complexity around
si . Specifically, we choose st(i) to be the furthest state on the trajectory such that it is reachable from
si with the CLLP and so do all its predecessors. In other words, we check whether CLLP starting
in si can reach si+1 , si+2 , etc. When we find the first state sj that is not reachable, we set t(i) to be
j − 1.
Intuitively, this approach makes the generator learn to output subgoals as distant as possible, but
still reachable for CLLP. However, this way the targets are selected on the borderline of reachability,
which may lead to too hard subgoals in some cases.
Sampling-reachable To make target state selection more robust, we modify reachability verifica-
tion. Instead of greedily following the best action determined by CLLP probabilities, in every step
we sample the action. This way, we are more likely to take suboptimal actions, so the selected target
should be reachable with higher confidence.
Secondary-reachable Another method of making more robust selection is to follow the action with
the lowest probability that exceeds a fixed threshold, e.g. 25%. Intuitively, we follow the action that
CLLP considers to be good, but is less certain than in the case of the highest-ranked. Therefore, a
subgoal reached in this way should be reachable with even higher confidence when following the
greedy actions.
Our experiments show that the adaptive generators trained according to those designs perform well
in the environments we consider. For instance, all the methods nearly reach a 90% solve rate on
Sokoban. However, none of them provide better results than the kSubS baseline. Therefore in this
work we focus on planner-based adaptivity and leave tuning the adaptive generators pipeline for
future work.

H.4    B ENCHMARKING RESULTS

Tables 10-12 show the numerical results achieved by the adaptive planners described in section H.1,
compared to baselines: BestFS and kSubS. For some of the methods a few variants are provided.
In each table, the longest-first, strongest-first and iterative mixing methods use the same set of
generators: [3, 2, 1] for INT, [4, 3, 2] for Rubik, and [8, 4, 2] for Sokoban. Our main algorithm,
Adaptive Subgoal Search, uses the longest-first planner and the verifier network.


                                                    27
 Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


                                                  INT
                                                Small budget (50 nodes)    Large budget (1000 nodes)
                                                with verifier    without   with verifier   without
BestFS                                                  -         1.7%           -         36.7%
                          k=4                       2.2%          0.1%        82.4%        83.0%
                          k=3                       4.0%          0.2%        89.6%        90.7%
kSubS
                          k=2                       2.1%          0.5%        89.8%        91.7%
                          k=1                       0.0%          0.0%        34.7%        46.0%
                          k=[4,3,2]                0.0%          0.0%         94.6%        95.0%
MixSubS                   k=[3,2,1]                0.0%          0.0%         92.2%        92.9%
                          k=[3,2]                  17.0%         14.8%        92.2%        93.5%
                          iterations=[1,1,1]       32.0%         30.1%        87.0%        88.6%
Iterative mixing          iterations=[10,1,1]      43.0%         44.8%        95.1%        96.0%
                          iterations=[4,2,1]       54.0%         52.1%        93.6%        95.5%
Strongest-first                                    39.5%         40.8%        88.5%        89.8%
Longest-first (AdaSubS)                            59.0%         51.5%        95.7%        95.5%

                                       Table 10: INT benchmark


                                                Rubik
                                                Small budget (400 nodes)   Large budget (6000 nodes)
                                                with verifier    without   with verifier   without
BestFS                                                 -          0.0%           -          1.8%
                          k=4                      28.8%         24.5%        98.6%         98.8%
                          k=3                      19.3%         18.6%        95.6%         95.4%
kSubS
                          k=2                       8.2%         4.5%         99.0%         95.8%
                          k=1                       0.5%         0.5%         76.5%         76.5%
                          k=[4,3,2]                29.1%         20.9%        99.1%        100.0%
MixSubS
                          k=[4,3]                  49.1%         45.1%        99.2%        100.0%
                          iterations=[1,1,1]       33.5%         23.0%        99.2%        100.0%
Iterative mixing          iterations=[10,1,1]      50.6%         43.6%        99.1%         99.9%
                          iterations=[4,2,1]       48.4%         41.2%        99.2%        100.0%
Strongest-first                                    33.4%         27.1%        99.0%         99.9%
Longest-first (AdaSubS)                            58.0%         52.4%        99.2%        100.0%

                                      Table 11: Rubik benchmark


                                                  28
 Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


                                                Sokoban
                                                 Small budget (100 nodes)   Large budget (5000 nodes)
                                                 with verifier   without    with verifier   without
BestFS                                                  -        45.9%            -         82.6%
                          k=16                      13.7%         5.1%         60.5%        63.5%
                          k=8                       26.0%         4.7%         85.6%        84.4%
kSubS
                          k=4                        8.2%         2.6%         68.1%        65.5%
                          k=2                        1.4%         0.7%         40.0%        38.3%
                          k=[8,4,2]                 52.7%        37.7%         91.7%        90.2%
MixSubS
                          k=[16,8,4]                55.6%        44.9%         89.1%        89.0%
                          iterations=[1,1,1]        52.7%        37.7%         91.7%        90.2%
Iterative mixing          iterations=[10,1,1]       68.3%        58.6%         92.5%        92.1%
                          iterations=[4,2,1]        64.5%        52.6%         93.5%        93.2%
Strongest-first                                     54.6%        41.9%         92.0%        90.8%
Longest-first (AdaSubS)                             72.2%        63.4%         93.4%        93.6%

                                       Table 12: Sokoban benchmark


                                                   29
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


I   O PTIMALITY OF SOLUTIONS FOR S OKOBAN
We did an additional experiment for Sokoban: we used simple BFS to find the optimal path, and
we compared its length with the outcome of AdaSubS. The results are as follows (tested on 600
Sokoban boards):

      • For 7% of boards, AdaSubS found the optimal solution.
      • The average difference between the length of the AdaSubS solution and the optimal solu-
        tion is 15 steps.
      • On average, the AdaSubS solution is 38% longer than the optimal one.


                                             30
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


J   I NFRASTRUCTURE USED
We performed experiments using two types of hardware: with and without access to GPUs. In the
former, we used nodes equipped with a single Nvidia V100 32GB card or Nvidia RTX 2080Ti 11GB
card. Each such node had 4 CPU cores and 168GB of RAM. In the latter, we used nodes equipped
with Intel Xeon E5-2697 2.60GHz CPU with 28 cores and 128GB RAM.
Each transformer model was trained on a single GPU node for 3 days. Sokoban models were trained
on CPU nodes (due to the small size of the models).


                                              31
Fast and Precise: Adjusting Planning Horizon with Adaptive Subgoal Search


K    O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS
In Rubik’s Cube, we trained the generators on very short trajectories, obtained by applying only 10
random moves to the ordered cube (that covers about 7 · 109 configurations, compared to 4 · 1019
in total). Even with such limited data, AdaSubS succeeded in solving 99% of the fully scrambled
cubes we tested.
In Sokoban, we check that AdaSubS trained on boards with 4 boxes can tackle instances with 5, 6,
and 7 boxes. Specifically, it solves 87%, 82%, and 74% of cases, respectively, while kSubS only
solves 74%, 67%, and 56%, respectively. The results are presented in Figure 5. Note that exactly
like in the case of INT, AdaSubS consistently has half the failure rate of that of kSubS on OOD
instances.


Figure 5: Out-of-distribution performance of AdaSubS and kSubS for Sokoban boards with more boxes, with
budget of 5000 nodes. Both methods were trained on instances with 4 boxes. Error bars correspond to 95%
confidence intervals.


                                                  32
