Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NIFIED A LGORITHMS FOR RL WITH D ECISION -
E STIMATION C OEFFICIENTS : N O -R EGRET, PAC, AND
R EWARD -F REE L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Finding unified complexity measures and algorithms for sample-efficient learn-
         ing is a central topic of research in reinforcement learning (RL). The Decision-
         Estimation Coefficient (DEC) is recently proposed by Foster et al. (2021) as
         a governing complexity measure for sample-efficient no-regret RL. This paper
         makes progress towards a unified theory for RL with the DEC framework. First,
         we propose two new DEC-type complexity measures: Explorative DEC (EDEC),
         and Reward-Free DEC (RFDEC). We show that they are necessary and sufficient
         for sample-efficient PAC learning and reward-free learning, thereby extending the
         original DEC which only captures no-regret learning. Next, we design new unified
         sample-efficient algorithms for all three learning goals. Our algorithms instantiate
         variants of the Estimation-To-Decisions (E2D) meta-algorithm with a strong and
         general model estimation subroutine. Even in the no-regret setting, our algorithm
         E2D-TA improves upon the algorithms of Foster et al. (2021) which require ei-
         ther bounding a variant of the DEC which may be prohibitively large, or designing
         problem-specific estimation subroutines. As applications, we recover existing and
         obtain new sample-efficient learning results for a wide range of tractable RL prob-
         lems using essentially a single algorithm. Finally, as a connection, we re-analyze
         two existing optimistic model-based algorithms based on Posterior Sampling or
         Maximum Likelihood Estimation, showing that they enjoy similar regret bounds
         as E2D-TA under similar structural conditions as the DEC.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved immense success in modern artificial intelligence. As
RL agents typically require an enormous number of samples to train in practice (Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016), sample-efficiency has been an important question in RL research. This question
has been studied extensively in theory, with provably sample-efficient algorithms established for
many concrete RL problems starting with tabular Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Brafman &
Tennenholtz, 2002; Azar et al., 2017; Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Dann et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020b), and later MDPs with various types of linear structures (Yang & Wang, 2019; Jin et al.,
2020b; Zanette et al., 2020b; Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021).
Towards a more unifying theory, a recent line of work seeks general structural conditions and uni-
fied algorithms that encompass as many as possible known sample-efficient RL problems. Many
such structural conditions have been identified, such as Bellman rank (Jiang et al., 2017), Witness
rank (Sun et al., 2019), Eluder dimension (Russo & Van Roy, 2013; Wang et al., 2020b), Bilinear
Class (Du et al., 2019), and Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021). The recent work of Fos-
ter et al. (2021) proposes the Decision-Estimation Coefficient (DEC) as a quantitative complexity
measure that governs the statistical complexity of model-based RL with a model class. Roughly
speaking, the DEC measures the optimal trade-off—achieved by any policy—between exploration
(gaining information) and exploitation (being a near-optimal policy itself) when the true model could
be any model within the model class. Foster et al. (2021) establish regret lower bounds for online RL
in terms of the DEC, and upper bounds in terms of (a variant of) the DEC and model class capacity,
showing that the DEC is necessary and (in the above sense) sufficient for online RL with low regret.
This constitutes a significant step towards a unified understanding of sample-efficient RL.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Despite this progress, several important questions remain open within the DEC framework. First,
in Foster et al. (2021), regret upper bounds for low-DEC problems are achieved by the Estimation-
To-Decisions (E2D) meta-algorithm, which requires a subroutine for online model estimation given
past observations. However, their instantiations of this algorithm either (1) use a general improper1
estimation subroutine that works black-box for any model class, but results in a regret bound that
scales with a (potentially significantly) larger variant of the DEC that does not admit known polyno-
mial bounds, or (2) require a proper estimation subroutine, which typically requires problem-specific
designs and unclear how to construct for general model classes. These additional bottlenecks pre-
vent their instantiations from being a unified sample-efficient algorithm for any low-DEC problem.
Second, while the DEC captures the complexity of no-regret learning, there are alternative learn-
ing goals that are widely studied in the RL literature such as PAC learning (Dann et al., 2017) and
reward-free learning (Jin et al., 2020a), and it is unclear whether they can be characterized using
a similar framework. Finally, several other optimistic model-based algorithms such as Optimistic
Posterior Sampling (Zhang, 2022; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022a) or Optimistic Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (Mete et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022a;b) have been proposed in recent work, whereas the
E2D algorithm does not explicitly use optimism in its algorithm design. It is unclear whether E2D
actually bears any similarities or connections to the aformentioned optimistic algorithms.
In this paper, we resolve the above open questions positively by developing new complexity mea-
sures and unified algorithms for RL with Decision-Estimation Coefficients. Our contributions can
be summarized as follows.
     • We design E2D-TA, the first unified algorithm that achieves low regret for any problem with
       bounded DEC and low-capacity model class (Section 3). E2D-TA instantiates the E2D meta-
       algorithm with Tempered Aggregation, a general improper online estimation subroutine that
       achieves stronger guarantees than variants used in existing work.
     • We establish connections between E2D-TA and two existing model-based algorithms: Opti-
       mistic Model-Based Posterior Sampling, and Optimistic Maximum-Likelihood Estimation. We
       show that these two algorithms enjoy similar regret bounds as E2D-TA under similar structural
       conditions as the DEC (Appendix E).
     • We extend the DEC framework to two new learning goals: PAC learning and reward-free learn-
       ing. We define variants of the DEC, which we term as Explorative DEC (EDEC) and Reward-
       Free DEC (RFDEC), and show that they give upper and lower bounds for sample-efficient
       learning in the two settings respectively (Section 4).
     • We instantiate our results to give sample complexity guarantees for the broad problem class of
       RL with low-complexity Bellman representations. Our results recover many existing and yield
       new guarantees when specialized to concrete RL problems (Section 5).

Related work Our work is closely related to the long lines of work on sample-efficient RL (both
no-regret/PAC and reward-free), and problems/algorithms in general interactive decision making.
We review these related work in Appendix A due to the space limit.

2        P RELIMINARIES
RL as Decision Making with Structured Observations We adopt the general framework of De-
cision Making with Structured Observations (DMSO) (Foster et al., 2021), which captures broad
classes of problems such as bandits and reinforcement learning.
In DMSO, the environment is described by a model M “ pPM , RM q, where PM specifies the
distribution of the observation o P O, and RM specifies the conditional means2 of the reward vector
r P r0, 1sH , where H is the horizon length. The learner interacts with a model using a policy π P Π.
Upon executing π in M , they observe an (observation, reward) tuple po, rq „ M pπq as follows:

    1. The learner first observes an observation o „ PM pπq (also denoted as PM,π p¨q P ∆pOq).
    2. Then, the learner receives a (random) reward vector r “ prh qH     h“1 , with conditional mean
       RM poq “ pRhM poqqH  h“1 :“  E    M
                                      r„R p¨|oq rrs P r0, 1sH
                                                              and independent entries conditioned on o.
     1
         Which outputs in general a distribution of models within class rather than a single model.
     2
         Note that RM (and thus M ) only specifies the conditional mean rewards instead of the reward distributions.


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                     řH
Let f M pπq :“ EM,π r h“1 rh s denote the value (expected cumulative reward) of π under M , and
let πM :“ arg maxπPΠ f M pπq and f M pπM q denote the optimal policy and optimal value for M ,
respectively.
In this paper, we focus on RL in episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) using the DMSO
framework. An MDP M “ pH, S, A, PM , rM q can be cast as a DMSO problem as follows. The
observation o “ ps1 , a1 , . . . , sH , aH q is the full state-action trajectory (so that the observation space
is O “ pS ˆ AqH ). Upon executing policy π “ tπh : S Ñ ∆pAquhPrHs in M , the learner observes
o “ ps1 , a1 . . . , sH , aH q „ PM pπq, which sequentially samples s1 „ PM         0 p¨q, ah „ πh p¨|sh q, and
sh`1 „ PM  h p¨|s   h , ah q for all h P rHs.  The   learner  then receives  a reward  vector r “ prh qhPrHs P
r0, 1sH , where rh “ rhM psh , ah q is the (possibly random) instantaneous reward for the h-th step with
conditional mean EM rrh |os “ RhM poq “: RhM psh , ah q depending only on psh , ah q. We assume that
řH        M
   h“1 Rh psh , ah q P r0, 1s for all M and all o P O.

Learning goals We consider the online learning setting, where the learner interacts with a fixed
(unknown) ground truth model M ‹ for T episodes. Let π t P Π denote the policy executed within
the t-th episode. In general, π t may be sampled by the learner from a distribution pt P ∆pΠq before
the t-th episode starts. One main learning goal in this paper is to minimize the standard notion of
regret that measures the cumulative suboptimality of tπ t utPrT s :
                                            T           ” ‹                      ı
                                            ÿ                             ‹
                            RegDM :“             Eπt „pt f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπ t q .
                                           t“1
To achieve low regret, this paper focuses on model-based approaches, where we are given a model
class M, and we assume realizability: M ‹ P M. Additionally, throughout the majority of the
paper, we assume that the model class is finite: |M| ă 8 (or |P| ă 8 for the reward-free set-
ting in Section 4.2) for simplicity of the presentation; both can be relaxed using standard covering
arguments (see e.g. Appendix D.2), which we do when we instantiate our results to concrete RL
problems in Example 13-15.

2.1    DEC WITH RANDOMIZED REFERENCE MODELS

The Decision-Estimation Coefficient (DEC) is proposed by Foster et al. (2021) as a key quantity
characterizing the statistical complexity of sequential decision making. We consider the following
definition of DEC with randomized reference models (henceforth “DEC”):
Definition 1 (DEC with randomized reference models). The DEC of M with respect to distribution
µ P ∆pMq (with policy class Π and parameter γ ą 0) is defined as
                                                “                                           ‰
     decγ pM, µq :“ inf sup Eπ„p EM „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γDRL         2
                                                                            pM pπq, M pπqq ,
                         pP∆pΠq M PM
                                                            2
Further define decγ pMq :“ supµP∆pMq decγ pM, µq. Above, DRL   is the following squared diver-
gence function
                                                              ”›                  ›2 ı
          2                     2
        DRL  pM pπq, M pπqq :“ DH pPM pπq, PM pπqq ` Eo„PM pπq ›RM poq ´ RM poq›2 ,        (1)
        2
                      ş a        a
where DH  pP, Qq :“ p dP{dµ ´ dQ{dµq2 dµ denotes the standard Hellinger distance between
probability distributions P, Q.
Definition 1 instantiates the general definition of DECs in Foster et al. (2021, Section 4.3) with
                                 2
divergence function chosen as DRL   . The quantity decγ pM, µq measures the optimal trade-off of a
policy distribution p P ∆pΠq between two terms: low suboptimality f M pπM q ´ f M pπq, and high
                    2
information gain DRL   pM pπq, M pπqq with respect to the randomized reference model M „ µ.
                         2
The main feature of DRL      is that it treats the estimation of observations and rewards separately: It
requires the observation distribution to be estimated accurately in Hellinger distance between the
full distributions, but the reward only accurately in the squared L2 error between the conditional
means. Such a treatment is particularly suitable for RL problems, where estimating mean rewards is
easier than estimating full reward distributions3 and is also sufficient in most scenarios.
  3
    Foster et al. (2021) mostly use the standard Hellinger distance (in the tuple po, rq) in their definition of the
DEC, which cares about full reward distributions (cf. Appendix C.1 for detailed discussions).


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 E2D-TA: E STIMATION - TO -D ECISIONS WITH T EMPERED AGGREGATION
Input: Parameter γ ą 0; Learning rate ηp P p0, 21 q, ηr ą 0.
 1: Initialize µ1 Ð UnifpMq.
 2: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
                                    t              t
 3:    Set pt Ð arg minpP∆pΠq Vpγµ ppq, where Vpγµ is defined in (2).
 4:    Sample π t „ pt . Execute π t and observe pot , rt q.
 5:    Update randomized model estimator by Tempered Aggregation:
                                              ´              t        ›             ›2 ¯
                    µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp ηp log PM,π pot q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .           (3)



3   E2D WITH T EMPERED AGGREGATION
We begin by presenting our algorithm Estimation-to-Decisions with Tempered Aggregation (E2D-
TA; Algorithm 1), a unified sample-efficient algorithm for any problem with bounded DEC.

Algorithm description In each episode t, Algorithm 1 maintains a randomized model estimator
µt P ∆pMq, and uses it to obtain a distribution of policies pt P ∆pΠq by minimizing the following
risk function (cf. Line 3):
                t                        “                                           ‰
            Vpγµ ppq :“ sup Eπ„p EM „µt f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γDRL  2
                                                                      pM pπq, M pπqq .        (2)
                       M PM

This risk function instantiates the E2D meta-algorithm with randomized estimators (Foster et al.,
                                        2
2021, Algorithm 3) with divergence DRL    . The algorithm then samples a policy π t „ pt , executes
 t                 t t
π , and observes po , r q from the environment (Line 4).
Core to our algorithm is the subroutine for updating our randomized model estimator µt : Inspired
by Agarwal & Zhang (2022a), we use a Tempered Aggregation subroutine that performs an expo-
                                                                                               t
nential weights update on µt pM q using a linear combination of the log-likelihood log PM,π pot q for
                                                        › t           ›2
the observation, and the negative squared L2 loss ´ ›r ´ RM pot q›2 for the reward (cf. Line 5).
An important feature of this subroutine is the learning rate ηp ď 1{2, which is smaller compared
to e.g. Vovk’s aggregating algorithm (Vovk, 1995) which uses ηp “ 1. As we will see shortly,
this difference is crucial and allows a stronger estimation guarantee that is suitable for our purpose.
                                                             t                 t
As an intuition, exponential weights with exppηp log PM,π pot qq “ pPM,π pot qqηp with ηp ď 1{2
is equivalent to computing the tempered posterior in a Bayesian setting (Bhattacharya et al., 2019;
Alquier & Ridgway, 2020) (hence our name “tempered”), whereas ηp “ 1 computes the exact
posterior (see Appendix C.2 for a derivation).
We are now ready to present the main theoretical guarantee for Algorithm 1.
Theorem 2 (E2D with Tempered Aggregation). Choosing ηp “ ηr “ 1{3, Algorithm 1 achieves
the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                           RegDM ď T decγ pMq ` 10γ ¨ logp|M| {δq.
                                                             ␣                              (
By choosing the optimal γ ą 0, we get RegDM — inf γą0 T decγ pMq ` γ logp|M| {δq , which
         a
scales as dT logp|M| {δq if the model class satisfies decγ pMq À d{γ for some complexity mea-
sure d. To our best knowledge, this is the first unified sample-efficient algorithm for general prob-
lems with low DEC, and resolves a subtle but important technical challenge in Foster et al. (2021)
which prevented them from obtaining such a unified algorithm.
Concretely, Foster et al. (2021, Theorem 3.3 & 4.1) show that E2D with Vovk’s aggregating algo-
rithm as the estimation subroutine achieves the following regret bound with high probability:
                        T ¨ supM PcopMq decγ pM; δM q ` Opγ logp|M| {δqq,

where δM denotes point mass at M , and copMq denotes the set of all possible mixtures of models in
M. Unfortunately, this mixture causes supM PcopMq decγ pM; δM q to be potentially intractable for


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


most RL problems—Even when M={tabular MDPs}, supM PcopMq decγ pM; δM q does not admit
known bounds of the form polypH, S, A, 1{γq. Our Theorem 2 removes this bottleneck and only
scales with decγ pMq, which is much milder and admits tractable bounds for most known tractable
RL problems (Section 5); For example, decγ pMq À H 2 SA{γ for tabular MDPs (Appendix K.3.1).
See Appendix C.1 for additional details on the comparison between these two DECs.

Proof overview The proof of Theorem 2 (deferred to Appendix D.2) builds upon the analysis of
E2D meta-algorithms (Foster et al., 2021). The main new ingredient in the proof is the following
online estimation guarantee for the Tempered Aggregation subroutine (proof in Appendix D.1).
Lemma 3 (Online estimation guarantee for Tempered Aggregation). Subroutine (3) with 4ηp `ηr ă
2 achieves the following bound with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                       T
                       ÿ                  ”                     ı
                                            2       ‹ t xt t
            EstRL :“      Eπt „pt EMxt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq ď C ¨ logp|M| {δq,           (4)
                        t“1

where C depends only on pηp , ηr q. Specifically, we can choose ηp “ ηr “ 1{3 and C “ 10.
Bound (4) is stronger than the estimation bound for Vovk’s aggregating algorithm (e.g. Foster et al.
                                    2
(2021, Lemma A.15), adapted to DRL    ), which only achieves
               T
               ÿ            ”    ´                    ”      ı¯ı
                              2
                     Eπt „pt DRL   M ‹ pπ t q, EM       xt t
                                                xt „µt M pπ q    ď C ¨ logp|M| {δq,                (5)
               t“1
             ”        ı
                t t                                  xt pπ t q where M
                                                                     xt „ µt . Note that (4) is
where EM t
       x „µt  Mx pπ q   denotes the mixture model of M
                                     2
stronger than (5) by convexity of DRL   in the second argument and Jensen’s inequality. Therefore,
while both algorithms yield randomized model estimates, the guarantee of Tempered Aggregation is
stronger, which in turn allows our regret bound in Theorem 2 to scale with a smaller DEC.

Connections to other optimistic algorithms In Appendix E, we re-analyze two existing opti-
mistic algorithms: Model-based Optimistic Posterior Sampling (MOPS), and Optimistic Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (OMLE). These algorithms are similar to E2D-TA due to their use of poste-
riors/likelihoods, and we show that they achieve regret bounds similar as E2D-TA under structural
conditions similar as the DEC, thereby establishing a connection between these three algorithms.

4     PAC LEARNING AND REWARD - FREE LEARNING
We now extend the DEC framework to two alternative learning goals in RL beyond no-regret: PAC
learning, and reward-free learning. We propose new generalized definitions of the DEC and show
that they upper and lower bound the sample complexity in both settings.

4.1   PAC LEARNING VIA E XPLORATIVE DEC

In PAC learning, we only require the learner to output a near-optimal policy after T episodes are
                                                           T
finished, and does not require the executed policies tπ t ut“1 (the “exploration policies”) to be high-
quality. It is a standard result that any no-regret algorithm can be converted into a PAC algorithm
by the online-to-batch conversion (e.g. Jin et al. (2018)), so that the DEC (and the corresponding
E2D-TA algorithm) gives upper bounds for PAC learning as well. However, for certain problems,
there may exist PAC algorithms that are better than converted no-regret algorithms, for which the
DEC would not tightly capture the complexity of PAC learning.
To better capture PAC learning, we define the following Explorative DEC (EDEC):
Definition 4 (Explorative DEC). The Explorative Decision-Estimation Coefficient (EDEC) of a
model-class M with respect to µ P ∆pMq and parameter γ ą 0 is defined as
                                          “                   ‰                “ 2               ‰
edecγ pM, µq :“     inf     sup Eπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γEπ„pexp ,M „µ DRL   pM pπq, M pπqq .
                 pexp P∆pMq M PM
                 pout P∆pMq

Further, define edecγ pMq :“ supµP∆pMq edecγ pM, µq.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The main difference between the EDEC and the DEC (Definition 1) is that the inf is taken over
two different policy distributions pexp and pout , where pexp (the “exploration policy distribution”)
appears in the information gain term, and pout (the “output policy distribution”) appears in the
suboptimality term. In comparison, the DEC restricts the policy distribution to be the same in both
terms. This accurately reflects the difference between PAC learning and no-regret learning, where
in PAC learning the exploration policies are not required to be the same as the final output policy.

Algorithm and theoretical guarantee The EDEC naturally leads to the following E XPLORATIVE
                                                         µt
E2D algorithm for PAC learning. Define risk function Vppac,γ : ∆pΠq ˆ ∆pΠq Ñ R as
     t                               “                   ‰                 ”                  ı
   µ
Vppac,γ ppexp , pout q :“ sup Eπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´γEπ„pexp ,M       2          xt
                                                                     xt „µt DRL pM pπq, M pπqq .
                        M PM
                                                                                                            (6)
Our algorithm (full description in Algorithm 7) is similar as E2D-TA (Algorithm 1), except that in
                                                                   µt
each iteration, we find pptexp , ptout q that jointly minimizes Vppac,γ p¨, ¨q (Line 3), execute π t „ ptexp to
                                          T
collect data, and return ppout “ T1 t“1 ptout as the output policy after T episodes.
                                       ř

Theorem 5 (PAC learning with E XPLORATIVE E2D). Choosing ηp “ ηr “ 1{3, Algorithm 7
achieves the following PAC guarantee with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                            ‹
                                                    ” ‹ ı                            γ logp|M| {δq
         SubOpt :“ f M pπM ‹ q ´ Eπ„ppout f M pπq ď edecγ pMq ` 10                                   .
                                                                                            T
The proof can be found ´in Appendix H.1.¯ For problems with edecγ pMq À O  r pd{γq, Theorem 5
                         a                                                `            ˘
achieves SubOpt ď O  r                                                  r d log |M| {ε2 sam-
                           d log |M| {T (by tuning γ), which implies an O
ple complexity for learning an ε near-optimal policy.
In the literature, PAC RL algorithms with exploration policies different from output policies have
been designed for various problems, e.g. Jiang et al. (2017); Du et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2022a).
These algorithms typically design their exploration policies manually (e.g. concatenating the output
policy with a uniform policy over time step h) using prior knowledge about the problem. By contrast,
E XPLORATIVE E2D does not require such knowledge and automatically learns the best exploration
policy pexp P ∆pΠq by minimizing (6), thus substantially simplifying the algorithm design.

Lower bound We show that a suitably localized version of the EDEC gives an information-
theoretic lower bound for PAC learning. The form of this lower bound is similar as the regret lower
bound in terms of the (localized) DEC (Foster et al., 2021). For any model class M and M P M,
define shorthand edecγ pM, M q :“ edecγ pM, δM q where δM denotes the point mass at M .
Proposition 6 (Lower bound for PAC learning; Informal version of Proposition H.2). For any model
class M, T P Zě1 , and any algorithm A, there exists a M ‹ P M such that
                          ‹
                      EM ,A rSubOpts ě c0 ¨ max sup edecγ pM8
                                                            εγ pM q, M q,
                                            γą0
                                                 M PM
                                           8
where c0 ą 0 is an absolute constant, and Mεγ pM q denotes a certain localized subset of M around
M with radius εγ — γ{T (formal definition in (45)).
The upper and lower bounds in Theorem 5 and Proposition 6 together show that the EDEC governs
the complexity of PAC learning, similar as the DEC for no-regret learning (Foster et al., 2021).
Proposition 6 can be used to establish PAC lower bounds for concrete problems: For example, for
tabular MDPs, we show in Proposition H.3 that supM PM edecγ pM8        ε pM q, M q Á min t1, a HSA{γu
as long as ε Á HSA{γ, which when plugged  ř    into Proposition   6 recovers   the known  Ωp   HSA{T q
PAC lower bound for tabular MDPs ?  with    h rh P  r0, 1s (Domingues    et al., 2021). This implies (and
is slightly stronger than) the Ωp HSAT q regret lower bound for the same problem implied by the
DEC (Foster et al., 2021, Section 5.2.4), as no-regret is at least as hard as PAC learning.

Relationship between DEC and EDEC As the definition of EDEC takes the infimum over a
larger set than the DEC, we directly have edecγ pM, µq ď decγ pM, µq for any M and µ P ∆pMq.
The following shows that the converse also holds in an approximate sense (proof in Appendix H.3).



                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 7 (Relationship between DEC and EDEC). For any pα, γq P p0, 1q ˆ Rą0 and µ P
∆pMq, we have decγ pM, µq ď α ` p1 ´ αq edecγα{p1´αq pM, µq, and thus
                          piq        piiq ␣                           (
                edecγ pMq ď decγ pMq ď inf α ` p1 ´ αqedecγα{p1´αq pMq .
                                              αą0


Bound (i) asserts that, any problem with a bounded DEC enjoys the same bound on the EDEC, on
which E XPLORATIVE E2D achieves sample complexity no worse than that of E2D-TA (Theorem 5
& Theorem 2). On the other hand, the converse bound (ii) is in general a lossy conversion—For a
class with low EDEC, the implied DEC bound yields a slightly worse rate, similar to the standard
explore-then-commit conversion from PAC to no-regret (cf. Appendix H.3.1 for detailed discus-
sions). Indeed, there exist problems for` which
                                              ˘ the current best sample complexity through no-regret
learning and bounding the DEC is O   r 1{ε3 ; whereas PAC learning through bounding the EDEC
                  `     ˘
                r 1{ε2 (cf. Proposition 12 and the discussions thereafter).
gives a tighter O

4.2   R EWARD - FREE LEARNING VIA R EWARD -F REE DEC

In reward-free RL (Jin et al., 2020a), the goal is to optimally explore the environment without ob-
serving reward information, so that after the exploration phase, a near-optimal policy of any given
reward can be computed using the collected trajectory data alone without further interacting with
the environment.
We define the following Reward-Free DEC (RFDEC) to capture the complexity of reward-free learn-
ing. Let R denote a set of mean reward functions, P denote a set of transition dynamics, and
M :“ P ˆ R denote the class of all possible models specified by M “ pP, Rq P P ˆ R. We
assume the true transition dynamics P‹ P P.
Definition 8 (Reward-Free DEC). The Reward-Free Decision-Estimation Coefficient (RFDEC) of
model class M “ P ˆ R with respect to µ P ∆pPq and parameter γ ą 0 is defined as
                                                      !      “                          ‰
     rfdecγ pM, µq :“       inf    sup    inf     sup Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq
                        pexp P∆pΠq RPR pout P∆pΠq PPP
                                                                         “ 2              ‰)
                                                        ´ γEπ„pexp EP„µ DH    pPpπq, Ppπqq .

Further, define rfdecγ pMq :“ supµP∆pPq rfdecγ pM, µq.
The RFDEC can be viewed as a modification of the EDEC, where we further insert a supRPR to
                                                                                       2
reflect that we care about the complexity of learning any reward R P R, and use DH       pPpπq, Ppπqq
                                                                            t
as the divergence to reflect that we observe the state-action trajectories o only and not the reward.

Algorithm and theoretical guarantee Our algorithm R EWARD -F REE E2D (full description
in Algorithm 8) is an adaptation of E XPLORATIVE E2D to the reward-free setting, and works in two
                                                                                            µt
phases. In the exploration phase, we find ptexp P ∆pΠq minimizing the sup-risk supRPR Vprf,γ    p¨, Rq
in the t-th episode, where
                                                                                   ”                  ı
   µt                               “                         ‰
Vprf,γ ppexp , Rq :“ inf sup Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq ´ γEπ„pexp EPp t „µt DH
                                                                                     2        p t pπqq .
                                                                                       pPpπq, P
                  pout PPP
                                                                                                   (7)
Then, in the planning phase, for any given reward R‹ P R, we compute ptout pR‹ q as the argmin of
                   µt                                                                řT
the inf pout in Vprf,γ pptexp , R‹ q, and output the average policy ppout pR‹ q :“ T1 t“1 ptout pR‹ q.
Theorem 9 (Reward-Free E2D). Algorithm 8 achieves the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                  ! ‹ ‹                           ” ‹ ‹ ı)                          3 logp|P| {δq
SubOptrf :“ sup f P ,R pπP‹ ,R‹ q ´ Eπ„ppout pR‹ q f P ,R pπq ď rfdecγ pMq ` γ                    .
              ‹
             R PR                                                                         T

The proof can be found in Appendix I.2. For problems with rfdecγ pMq À O   r pd{γq, by tuning γ ą
                                                  `           2
                                                                ˘
0 Theorem 9 achieves SubOptrf ď ε within O      r d log |P| {ε episodes of play. The only known
such general guarantee for reward-free RL is the recently proposed RFOlive algorithm of Chen et al.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                 `                               ˘
(2022) which achieves sample complexity O      r polypHq ¨ d2 logp|F| |R|q{ε2 in the model-free
                                                              BE
setting4 . Theorem 9 can be seen as a generalization of this result to the model-based setting, with a
more general form of structural condition (RFDEC). Further, our guarantee does not further depend
on the statistical complexity (e.g. log-cardinality) of R once we assume bounded RFDEC.

Lower bound Similar as EDEC for PAC learning, the RFEC also gives the following lower bound
for reward-free learning. For any M “ P ˆ R and P P P, define shorthand rfdecγ pM, Pq :“
rfdecγ pM, δP q where δP denotes the point mass at P.
Proposition 10 (Reward-free lower bound; Informal version of Proposition I.2). For any model
class M “ P ˆ R, T P Zě1 , and any algorithm A, there exists a P‹ P P such that
                        ‹
                     EP ,A rSubOptrf s ě c0 ¨ max sup rfdecγ pM8,rf
                                                               εγ pPq, Pq,
                                                 γą0
                                                       PPP

where c0 ą 0 is an absolute constant, and M8,rf
                                           εγ pM q denotes a certain localized subset of M
around M with radius εγ — γ{T (formal definition in (50)).

5   I NSTANTIATION : RL WITH B ELLMAN R EPRESENTABILITY
In this section, we instantiate our theories to bound the three DEC variants and give unified sample-
efficient algorithms for a broad class of problems—RL with low-complexity Bellman Representa-
tions (Foster et al., 2021). Consequently, our algorithms recover existing and obtain new sample
complexity results on a wide range of concrete RL problems.
Definition 11 (Bellman Representation). The Bellman representation of pM, M q is a collection of
function classes pGhM :“ tghM ;M : M Ñ r´1, 1suqhPrHs such that:
                       ˇ        ”                                         ıˇ ˇ           ˇ
(a) For all M P M, ˇEM ,πM QM,π                              M,πM
                                       M                                   ˇ ˇ M ;M
                                             , a      r    V
                       ˇ                                                                 ˇ
                                   h     psh    h q ´  h ´  h`1   psh`1 q  ˇ ď ˇgh  pM q ˇ.
                                                   est
(b) There exists a family of estimation policies tπM,h  uM PM,hPrHs and a constant L ě 1 such that
                     ˇ 1         ˇ
                       M  ;M                        est           est
for all M, M 1 P M, ˇgh      pM qˇ ď L ¨ DRL pM pπM,h    q, M 1 pπM,h
                     ˇ           ˇ
                                                                      qq.

We say M satisfies Bellman representability with Bellman representation G :“ pGhM qM PM,hPrHs if
pM, M q admits a Bellman representation pGhM qhPrHs for all M P M.
It is shown in Foster et al. (2021) that problems admitting a low-complexity Bellman representation
G (e.g. linear or low Eluder dimension) include tractable subclasses such as (model-based versions
of) Bilinear classes (Du et al., 2021) and Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021). We show that
Bellman representability with a low complexity G implies bounded DEC/EDEC/RFDEC, which in
turn leads to concrete rates using our E2D algorithms in Section 3 and 4.
Proposition 12 (Rates for RL with low-complexity Bellman representations). Suppose M admits
a Bellman representation G with low complexity: mintepGhM , ∆q, spGhM , ∆q2 u ď O       r pdq for all
ph, M q P rHs ˆ M, where e is the Eluder dimension, s is the star number (Definition K.3 & K.4),
d ą 0 and O r p¨q contains possibly polylogp1{∆q factors. Then we have
                             est
(1) (No-regret learning) If πM,h “ πM for all M P M (the on-policy case), then decγ pMq ď
       ` 2 2 ˘                                                       a
    Or dH L {γ , and Algorithm E2D-TA achieves RegDM ď OpHL    r       dT log |M|q.
                                      est
                                                                                `          ˘
(2) (PAC learning) For any general tπM,h uM PM,hPrHs , we have edecγ pMq ď O   r dH 2 L2 {γ ,
                                                                       `                    ˘
    and Algorithm E XPLORATIVE E2D achieves SubOpt ď ε within O       r dH 2 L2 log |M| {ε2
    episodes of play.
(3) (Reward-free learning) If G is `a Bellman˘representation in a stronger sense (cf. Defini-
    tion K.8), then rfdecγ pMq ď Or dH 2 L2 {γ , and Algorithm R EWARD -F REE E2D achieves
                             ` 2 2             ˘
    SubOptrf ď ε within O   r dH L log |P| {ε2 episodes of play.
   4
     Where F denotes the value class, and R denotes the reward class, and dBE denotes the Bellman-Eluder
dimension of a certain class of reward-free Bellman errors induced by F.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The proof can be found in Appendix K.2. To our best knowledge, results (2)(3) above are the first
such results with
               ` DEC-type
                     ˘      structural assumptions. In particular, when the estimation policies are
             r 1{ε2 PAC sample complexity in (2) through bounded EDEC improves over Foster
general, the O
                                                                                              `    ˘
et al. (2021, Theorem 7.1 & F.2) which uses the conversion to DEC and results in an O      r 1{ε3
sample complexity. The no-regret result in (1) also improves over the result of Foster et al. (2021)
as a unified algorithm without requiring proper online estimation oracles which is often problem-
specific. We remark that a similar bound as (1) also holds for pscγ (c.f. Definition E.1), and for
mlecγ (c.f. Definition E.4) assuming bounded Eluder dimension epGhM , ∆q ď O      r pde q, and thus
MOPS and OMLE algorithms achieve similar regret bounds as E2D-TA (cf. Appendix K.1).
Examples Proposition 12 can be specialized to a wide range of concrete RL problems, for which
we give a few illustrating examples here (problem definitions and proofs in Appendix K.3). We em-
phasize that, except for feeding the different model class M’s into the Tempered Aggregation sub-
routines, the rates below (for each learning goal) are obtained through a single unified algorithm
without further problem-dependent designs.
                                                                                 ´?             ¯
Example 13. For tabular MDPs, E2D-TA achieves regret RegDM ď O                r     S 3 A2 H 3 T , and
                                                                         ´a                ¯
R EWARD -F REE E2D achieves reward-free guarantee SubOptrf ď O         r     S 3 A2 H 3 {T . ♢
                                                ?
Both  rates  are  worse  then  the optimal   r HSAT q regret bound (Azar et al., 2017)5 and
                                             Op
   a
 r polypHqS 2 A{T q reward-free bound (Jin et al., 2020a). However, our rates are obtained
Op
through unified algorithms that is completely agnostic to the tabular structure.
Example 14. For linear mixture MDPs ´(Ayoub et ¯al., 2020) with a d-dimensional feature map,
                                             ?
E2D-TA achieves regret RegDM ď O         r     d2 H 3 T , and R EWARD -F REE E2D achieves reward-
                                  ´a           ¯
free guarantee SubOptrf ď O     r    d2 H 3 {T . ♢
                                                  `         ˘
                                                r d2 H 3 {ε2 for ε-near optimal reward-free learn-
The later result implies a sample complexity of O
ing in linear mixture
               ` 2     MDPs,
                         ˘    which only has an additional H 2 factor over the current best sample
complexity O r d H{ε2 of Chen et al. (2021)5 .
Example 15. For low-rank MDPs with unknown d-dimensional features pϕ, ψq P Φ ˆ Ψ (i.e.
the FLAMBE setting (Agarwal et al., 2020)),  ´aA actions, and rewards R¯ P R, E XPLORATIVE
E2D achieves PAC guarantee SubOpt ď O      r     dAH 2 logp|Φ| |Ψ| |R|q{T , and E2D-RF achieves
                                       ´a                        ¯
reward-free guarantee SubOptrf ď O   r      dAH 2 logp|Φ| |Ψ|q{T . ♢

Our PAC result matches the best known sample complexity achieved by e.g. the V-Type Golf Al-
gorithm of Jin et al. (2021). For reward-free learning, our linear in d dependence improves over the
current best d2 dependence achieved by the RFOlive algorithm (Chen et al., 2022), and we do not
require linearity or low complexity assumptions on the class of reward functions R made in existing
work (Wang et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2022). However, we remark that they handle a slightly more
general setting where only the Φ class is known, due to their model-free approach.
An important subclass of low-rank MDPs is Block MDPs (Du et al., 2019). In (stationary-
                  ´a with O states, A actions,
transition) Block MDPs                      ¯ and S latent states, R EWARD -F REE E2D achieves
SubOptrf ď O    r    pSOA ` S 3 A2 qH 2 {T , which improves over the result of Jedra et al. (2022)
in the S dependence, and does not require a certain reachability assumption made in their result.

6       C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes unified sample-efficient algorithms for no-regret, PAC, and reward-free rein-
forcement learning, by developing new complexity measures and stronger algorithms within the
DEC framework. We believe our work opens up many important questions, such as developing
model-free analogs of this framework, extending to other learning goals (such as multi-agent RL),
and computational efficiency of our algorithms.
    5
        Rescaled to total reward within r0, 1s.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori and Gergely Neu. Online learning in mdps with side information. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1406.6812, 2014.
Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Model-based rl with optimistic posterior sampling: Structural
  conditions and sample complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07659, 2022a.
Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Non-linear reinforcement learning in large action spaces: Struc-
  tural conditions and sample-efficiency of posterior sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08248,
  2022b.
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1638–1646. PMLR, 2014.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural com-
  plexity and representation learning of low rank mdps. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:20095–20107, 2020.
Shipra Agrawal and Randy Jia. Optimistic posterior sampling for reinforcement learning: worst-
  case regret bounds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Pierre Alquier and James Ridgway. Concentration of tempered posteriors and of their variational
  approximations. The Annals of Statistics, 48(3):1475–1497, 2020.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multi-
  armed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Peter Auer, Ronald Ortner, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved rates for the stochastic continuum-
  armed bandit problem. In International Conference on Computational Learning Theory, pp.
  454–468. Springer, 2007.
Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463–474. PMLR, 2020.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR, 2017.
Alina Beygelzimer, John Langford, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandit
  algorithms with supervised learning guarantees. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 19–26. JMLR Workshop and Conference
  Proceedings, 2011.
Anirban Bhattacharya, Debdeep Pati, and Yun Yang. Bayesian fractional posteriors. The Annals of
  Statistics, 47(1):39–66, 2019.
Ronen I Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-max-a general polynomial time algorithm for near-
  optimal reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Oct):213–231, 2002.
Sébastien Bubeck and Ronen Eldan. Multi-scale exploration of convex functions and bandit convex
   optimization. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 583–589. PMLR, 2016.
Sébastien Bubeck, Ofer Dekel, Tomer Koren, and Yuval Peres. Bandit convex optimization:zsqrtt
   regret in one dimension. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 266–278. PMLR, 2015.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy opti-
  mization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1283–1294. PMLR, 2020.
Jinglin Chen, Aditya Modi, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. On the sta-
   tistical efficiency of reward-free exploration in non-linear rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10770,
   2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaoyu Chen, Jiachen Hu, Lin F Yang, and Liwei Wang. Near-optimal reward-free exploration for
  linear mixture mdps with plug-in solver. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03244, 2021.

Wei Chu, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandits with linear payoff func-
 tions. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 208–214. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.

Christoph Dann and Emma Brunskill. Sample complexity of episodic fixed-horizon reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.

Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds
  for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.

Christoph Dann, Lihong Li, Wei Wei, and Emma Brunskill. Policy certificates: Towards account-
  able reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1507–1516.
  PMLR, 2019.

Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre Ménard, Emilie Kaufmann, and Michal Valko. Episodic rein-
 forcement learning in finite mdps: Minimax lower bounds revisited. In Algorithmic Learning
 Theory, pp. 578–598. PMLR, 2021.

David L Donoho and Richard C Liu. Geometrizing rates of convergence. Annals of, 1987.

David L Donoho and Richard C Liu. Geometrizing rates of convergence, ii. The Annals of Statistics,
  pp. 633–667, 1991a.

David L Donoho and Richard C Liu. Geometrizing rates of convergence, iii. The Annals of Statistics,
  pp. 668–701, 1991b.

Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient rl with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1665–1674. PMLR, 2019.

Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826–2836. PMLR, 2021.

Simon S. Du, Sham M. Kakade, Ruosong Wang, and Lin F. Yang. Is a good representation suf-
  ficient for sample efficient reinforcement learning? In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1genAVKPB.

Dylan Foster and Alexander Rakhlin. Beyond ucb: Optimal and efficient contextual bandits with
  regression oracles. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3199–3210. PMLR,
  2020.

Dylan J Foster, Alexander Rakhlin, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Instance-dependent
  complexity of contextual bandits and reinforcement learning: A disagreement-based perspective.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03104, 2020.

Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.

Dylan J Foster, Alexander Rakhlin, Ayush Sekhari, and Karthik Sridharan. On the complexity of
  adversarial decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13063, 2022.

Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(51):1563–1600, 2010. URL http://
  jmlr.org/papers/v11/jaksch10a.html.

Yassir Jedra, Junghyun Lee, Alexandre Proutière, and Se-Young Yun. Nearly optimal latent state
  decoding in block mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08480, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.
Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably effi-
  cient? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration
  for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4870–4879.
  PMLR, 2020a.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020b.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406–13418, 2021.
Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Adaptive reward-free exploration. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 865–
  891. PMLR, 2021.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time. Ma-
 chine learning, 49(2):209–232, 2002.
Robert Kleinberg. Nearly tight bounds for the continuum-armed bandit problem. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 17, 2004.
Robert Kleinberg, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Eli Upfal. Bandits and experts in metric spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1312.1277, 2013.
John Langford and Tong Zhang. The epoch-greedy algorithm for multi-armed bandits with side
  information. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Tor Lattimore. Improved regret for zeroth-order adversarial bandit convex optimisation. Mathemat-
  ical Statistics and Learning, 2(3):311–334, 2020.
Tor Lattimore and Andras Gyorgy. Mirror descent and the information ratio. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, pp. 2965–2992. PMLR, 2021.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Exploration by optimisation in partial monitoring. In Confer-
  ence on Learning Theory, pp. 2488–2515. PMLR, 2020.
Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gellert Weisz. Learning with good feature representations in
  bandits and in rl with a generative model. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5662–5670. PMLR, 2020.
Qinghua Liu, Tiancheng Yu, Yu Bai, and Chi Jin. A sharp analysis of model-based reinforce-
  ment learning with self-play. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7001–7010.
  PMLR, 2021.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08967, 2022a.
Qinghua Liu, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning of partially
  observable markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01315, 2022b.
Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Fast active learning for pure exploration in reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7608. PMLR, 2021.
Akshay Mete, Rahul Singh, Xi Liu, and PR Kumar. Reward biased maximum likelihood estimation
  for reinforcement learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 815–827. PMLR, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dipendra Misra, Mikael Henaff, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Kinematic state ab-
  straction and provably efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 6961–6971. PMLR, 2020.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.

Aditya Modi and Ambuj Tewari. No-regret exploration in contextual reinforcement learning. In
  Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 829–838. PMLR, 2020.

Aditya Modi, Nan Jiang, Satinder Singh, and Ambuj Tewari. Markov decision processes with con-
  tinuous side information. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 597–618. PMLR, 2018.

Aditya Modi, Nan Jiang, Ambuj Tewari, and Satinder Singh. Sample complexity of reinforcement
  learning using linearly combined model ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2010–2020. PMLR, 2020.

Aditya Modi, Jinglin Chen, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. Model-free
  representation learning and exploration in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07035,
  2021.

Shuang Qiu, Jieping Ye, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. On reward-free rl with kernel and neural
  function approximations: Single-agent mdp and markov game. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 8737–8747. PMLR, 2021.

Daniel Russo. Worst-case regret bounds for exploration via randomized value functions. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.

Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. An information-theoretic analysis of thompson sampling. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2442–2471, 2016.

Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via information-directed sampling.
  Operations Research, 66(1):230–252, 2018.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 rl in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2898–2933. PMLR, 2019.

William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of
 the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4):285–294, 1933.

Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline rl
 in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652, 2021.

VG Vovk. A game of prediction with expert advice. In Proceedings of the eighth annual conference
 on Computational learning theory, pp. 51–60, 1995.

Andrew J Wagenmaker, Yifang Chen, Max Simchowitz, Simon Du, and Kevin Jamieson. Reward-
  free rl is no harder than reward-aware rl in linear markov decision processes. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22430–22456. PMLR, 2022.

Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, Lin Yang, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. On reward-free reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:17816–17826, 2020a.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123–6135, 2020b.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in re-
  inforcement learning with generalized linear function approximation. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  CBmJwzneppz.
Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Sample-optimal parametric q-learning using linearly additive features.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6995–7004. PMLR, 2019.
Andrea Zanette and Emma Brunskill. Tighter problem-dependent regret bounds in reinforcement
  learning without domain knowledge using value function bounds. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7304–7312. PMLR, 2019.
Andrea Zanette, David Brandfonbrener, Emma Brunskill, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric.
  Frequentist regret bounds for randomized least-squares value iteration. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1954–1964. PMLR, 2020a.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978–10989. PMLR, 2020b.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Provably ef-
  ficient reward-agnostic navigation with linear value iteration. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:11756–11766, 2020c.
Tong Zhang. Feel-good thompson sampling for contextual bandits and reinforcement learning. SIAM
  Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 4(2):834–857, 2022.
Weitong Zhang, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Reward-free model-based reinforcement learn-
 ing with linear function approximation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 1582–1593, 2021a.
Xuezhou Zhang, Yuzhe Ma, and Adish Singla. Task-agnostic exploration in reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11734–11743, 2020a.
Zihan Zhang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Almost optimal model-free reinforcement learningvia
  reference-advantage decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  15198–15207, 2020b.
Zihan Zhang, Simon Du, and Xiangyang Ji. Near optimal reward-free reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12402–12412. PMLR, 2021b.
Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Csaba Szepesvari. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learn-
  ing for linear mixture markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4532–
  4576. PMLR, 2021.


A    R ELATED WORK
Sample-efficient reinforcement learning Sample-efficient RL has been extensively studied in the
basic model of tabular MDPs (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Jaksch et al.,
2010; Dann & Brunskill, 2015; Azar et al., 2017; Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Russo,
2019; Dann et al., 2019; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b; Domingues et al., 2021).
The minimax sample complexity for finite-horizon tabular MDPs has been achieved by both model-
based and model-free approaches (Azar et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020b). When there is function
approximation, the sample-efficiency of RL has been studied under concrete assumptions about the
function class and/or the MDP, such as (various forms of) linear or low-rank MDPs (Yang & Wang,
2019; Du et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020b; Zanette et al., 2020b; Cai et al., 2020; Lattimore et al., 2020;
Agarwal et al., 2020; Ayoub et al., 2020; Modi et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021), generalized linear


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


function approximation (Wang et al., 2021), Block MDPs (Du et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2020), and
so on. More general structural conditions and algorithms has been studied (Russo & Van Roy, 2013;
Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020b) and later unified by frameworks such as
Bilinear Class (Du et al., 2021) and Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021).
Foster et al. (2021) propose the DEC as a complexity measure for interactive decision making prob-
lems, and develop the E2D meta-algorithm as a general model-based algorithm for problems within
their DMSO framework (which covers bandits and RL). The DEC framework is further generalized
in (Foster et al., 2022) to capture adversarial decision making problems. The DEC has close con-
nections to the modulus of continuity (Donoho & Liu, 1987; 1991a;b), information ratio (Russo &
Van Roy, 2016; 2018; Lattimore & Gyorgy, 2021), and Exploration-by-optimization (Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020). Our work builds on and extends the DEC framework: We propose the E2D-
TA algorithm as a general and strong instantiation of the E2D meta-algorithm, and generalize the
DEC to capture PAC and reward-free learning.

Other general algorithms Posterior sampling (or Thompson Sampling) is another general pur-
pose algorithm for interactive decision making (Thompson, 1933; Russo, 2019; Agrawal & Jia,
2017; Zanette et al., 2020a; Zhang, 2022; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022a;b). Frequentist regret bounds
for posterior sampling are established in tabular MDPs (Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Russo, 2019) and
linear MDPs (Russo, 2019; Zanette et al., 2020a). Zhang (2022) proves regret bounds of a pos-
terior sampling algorithm for RL with general function approximation, which is then generalized
in Agarwal & Zhang (2022a;b). Our Appendix E.1 discusses the connection between the MOPS
algorithm of Agarwal & Zhang (2022a) and E2D-TA. The OMLE (Optimistic Maximum Likeli-
hood Estimation) algorithm is studied in (Liu et al., 2022a;b) for Partially Observable Markov De-
cision Process; however, the algorithm itself is general and can be used for any problem within the
DMSO framework; We provide such a generalization and discuss the connections in Appendix E.2.
Maximum-likelihood based algorithms for RL are also studied in (Mete et al., 2021; Agarwal et al.,
2020; Uehara et al., 2021).

Reward-free RL The reward-free learning framework is proposed by (Jin et al., 2020a) and well-
studied in both tabular and function approximation settings (Jin et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020a;
Kaufmann et al., 2021; Ménard et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020a; Zanette et al., 2020c; Agarwal et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2021; Modi et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021a;b; Qiu et al., 2021; Wagenmaker et al.,
2022). The recent work of Chen et al. (2022) proposes a general algorithm for problems with low
(reward-free version of) Bellman-Eluder dimension. Our Reward-Free DEC framework generalizes
many of these results by offering a unified structural condition and algorithm for reward-free RL
with a model class.

Other problems covered by DMSO Besides multi-armed bandits and RL, the DMSO framework
of (Foster et al., 2021) (and thus all our theories as well) can handle other problems such as con-
textual bandits (Auer et al., 2002; Langford & Zhang, 2007; Chu et al., 2011; Beygelzimer et al.,
2011; Agarwal et al., 2014; Foster & Rakhlin, 2020; Foster et al., 2020), contextual reinforcement
learning (Abbasi-Yadkori & Neu, 2014; Modi et al., 2018; Dann et al., 2019; Modi & Tewari, 2020),
online convex bandits (Kleinberg, 2004; Bubeck et al., 2015; Bubeck & Eldan, 2016; Lattimore,
2020), and non-parametric bandits (Kleinberg, 2004; Auer et al., 2007; Kleinberg et al., 2013). In-
stantiating our theories to these settings would be an interesting direction for future work.


B     T ECHNICAL TOOLS

B.1    S TRONG DUALITY

The following strong duality result for variational forms of bilinear functions is standard, e.g. ex-
tracted from the proof of Foster et al. (2021, Proposition 4.2).
Theorem B.1 (Strong duality). Suppose that X , Y are two topological spaces, such that X is
Hausdorff6 and Y is finite (with discrete topology). Then for a bi-continuous function f : X ˆY Ñ R
    6
      The Hausdorff space requirement of X is only needed to ensure that ∆pX q contains all finitely supported
distributions on X .


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that is uniformly bounded, it holds that
             sup      inf    Ex„X Ey„Y rf px, yqs “       inf         sup Ex„X Ey„Y rf px, yqs.
           XP∆pX q Y P∆pYq                              Y P∆pYq XP∆pX q


In this paper, for most applications of Theorem B.1, we take X “ M and Y “ Π. We will as-
sume that Π is finite, which is a natural assumption. For example, in tabular MDPs, it is enough to
consider deterministic Markov policies and there are only finitely many of them. Also, the finite-
ness assumption in Theorem B.1 can be relaxed—The strong duality holds as long as both X , Y is
Hausdorff, and the function class tf px, ¨q : Y Ñ RuxPX has a finite ρ-covering for all ρ ą 0. Such
relaxed assumption is always satisfied in our applications.

B.2   C ONCENTRATION INEQUALITIES

We will use the following standard concentration inequality in the paper.
Lemma B.2 (Foster et al. (2021, Lemma A.4)). For any sequence of real-valued random variables
pXt qtďT adapted to a filtration pFt qtďT , it holds that with probability at least 1 ´ δ, for all t ď T ,
                       t
                       ÿ                                        t
                                                                ÿ             `    ˘
                             ´ log E r expp´Xs q| Fs´1 s ď            Xs ` log δ ´1 .
                       s“1                                      s“1


B.3   P ROPERTIES OF THE H ELLINGER DISTANCE

Recall that for two distributions P, Q that are absolutely continuous with respect to µ, their squared
Hellinger distance is defined as
                                           ż a             a
                               2
                             DH pP, Qq :“ p dP{dµ ´ dQ{dµq2 dµ.

We will use the following properties of the Hellinger distance.
Lemma B.3 (Foster et al. (2021, Lemma A.11, A.12)). For distributions P, Q defined on X and
function h : X Ñ r0, Rs, we have
                                          b
              |EP rhpXqs ´ EQ rhpXqs| ď 2RpEP rhpXqs ` EQ rhpXqsq ¨ DH 2 pP, Qq.

                                       2
Therefore, EP rhpXqs ď 3EQ rhpXqs ` 2RDH pP, Qq. Also, for function h : X Ñ r´R, Rs, we have
                                     b
            |EP rhpXqs ´ EQ rhpXqs| ď 8RpEP r|hpXq|s ` EQ r|hpXq|sq ¨ DH  2 pP, Qq.


Lemma B.4. For any pair of random variable pX, Y q, it holds that
                            “ 2`              ˘‰        2
                   EX„PX DH      PY |X , QY |X ď 2DH      pPX,Y , QX,Y q .
Conversely, it holds that
               2                    2
                                                         “ 2`              ˘‰
              DH pPX,Y , QX,Y q ď 3DH pPX , QX q ` 2EX„PX DH  PY |X , QY |X .

Proof. Throughout the proof, we slightly abuse notations and write a distribution P and its density
dP{dµ interchangeably. By the definition of the Hellinger distance, we have
                                             ż
                1 2                             a       a
                  DH pPX,Y , QX,Y q “ 1 ´        PX,Y QX,Y
                2
                     ż a         b        b
              “1´         PX QX PY |X QY |X
                     ż
                        P X ` QX b         b
              ě1´                     PY |X QY |X
                            2
                 ż
                   PX ` QX ´        b        b        ¯
              “                1 ´ PY |X QY |X
                        2
                 1         “ 2`                ˘‰ 1           “ 2`               ˘‰
              “ EX„PX DH        PY |X , QY |X ` EX„QX DH            PY |X , QY |X .
                 4                                  4

                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly,
                                   ż a             ż a
         1 2                                                       b
           DH pPX,Y , QX,Y q “ 1 ´      PX QX `        PX QX p1 ´ PY |X QY |X q
         2
                                                  ż
                                1 2                  PX ` QX 1 2 `                 ˘
                             ď DH pPX , QX q `                 ¨ DH PY |X , QY |X ,
                                2                       2       2
and hence
               2                   2               1       “ 2`                ˘‰
             DH  pPX,Y , QX,Y q ďDH   pPX , QX q ` EX„PX DH      PY |X , QY |X
                                                   2
                                     1        “ 2`              ˘‰
                                  ` EX„QX DH PY |X , QY |X
                                     2                      “ 2`                ˘‰
                                     2
                                ď3DH   pPX , QX q ` 2EX„PX DH     PY |X , QY |X ,
                                                   2
where the last inequality is due to Lemma B.3 and DH P r0, 2s.

                             2
Next, recall the divergence DRL defined in (1):
                                                            „›               ›2 ȷ
         2                    2
        DRL pM pπq, M pπqq “ DH pPM pπq, PM pπqq ` Eo„PM pπq ›RM poq ´ RM poq› .
                                                             ›               ›
                                                                                            2

Proposition B.5. Recall that po, rq „ M pπq is the observation and reward vectors as described
in Section 2, with o „ PM pπq and r „ RM p¨|oq. Suppose that r P r0, 1sH almost surely and
}RM poq ´ RM poq}22 ď 2 for all o P O. Then it holds that
                            2                       2
                                                       `             ˘
                           DRL pM pπq, M pπqq ď 5DH      M pπq, M pπq ,
         2
           `             ˘
where DH     M pπq, M pπq is the standard squared Hellinger distance between RM b PM pπq and
RM b PM pπq.

                                                                     M            M      2
    ´ To prove this
Proof.               ¯ proposition, we need to bound }R poq ´ R poq}2 in terms of
  2
DH    RM poq, RM poq . We denote by RM      h poq the distribution of rh . Then by independence, we
have
                    1 2´ M                   ¯ źˆ             1 2´ M                 ¯˙
                                       M                                       M
                1 ´ DH R poq, R poq “                   1 ´ DH Rh poq, Rh poq
                    2                               h
                                                              2
                                                  źˆ          1 2 ´ M                 ¯˙
                                                                                M
                                               ď        1 ´ DTV Rh poq, Rh poq
                                                    h
                                                              2
                                                      ˆ                           ˇ2 ˙
                                                  ź           1 ˇˇ
                                                        1 ´ ˇRhM poq ´ RhM poqˇ
                                                                                  ˇ
                                               ď
                                                    h
                                                              2
                                                      ˆ                          ›2 ˙
                                                            1 ››
                                               ď exp ´ ›RM poq ´ RM poq›
                                                                                 ›
                                                            2                     2
                                                      1 ›› M                 ›2
                                               ď1 ´ ›R poq ´ RM poq› ,
                                                                             ›
                                                      4                       2

where the last inequality use the fact that e´x ď 1 ´ x{2 for all x P r0, 1s. Then by Lemma B.4,
                        „›                     ›2 ȷ                ”                       ı
             Eo„PM pπq ›R poq ´ R poq› ď2Eo„PM pπq DH pRM poq, RM poqq2
                          › M            M     ›
                                                2
                                                          2
                                                            `             ˘
                                                    ď4DH      M pπq, M pπq .
                                                            2
                                                                                         `              ˘
Combining the above estimation with the fact that DH           pPM pπq, PM pπqq ď DH   2
                                                                                           M pπq, M pπq
(data-processing inequality) completes the proof.

                                             2
The following lemma shows that, although DRL     is not symmetric with respect to its two arguments
                                  M
(due to the expectation over o „ P pπq in the second term), it is almost symmetric within a constant
multiplicative factor:


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma B.6. For any two models M, M and any policy π, we have
                                 2                     2
                                DRL pM pπq, M pπqq ď 5DRL pM pπq, M pπqq.

Proof. For any function h : O Ñ r0, 2s, by Lemma B.3 we have
                                                          2
                 Eo„PM pπq rhpoqs ď 3Eo„PM pπq rhpoqs ` 4DH pPM pπq, PM pπqq.
                                    ›                 ›2
Therefore, we can take h as hpoq :“ ›RM poq ´ RM poq› , and the bound above gives
                                    ›                 ›
                                                                 2
       2
      DH pPM pπq, PM pπqq ` Eo„PM pπq rhpoqs ď 5D  2    M           M
                                                   H pP pπq, P pπqq ` 5Eo„PM pπq rhpoqs,
                                               loooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooon
      loooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooon
                      2 pM pπq,M pπqq                                   2 pM pπq,M pπqq
                                                                     “5DRL
                     DRL

which is the desired result.
Lemma B.7. For any two models M, M and any policy π, we have
                   ˇ               ˇ ?
                   ˇ M
                   ˇf pπq ´ f M pπqˇ ď H ` 1 ¨ DRL pM pπq, M pπqq.
                                   ˇ


Proof. We have
           ˇ                ˇ ˇ          “      ‰           ”      ıˇ
           ˇ M
           ˇf pπq ´ f M pπqˇ “ ˇEo„PM pπq RM poq ´ Eo„PM pπq RM poq ˇ
                            ˇ ˇ                                     ˇ
            ˇ       ”                 ıˇ ˇ         ”       ı            ”    ıˇ
        ď ˇEo„PM pπq RM poq ´ RM poq ˇ ` ˇEo„PM pπq RM poq ´ Eo„PM pπq RM poq ˇ
            ˇ                          ˇ ˇ                                    ˇ

        piq         ”? ›                   › ı
        ď Eo„PM pπq H ›RM poq ´ RM poq› ` DH pPM pπq, PM pπqq
                          ›                ›
                                            2
              d       ˆ          „›
        piiq                                      ›2 ȷ                    ˙
                                  › M          M          2   M
         ď pH ` 1q Eo„PM pπq ›R poq ´ R poq› ` DH pP pπq, P pπqq
                                                  ›                   M
                                                                 2
              ?
          “       H ` 1 ¨ DRL pM pπq, M pπqq.
Above, (i) uses the fact that RM poq P r0, 1s almost surely, and the bound
   ˇ          ”       ı             ”         ıˇ
   ˇEo„PM pπq RM poq ´ Eo„PM pπq RM poq ˇ ď DTV pPM pπq, PM pπqq ď DH pPM pπq, PM pπqq;
   ˇ                                           ˇ
                                ?             a
(ii) uses the Cauchy inequality Ha ` b ď pH ` 1qpa2 ` b2 q and the fact that the squared mean
is upper bounded by the second moment.

C     D ISCUSSIONS ABOUT DEC DEFINITIONS AND AGGREGATION
      ALGORITHMS

C.1    DEC DEFINITIONS

Here we discuss the differences between the DEC definitions used within our E2D-TA and within
the E2D algorithm of Foster et al. (2021, Section 4.1) which uses Vovk’s aggregating algorithm as
the subroutine (henceforth E2D-VA). Recall that the regret bound of E2D-TA scales with decγ pMq
defined in Definition 1 (cf. Theorem 2).
We first remark that all the following DECs considered in Foster et al. (2021) are defined in terms
                                      2
of the squared Hellinger distance DH    pM pπq, M pπqq between the full distribution of po, rq induced
                                                   2
by models M and M under π, instead of our DRL         which is defined in terms of squared Hellinger
                                                                                            2
distance in o and squared L2 loss in (the mean of) r. However, all these results hold for DRL   as well
with the DEC definition and algorithms changed correspondingly. For clarity, we state their results
              2
in terms of DRL  , which will not affect the essence of the comparisons.
Foster et al. (2021, Theorem 3.3 & 4.1) show that E2D-VA achieves the following regret bound
with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                                 ´                                        ¯
                  RegDM À O T ¨ supµPcopMq decγ pM; δµ q ` γ logp|M| {δq ,


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
         supµPcopMq decγ pM; δµ q
                                                                                                    (8)
                                    ”                           ´            “     ‰¯ı
        “     sup     inf   sup Eπ„p f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γDRL
                                                             2
                                                                 M pπq, EM „µ M pπq ,
             µPcopMq pP∆pΠq M PM

where EM „µ rM pπqs denotes the mixture distribution of M pπq for M „ µ, and copMq denotes
the set of all mixtures of models in M (which can be also identified with ∆pMq, the set of all
probability distributions over M).
Compared with decγ , Eq. (8) is different only in the place where the expectation EM „µ is taken. As
  2
DRL  is convex in the
                    ”›second argument (by   convexity of the squared Hellinger distance and linearity
                                        ›2 ı
of E     Eo„PM pπq ›RM poq ´ RM poq› in µ), by Jensen’s inequality, we have
      M „µ                                   2

                                    sup      decγ pM; δµ q ě decγ pMq.
                                   µPcopMq

Unfortunately, bounding supµPcopMq decγ pM; δµ q requires handling the information gain with re-
spect to the mixture model EM „µ rM pπqs, which is in general much harder than bounding the
decγ pMq which only requires handling the expected information gain with respect to a proper
model M pπq over M „ µ. For general RL problems with H ą 1, it is unclear whether
supµPcopMq decγ pM; δµ q admit bounds of the form d{γ where d is some complexity measure (Fos-
ter et al., 2021, Section 7.1.3). By contrast, our decγ pMq can be bounded for broad classes of
problems (e.g. Section 5).
We also remark that an alternative approach considered in Foster et al. (2021, Theorem 4.1) depends
on the following definition of DEC with respect to deterministic reference models:
                                             “                            2
                                                                                          ‰
        decγ pM, M q :“ inf       sup Eπ„p fM pπM q ´ fM pπq ´ γDRL         pM pπq, M pπqq ,
                            pP∆pMq M PM

and the DEC of the model class M is simply decγ pMq :“ supM PM decγ pM, M q. As M (viewed
as the set of all point masses) is a subset of copMq, by definition we have
                                          decγ pMq ď decγ pMq,
therefore decγ pMq can be bounded as long as decγ pMq can. However, that approach requires the
                                                                xt P M with bounded Hellinger
online model estimation subroutine to output a proper estimator M
error, which—unlike Tempered Aggregation (for the improper case)—requires problem-specific de-
signs using prior knowledge about M and is unclear how to construct for general M.

C.2     AGGREGATION ALGORITHMS AS POSTERIOR COMPUTATIONS

We illustrate that Tempered Aggregation is equivalent to computing the tempered posterior (or
power posterior) (Bhattacharya et al., 2019; Alquier & Ridgway, 2020) in the following vanilla
Bayesian setting.
Consider a model class M associated with a prior µ1 P ∆pMq, and each model specifies a distri-
bution PM p¨q P ∆pOq of observations o P O. Suppose we receive observations o1 , . . . , ot , . . . in a
sequential fashion. In this setting, the Tempered Aggregation updates
                                            `              ˘          `       ˘ηp
               µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp ηp log PM pot q “ µt pM q ¨ PM pot q .
Therefore, for all t ě 1,
                                                         ˜              ¸ηp
                                                             t
                                                             ź
                              µt`1 pM q 9M µ1 pM q ¨             PM pos q     .
                                                         s“1

If ηp “ 1 as in Vovk’s aggregating algorithm (Vovk, 1995), by Bayes’ rule, the above µt`1 is exactly
the posterior M |o1:t . As we chose ηp ď 1{2 ă 1 in Tempered Aggregation, µt`1 gives the tempered
posterior, which is a slower variant of the posterior where data likelihoods are weighed less than in
the exact posterior.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 T EMPERED AGGREGATION
Input: Learning rate ηp P p0, 12 q, ηr ą 0.
 1: Initialize µ1 Ð UnifpMq.
 2: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
 3:    Receive pπ t , ot , rt q.
 4:    Update randomized model estimator:
                                               ´                          ›             ›2 ¯
                     µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp ηp log PM pot |π t q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .                         (10)



D       P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3

D.1     T EMPERED AGGREGATION

In this section, we analyze the Tempered Aggregation algorithm for finite model classes. For the
sake of both generality and simplicity, we state our results in the following general setup of online
model estimation. Lemma 3 (restated in Corollary D.2) then follows as a direct corollary.

Setup: Online model estimation In an online model estimation problem, the learner is given
a model set M, a context space Π, an observation space O, a family of conditional distributions
pPM p¨|¨q : Π Ñ ∆pOqqM PM 7 , a family of vector-valued mean reward functions pRM : O Ñ
r0, 1sH qM PM . The environment fix a ground truth model M ‹ P M; for shorthand, let P‹ :“
    ‹            ‹
PM , R‹ :“ RM . For simplicity (in a measure-theoretic sense) we assume that O is finite8 .
At each step t P rT s, the learner first determines a randomized model estimator (i.e. a distribution
over models) µt P ∆pMq. Then, the environment reveals the context π t P Π (that is in general ran-
dom and possibly depends on µt and history information), generates the observation ot „ P‹ p¨|π t q,
and finally generates the reward rt P Rd (which is a random vector) such that E r rt | ot s “ R‹ pot q.
The information pπ t , ot , rt q may then be used by the learner to obtain the updated estimator µt`1 .
For any M P M, we consider the following estimation error of model M with respect to the true
model, at step t:
                             ”                           ˘ ›                    ›2 ı
                  ErrtM :“ Et DH
                               2
                                 ` M
                                  P p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t q ` ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 ,      (9)

where Et is taken with respect to all randomness after prediction µt is made9 —in particular it takes
the expectation over pπ t , ot q. Note that ErrtM ‹ “ 0 by definition.

Algorithm and theoretical guarantee The Tempered Aggregation Algorithm is presented in Al-
gorithm 2. Here we present the case with a finite model class (|M| ă 8); In Appendix D.3 we treat
the more general case of infinite model classes using covering arguments.
                                                                                     t      2
Theorem D.1 (Tempered Aggregation).
                             t
                                   › M t Suppose       › ă 8, the reward vector r is σ -sub-
                                                     |M|
                                                  ‹ t ›
Gaussian conditioned on o , and R po q ´ R po q 2 ď D almost surely for all t P rT s. Then,
                                   ›
Algorithm 2 with any learning rate ηp , ηr ą 0 such that 2ηp ` 2σ 2 ηr ă 1 achieves the following
with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                                      T
                                      ÿ
                                            EM „µt ErrtM ď C logp|M| {δq,
                                                  “     ‰
                                      t“1
                     !                 )                   2     2
                   1        1
where C “ max     ηp , p1´2ηp qc1 , c
                                        1 :“
                                              p1 ´ e´cp1´2σ cqD q{D2 and c :“ ηr {p1 ´ 2ηp q are con-
stants depending on pηp , ηr , σ 2 , Dq only. Furthermore, it also achieves the following in-expectation
    7
     We use PM,π poq and PM po|πq interchangeably in the following.
    8
     To extend to the continuous setting, only slight modifications are needed, see e.g. Foster et al. (2021,
Section 3.2.3).
   9
     In other words, Et is the conditional expectation on Ft´1 “ σpµ1 , π 1 , o1 , r1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , π t´1 , ot´1 , rt´1 , µt q.


                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


guarantee:
                                        «                   ff
                                            T
                                            ÿ         “ t ‰
                                   E            EM „µt ErrM ď C log |M|.
                                         t“1


The proof of Theorem D.1 can be found in Appendix D.1.1.
Lemma 3 now follows as a direct corollary of Theorem D.1, which we restate and prove below.
Corollary D.2 (Restatement of Lemma 3). The Tempered Aggregation subroutine (3) in Algorithm 1
with 4ηp ` ηr ă 2 achieves the following bound with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                         T
                         ÿ                    ”                    ı
                                                2    ‹ t xt t
             EstRL :“                   xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq ď C ¨ logp|M| {δq,
                               Eπt „pt EM
                         t“1

where C depends only on pηp , ηr q. Specifically, we can choose ηp “ ηr “ 1{3 and C “ 10.
Furthermore, when ηp “ η P p0, 21 s, ηr “ 0, (3) achieves
                        T                 ”    ´ ‹                     ¯ı 1
                                                             xt
                        ÿ
                                             2   M    t     M      t
             EstH :“       Eπt „pt EM t
                                    x „µt  DH   P  pπ   q, P    pπ   q   ď ¨ logp|M| {δq
                       t“1
                                                                          η

with probability at least 1 ´ δ.

Proof. Note that subroutine (3) in Algorithm 1 is exactly an instantiation of the Tempered Aggrega-
tion algorithm (Algorithm 2) with context π t sampled from distribution pt (which depends on µt ),
observation  ot‰, and reward rt . Therefore, we can apply Theorem D.1, where we further note that
EM „µt ErrtM corresponds exactly to
        “

                                      „                                       ›                  ›2 ȷ
        “ t ‰                           2   M‹   t    xt
                                                      M   t                      M ‹
                                                                                           Mxt
EM „µt ErrM “ EM       xt „µt Eπ t „pt DH pP   pπ q, P pπ qq ` Eo„PM ‹ pπt q ›R poq ´ R poq›
                                                                              ›                  ›
                                                                                                  2
                                      ”                     ı
                                        2    ‹ t xt t
                  “ EM xt „µt Eπ t „pt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq .
                                          ?
Notice that we can pick σ 2 “ 1{4 and D “ 2, as each individual reward rh P r0, 1s almost surely
(so is 1{4-sub-Gaussian by Hoeffding’s Lemma), and
                         ›              ›2  H ˇ                ˇ2
                         › M        1       ÿ              1
                         ›R poq ´ RM poq› “
                                              ˇ M
                                              ˇRh poq ´ RhM poqˇ
                                        ›                      ˇ
                                                    2
                                                        h“1
                        H ˇ                ˇ   H
                        ÿ ˇ M          1       ÿ ˇ M ˇ ˇˇ M 1 ˇˇ
                          ˇRh poq ´ RhM poqˇ ď   ˇRh poqˇ ` ˇRh poqˇ “ 2.
                                           ˇ
                      ď
                         h“1                             h“1
                               1
for any two models M, M and any o P O. Therefore, Theorem D.1 yields that, as long as 4ηp `ηr ă
2, we have with probability at least 1 ´ δ that
                         T
                         ÿ                    ”                    ı
                                                2    ‹ t xt t
             EstRL :“                   xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq ď C ¨ logp|M| {δq,
                               Eπt „pt EM
                         t“1
                  !                     )
                       1       1
where C “ max         ηp , p1´2ηp qc1    , c1 “ p1 ´ e´cp2´cq q{2, and c “ ηr {p1 ´ 2ηp q. Choosing ηp “
ηr “ 1{3, we have c “ 1, c “ p1´e´1 q{2, and C “ max t3, 3{c1 u ď 10 by numerical calculations.
                              1

This is the desired result. The case ηr “ 0 follows similarly.

D.1.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.1
For all t P rT s define the random variable
                                                  PM pot |π t q
                                          „ ˆ                     ˙ȷ
                         t                                      t
                      ∆ :“ ´ log EM „µt exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM     ,
                                                  P po |π q

                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                                t
                                     ›             ›2 ›               ›2
                               δM :“ ›rt ´ R‹ pot q›2 ´ ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .                                 (11)
Recall that Et is taken with respect to all randomness after prediction µt is made. Then
                                                     PM pot |π t q
                            „        „      ˆ                                ˙ȷȷ
       “     `      ˘‰
   Et exp ´∆t “ Et EM „µt exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM                       t
                                                      P po |π q
                                            M t t
                           „    ˆ                                  ˙ȷ
            ÿ                             P po |π q
        “        µt pM qEt exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM             t

          M PM
                                          P po |π q
                                              PM pot |π t q
                           „        ˆ                       ˙                    ˆ            ˙ȷ
            ÿ                          1                                              ηr
        ď        µt pM qEt 2ηp exp       log ‹ t t              ` p1 ´ 2ηp q exp            t
                                                                                           δM              (12)
          M PM
                                       2      P po |π q                            1 ´ 2ηp
                              «              «d                ffff
                ÿ                                PM po|π t q
        “2ηp         µt pM qEt Eo„P‹ p¨|πt q
               M PM
                                                 P‹ po|π t q
                                        „      ˆ                 ˙ȷ
                          ÿ
                               t                    ηr        t
          ` p1 ´ 2ηp q        µ pM qEt exp                  δ       .
                         M PM
                                                 1 ´ 2ηp M
For the first term, by definition
                                «d                   ff
                                       PM po|π t q             1 2 ‹
                     Eo„P‹ p¨|πt q                        “ 1 ´ DH pP p¨|π t q, PM p¨|π t qq.              (13)
                                       P‹ po|π t q             2
                                                 ηr
To bound the second term, we abbreviate c :“ 1´2η   p
                                                      , and invoke the following lemma. The proof
can be found in Appendix D.1.2.
Lemma D.3. Suppose that r P Rd is a σ 2 -sub-Gaussian random vector, r “ Errs is the mean of r,
    r P Rd is any fixed vector. Then the random variable
and p
                                                            2             2
                                δ :“ }r ´ r}2 ´ }r ´ pr}2 ,
                          ´                        ¯
                                                 2
satisfies Erexppλδqs ď exp ´λp1 ´ 2σ 2 λq }r ´ p
                                               r}2 for any λ P R.

Therefore,
                     “   ` t ˘‰    ”     ´              ›                  ›2 ¯ı
                   Et exp cδM   ďEt exp ´cp1 ´ 2σ 2 cq ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2
                                          ”›                   ›2 ı
                                ď1 ´ c1 Et ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 ,                                        (14)
                                                                                                       2
where the second inequality is due to the fact that for all x P r0, D2 s, it holds that e´cp1´2σ cqx ď
                                                                                   2         2
1 ´ c1 x, which is ensured by our choice of c P r0, 2{σ 2 q and c1 :“ p1 ´ e´D cp1´2σ cq q{D2 ą 0.
Therefore, by flipping (12) and adding one on both sides, and plugging in (13) and (14), we get
                     “    `     ˘‰                         “ 2 M                          ‰
             1 ´ Et exp ´∆t ěηp EM „µt Eπt „¨|Ft´1 DH           pP p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t qq
                                                               ”›                       ›2 ı
                                     ` p1 ´ 2ηp qc1 EM „µt Et ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 .

Thus, by martingale concentration (Lemma B.2), we have with probability at least 1 ´ δ that
             T
             ÿ                         T
                                       ÿ                        T
                                                     “   `   ˘‰ ÿ       “   `    ˘‰
                   ∆t ` logp1{δq ě           ´ log Et exp ´∆t ě   1 ´ Et exp ´∆t
             t“1                       t“1                                    t“1
                                           T
                                           ÿ              “ 2 M                         ‰
                                     ěηp         EM „µt Et DH pP p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t qq
                                           t“1                                                             (15)
                                                            T              ”›
                                                            ÿ                                   ›2 ı
                                       ` p1 ´ 2ηp qc1             EM „µt Et ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2
                                                            t“1
                                     ě min ηp , p1 ´ 2ηp qc1 ¨ EM „µt ErrtM .
                                          ␣                 (        “     ‰


                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                             řT
It remains to upper bound t“1 ∆t . Note that the update rule of Algorithm 2 can be written in the
following Follow-The-Regularized-Leader form:
                                                `ř                                              ˘
                  t
                                  µ1 pM q exp                             M s s
                                                     sďt´1 ηp log P po |π q ` ηr δM
                                                                                              s
               µ pM q “ ř               1    1
                                                      `ř
                                                                              M 1 pos |π s q ` η δ s
                                                                                                     ˘,
                              M 1 PM µ pM q exp            sďt´1 ηp log P                       r M1

                             t
                                       ›                  ›2                        2                              2
where we have used that δM       “ ´ ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 ` }rt ´ R‹ pot q}2 in which }rt ´ R‹ pot q}2 is a
constant that does not depend on M for all t P rT s. Therefore we have
                                                PM pot |π t q
                               „     ˆ                                      ˙ȷ
                t                                                        t
      expp´∆ q “ EM „µt exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM
                                                 P po |π q
                                    M t t
                        ˆ                                  ˙
     ÿ
           t                      P po |π q            t
 “       µ pM q exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM
    M PM
                                   P po |π q
                              `                                              ˘
                 µ1 pM q exp                        M s s                  s
                                ř
                                                                                                     PM pot |π t q
                                                                                            ˆ                          ˙
                                   sďt´1 ηp log P po |π q ` ηr δM
     ÿ
                                                                                   ˘ exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM        t
 “        ř           1    1
                                    `ř
                                                          M 1 pos |π s q ` η δ s
             M 1 PM µ pM q exp         sďt´1 ηp log P
    M PM                                                                     r M1                    P po |π q
                            ´ř                 M   s   s
                                                                       ¯
     ř           1                           P po |π q              s
       M PM µ pM q exp           sďt ηp log P‹ pos |π s q ` ηr δM
 “ř                       ´ř                                            ¯,
              1 pM q exp                       PM pos |π s q          s
      M PM   µ                 sďt´1  η p log    ‹  s
                                               P po |π qs    `  η r δ M
                                                                                                             (16)
where the last equality used again the fact that ´ηp log P‹ pos |π s q is a constant that does not depend
on M for all s P rts.
Taking ´ log on both sides above and summing over t P rT s, we have by telescoping that
                                              ˜                                ¸
               T                                T
              ÿ
                    t
                               ÿ
                                     1
                                                ÿ           PM pot |π t q    t
                  ∆ “ ´ log        µ pM q exp       ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM .                                   (17)
              t“1             M PM             t“1
                                                            P po |π q

By realizability M ‹ P M, we have
                                    T
                                    ÿ
                                          ∆t ď ´ log µ1 pM ‹ q “ log |M|.
                                    t“1

Plugging this bound into (15) gives the desired high-probability statement. The”in-expectation
                                                                                          ı    state-
                                                                                 řT     t
ment follows similarly by further noticing that in (15), taking the expectation E t“1 ∆ gives the
same right-hand side, but without the additional logp1{δq term on the left-hand side.

D.1.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA D.3
By definition,
                                                                         2
                                      δ “ 2 xr ´ r, p
                                                    r ´ ry ´ }p
                                                              r ´ r}2 ,
and therefore,
                                      ´              ¯
                                                   2
                     Erexp pλδqs “ exp ´λ }p r ´ r}2 Erexp p2λ xr ´ r, p
                                                                       r ´ ryqs
                                      ´                              ¯
                                                       2           2
                                 ď exp 2σ 2 λ2 }p
                                                r ´ r}2 ´ λ }p
                                                             r ´ r}2
                                      ´                          ¯
                                                               2
                                 “ exp ´λp1 ´ 2σ 2 λq }r ´ pr}2 ,

where the inequality is due to the definition of σ 2 -sub-Gaussian random vector: For v “ 2λpp
                                                                                             r ´rq P
Rd ,                                                       ˜          ¸
                                                                    2
                                                             σ 2 }v}2
                                 Erexp pxv, ryqs ď exp                 .
                                                                 2



                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 E2D Meta-Algorithm with Randomized Model Estimators
Input: Parameter γ ą 0; Online estimation subroutine AlgEst ; Prior distribution µ1 P ∆pMq.
 1: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
                                   t              t
 2:   Set pt Ð arg minpP∆pΠq Vpγµ ppq, where Vpγµ is defined in (2).
 3:   Sample π t „ pt . Execute π t and observe pot , rt q.
 4:   Update randomized model estimator by online estimation subroutine:
                                                  ´                    ¯
                                 µt`1 Ð AlgtEst tpπ s , os , rs qusPrts .



D.2    G ENERAL E2D & P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

We first prove a guarantee for the following E2D meta-algorithm that allows any (randomized)
online estimation subroutine, which includes Algorithm 1 as a special case by instantiating AlgEst
as the Tempered Aggregation subroutine (for finite model classes) and thus proving Theorem 2.
The following theorem is an instantiation of Foster et al. (2021, Theorem 4.3) by choosing the
divergence function to be DRL . For completeness, we provide a proof in Appendix D.4. Let
                                    T
                                    ÿ                    ”                     ı
                                                           2   xt t     ‹ t
                       EstRL :“                    xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq
                                          Eπt „pt EM                                               (18)
                                    t“1

                                               T
denote the online estimation error of tµt ut“1 in DRL
                                                   2
                                                      divergence (achieved by AlgEst ).
Theorem D.4 (E2D Meta-Algorithm (Foster et al., 2021)). Algorithm 3 achieves
                                  RegDM ď T ¨ decγ pMq ` γ ¨ EstRL .

We are now ready to prove the main theorem (finite M).
Proof of Theorem 2       Note that Algorithm 1 is an instantiation of Algorithm 3 with AlgEst
chosen as Tempered Aggregation. By Lemma 3, choosing ηp “ ηr “ 1{3, the Tempered Aggrega-
tion subroutine achieves
                                          EstRL ď 10 logp|M| {δq
with probability at least 1 ´ δ. On this event, by Theorem D.4 we have that
            RegDM ď T ¨ decγ pMq ` γ ¨ EstRL ď T ¨ decγ pMq ` 10γ logp|M| {δq.
This is the desired result.


D.3    E2D-TA WITH COVERING

In many scenarios, we have to work with an infinite model class M instead of a finite one. In the
following, we define a covering number suitable for divergence DRL , and provide the analysis of
the Tempered Aggregation subroutine (as well as the corresponding E2D-TA algorithm) with such
coverings.
We consider the following definition of optimistic covering.
Definition D.5 (Optimistic covering). Given ρ P r0, 1s, an optimistic ρ-cover of M is a tuple
 r M0 q, where M0 is a finite subset of M, and each M0 P M0 is assigned with an optimistic
pP,
                    rM0 , such that the following holds:
likelihood function P

                                  rM0 ,π p¨q specifies a un-normalized distribution over O, and it holds
     › M0 P M0 , for each
(1) For                      › π, P
     › M0 ,π       rM0 ,π p¨q› ď ρ2 .
that ›P
                             ›
             p¨q ´ P
                              1


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2) For any M P M, there›exists a M0 P M0› that covers M : for all π P Π, o P O, it holds
rM0 ,π poq ě PM,π poq10 , and ›RM poq ´ RM0 poq› ď ρ.
P                                               1

The optimistic covering number N pM, ρq is defined as the minimal cardinality of M0 such that
there exists P            r M0 q is an optimistic ρ-cover of M.
             r such that pP,
With the definition of an optimistic covering at hand, the Tempered Aggregation algorithm can
be directly generalized to infinite model classes by performing the updates on an optimistic cover
(Algorithm 4).
Proposition D.6 (Tempered Aggregation with covering for RL). For any model class M and an
                                r M0 q, the Tempered Aggregation subroutine
associated optimistic ρ-cover pP,
                                           ´                                      › ¯
                                                   rM,πt pot q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2
                                                                    ›
              µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp ηp log P                                  2
                                                                                              (19)

with µ1 “ UnifpM0 q and ηp “ ηr “ 1{3 achieves the following bound with probability at least
1 ´ δ:
                            EstRL ď 10 ¨ rlog |M0 | ` 2T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.

E2D-TA with covering         Define
                               estpM, Kq :“ inf plog N pM, ρq ` Kρq                                     (20)
                                                ρě0

which measures the estimation complexity of M for K-step interaction.
Proposition D.6 implies that, based on the model class M, we can suitably design the optimistic
                    r and the prior µ1 , so that Algorithm 3 with Alg
likelihood function P                                                 Est chosen as (19) achieves
EstRL “ O pestpM, T qq. Therefore, by Theorem D.4 we directly have the following guarantee.
           r
Theorem D.7 (E2D-TA with covering). Algorithm 3 with AlgEst chosen as T EMPERED AGGRE -
GATION WITH COVERING (19) and optimally chosen γ achieves
                                    `                                          ˘
                  RegDM ď C inf T ¨ decγ pMq ` γ estpM, T q ` γ logp1{δq
                                   γą0

with probability at least 1 ´ δ, where C is a universal constant.

D.3.1    D ISCUSSIONS ABOUT OPTIMISTIC COVERING
We make a few remarks regarding our definition of the optimistic covering. Examples of optimistic
covers on concrete model classes can be found in e.g. Example K.13, Proposition K.15; see also
(Liu et al., 2022a, Appendix B).

A more relaxed definition We first remark that Definition D.5(2) can actually be relaxed to
                                                               ›                    ›
(2’) For any M P M, there exists a M0 P M0 , such that maxoPO ›RM poq ´ RM0 poq›1 ď ρ, and
                                     «           ff
                                       PM po|πq
                         Eo„PM p¨|πq                ď 1 ` ρ, @π P Π.                        (:)
                                       rM0 po|πq
                                       P

For the simplicity of presentation, we state all the results in terms of Definition D.5. But the proof
of Theorem D.8 can be directly adapted to (:); see Remark D.9.

Relation to Foster et al. (2021, Definition 3.2) We comment on the relationship between our
optimistic covering and the covering introduced in Foster et al. (2021, Definition 3.2) (which is also
used in their algorithms to handle infinite model classes). First, the covering in Foster et al. (2021)
needs to cover the distribution of reward, while ours only need to cover the mean reward function.
More importantly, Foster et al. (2021, Lemma A.16) explicitly introduces a factor log B, where
                                                                                      `                 ˘
  10
     An important observation is that, along with (1), this requirement implies DTV PM,π p¨q, PM0 ,π p¨q ď ρ2
(for proof, see e.g. (33)). Therefore, a ρ-optimistic covering must be a ρ2 -covering in TV distance.


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 4 T EMPERED AGGREGATION WITH COVERING
Input: Learning rate ηp P p0, 12 q, ηr ą 0, number of steps T , ρ-optimistic cover pP,
                                                                                    r M0 q.
                1
 1: Initialize µ Ð UnifpM0 q.
 2: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
 3:    Receive pπ t , ot , rt q.
 4:    Update randomized model estimator:
                                              ´                                        › ¯
                                                      rM pot |π t q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .
                                                                         ›
                    µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp ηp log P                                 2


                                  M
                       po|πq
B ě supoPO,πPΠ,M PM Pνpo|πq  with ν being certain base distribution. Actually, with such a B, we
can show that
                              N 1 pM, ρq ď NTV pM, ρ2 {4Bq,
where NTV is the covering number in the TV sense, and N 1 is the optimistic covering number with
respect to (:).

Relation to other notions of covering numbers Ignoring the reward component, our optimistic
covering number is essentially equivalent to the bracketing number. We further remark that opti-
mistic covering can be slightly weaker than the covering in χ2 -distance sense: given a ρ2 -covering
                                    r “ p1 ` ρ2 qP to obtain a ρ-optimistic covering defined by (:).
M0 in the latter sense, we can take P

D.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.4

We have by definition of RegDM that
                          T            ” ‹                      ı
                          ÿ                              ‹
       RegDM “                  Eπt „pt f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπ t q
                          t“1
          T            ” ‹                                  ”                       ıı
          ÿ                              ‹
      “         Eπt „pt f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπ t q ´ γEM
                                                     xt „µt  D 2
                                                               RL pM ‹ t xt t
                                                                      pπ q, M pπ qq
          t“1
                     T
                     ÿ                   ”                     ı
                                           2    ‹ t xt t
            `γ¨                    xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq
                          Eπt „pt EM
                    t“1
          T
      piq ÿ                        “                                                  ‰
      ď          sup Eπt „pt EM „µt f M pπM q ´ f M pπ t q ´ γDRL
                                                               2
                                                                  pM pπ t q, M pπ t qq ` γ ¨ EstRL
          t“1 M PM
           T
      piiq ÿ
      “              p µt ppt q
                     V                  `γ ¨ EstRL
                       γ
                     looomooon
          t“1
                                 t
                 “inf pP∆pΠq Vpγµ ppq
            T
      piiiq ÿ
      “          decγ pM, µt q ` γ ¨ EstRL ď T ¨ decγ pMq ` γ ¨ EstRL .
           t“1

Above, (i) follows by the realizability assumption M ‹ P M; (ii) follows by definition of the risk
    t                                                    t
Vpγµ (cf. (2)) as well as the fact that pt minimizes Vpγµ p¨q in Algorithm 3; (iii) follows by definition
of decγ pM, µt q. This completes the proof.

D.5    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION D.6

We first restates the T EMPERED AGGREGATION WITH COVERING subroutine (19) in the general
setup of online model estimation in Algorithm 4.
Theorem D.8 (Tempered Aggregation over covering). For any M that is not necessarily finite, but
otherwise under the same setting as Theorem D.1, Algorithm 4 with 2ηp ` 2σ 2 ηr ă 1 achieves with


                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


probability at least 1 ´ δ that
                   T
                   ÿ
                         EM „µt ErrtM ď Crlog |M0 | ` 2 logp2{δq ` 2T ρpηr ` ηp qs,
                               “     ‰
                   t“1

where C is defined same as in Theorem D.1.
Plugging Theorem D.8 into the RL setting, picking pηp , ηr q and performing numerical calculations,
we directly have the Proposition D.6. The proof follows the same arguments as Corollary D.2 and
hence omitted. Similarly, when ηp “ η P p0, 12 q, ηr “ 0, the proof of Theorem D.8 implies that (19)
with µ1 “ UnifpM0 q achieves the following bound with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
   T                  ”   ´ ‹                  ¯ı 1
                                       xt
   ÿ
                        2  M
                xt „µt DH P
       Eπt „pt EM             pπ t q, PM pπ t q ď ¨ rlog |M0 | ` 2ηT ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.                   (21)
   t“1
                                                  η

Proof of Theorem D.8         The proof is similar to that of Theorem D.1. Consider the random variable
                                            «     ˜                           ¸ff
                                                            PrM pot |π t q
                          t                                                 t
                         ∆ :“ ´ log EM „µt exp ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM               ,
                                                             P po |π q

for all t P rT s, where δ is defined in (11). Then by (12) and (14), we have
                                               »d                 fi
                 “   `       ˘‰                     rM pot |π t q
                                                    P
             Et exp ´∆t ď2ηp EM „µt Et –                          fl
                                                    P‹ pot |π t q
                                               ´                   ”›               ›2 ı¯
                                  ` p1 ´ 2ηp q 1 ´ c1 EM „µt Et ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 ,

where c1 is the same as in Theorem D.1. To bound the first term, we notice that for all π P Π, and
o „ P‹ p¨|πq, we have
            »d            fi                 «d              ff                »b                    a     fi
                P
                r M po|πq                         PM  po|πq                            rM po|πq ´ PM po|πq
                                                                                       P
Eo„P‹ p¨|πq –             fl “ Eo„P‹ p¨|πq                      ` Eo„P‹ p¨|πq –               a            fl
                P‹ po|πq                          P‹ po|πq                                      P‹ po|πq
                                                        ˆb                                   ˙2
                                                                            a
                                                      «     P po|πq ´ P po|πq ff 12
                                                             r M                 M
          1 2 M
   ď1 ´ DH pP p¨|πq, P‹ p¨|πqq ` Eo„P‹ p¨|πq
          2                                                            P‹ po|πq
                                                        ˇ
                                                      « ˇrM                         ˇ ff 1
                                                                          M         ˇ 2
          1 2 M                                         ˇ P  po|πq  ´   P   po|πq   ˇ
                             ‹
   ď1 ´ DH pP p¨|πq, P p¨|πqq ` Eo„P‹ p¨|πq                       ‹
          2                                                     P po|πq
          1 2 M                           ›                       › 21
                                          ›rM
   “1 ´ DH     pP p¨|πq, P‹ p¨|πqq ` ›P        p¨|πq ´ PM p¨|πq›
                                                                  ›
          2                                                         1
          1 2 M              ‹
   ď1 ´ DH pP p¨|πq, P p¨|πqq ` ρ,                                                                       (22)
          2
                                                      ›                         ›
where the last inequality is due to the fact that ›PM p¨|πq ´ P       rM p¨|πq›› ď ρ2 . (22) directly implies
                                                      ›
                                                                                  1
that
                      »d                 fi
                           rM pot |π t q
                          P              fl ď 1 ´ 1 Et DH
                                                          “ 2 M                            ‰
                   Et –      ‹  t   t
                                                              pP p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t qq ` ρ.             (23)
                           P po |π q                2

Therefore, by Lemma B.2, with probability at least 1 ´ δ{2, it holds that
             T
             ÿ                        T
                                      ÿ                        T
                                                    “   `   ˘‰ ÿ       “   `    ˘‰
                   ∆t ` logp2{δq ě          ´ log Et exp ´∆t ě   1 ´ Et exp ´∆t
             t“1                      t“1                           t“1


                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                             «                                                                  ff
                                                 T
                                                 ÿ
                                                                  2
                                                                    “                            ‰
                                    ěηp                EM „µt Et DH pPM p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t qq       ´ 2T ρ
                                                 t“1
                                                               T                 ”›
                                                               ÿ                                      ›2 ı
                                         ` p1 ´ 2ηp qc1                 EM „µt Et ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 .
                                                               t“1

In the following, we complete the proof by showing that with probability at least 1 ´ δ{2,
                                   T
                                   ÿ
                                         ∆t ď log |M0 | ` 2T ηr ρ ` logp2{δq.
                                   t“1

By a telescoping argument same as (17), we have
                                                                ˜                                       ¸
                T                                                   T
                                                         rM pot |π t q
                ÿ                        ÿ               P          ÿ
                   ∆t “ ´ log      µ1 pM q exp     ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δMt
                                                                                                            .        (24)
               t“1            M PM             t“1
                                                         P po |π   q
                                             0


By the definition of› M0 and the realizability
                                      ›        M ‹ P M, there exists a M P M0 such that M ‹ is
                       M           ‹              rM p¨|πq ě P‹ p¨|πq for all π). Then
covered by M (i.e. ›R 0 poq ´ R poq›8 ď ρ and P
              «     ˜         ¸ff          «    ˜                                  ¸ff
                       T                             T        rM pot |π t q
                      ÿ
                            t
                                                    ÿ         P                  t
            E exp         ∆       ď |M0 | E exp ´       ηp log ‹ t t ´ ηr δM          .  (25)
                      t“1                           t“1
                                                              P po |π q

Now
   «       ˜                              ¸ff     « ˜                  ¸ηp               ff
               T      rM pot |π t q                  T     ‹ t t
               ÿ      P                t
                                                    ź     P po |π  q                  t
    E exp ´     ηp log ‹ t t ´ ηr δM          “E                           ¨ expp´ηr δM q
                      P  po |π  q                        rM pot |π t q
                                                         P
            t“1                                     t“1
          «                 ff      «                                          ff
            źT                       Tź
                                      ´1
                         t                        t
                                                         “               ˇ ‰
                                                                       T ˇ T
        ďE      expp´ηr δM q “ E         expp´ηr δM q ¨ E expp´ηr δM q o
               t“1                                 t“1
                                                                                                                     (26)
                         «                              ff
                           Tź
                            ´1
                                            t
         ď exp p2ρηr qE            expp´ηr δM q
                             t“1
         ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď exp p2T ρηr q,
                                     rM ě P‹ , the second inequality is because for all t P rT s,
where the first inequality is due to P
          “               ˇ ‰          ´              ›                    ›2 ¯
                      t ˇ t
        E expp´ηr δM     q o ď exp ηr p1 ` 2σ 2 ηr q ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 ď expp2ρηr q,

                                                          ›R po q ´ R‹ pot q›2
                                                          › M t             ›
›which     is     due
                    ›  › to       Lemma›     D.3  and                        2
                                                                                      ď
›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q› ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q› ď ρ. Applying Chernoff’s bound completes the
                     1                     8
proof.


Remark D.9. From the proof above, it is clear that Theorem D.8 also holds for for the alternative
definition of
           ” covering ı number in (:): Under that definition, we can proceed in (26) by using the fact
             P‹ po|πq                                     t
Eo„P‹ p¨|πq PrM po|πq ď 1 ` ρ and the fact E r expp´ηr δM   q| ot s ď expp2ρηr q alternately.


E     C ONNECTIONS TO OPTIMISTIC ALGORITHMS

Motivated by the close connection between E2D-TA and posteriors/likelihoods, in this section,
we re-analyze two existing optimistic algorithms: Model-based Optimistic Posterior Sampling
(MOPS), and Optimistic Maximum Likelihood Estimation (OMLE), in a parallel fashion to E2D-
TA. We show that these two algorithms—in addition to algorithmic similarity to E2D-TA—work
under general structural conditions related to the DEC, for which we establish formal relationships.


                                                               28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.1    M ODEL - BASED O PTIMISTIC P OSTERIOR S AMPLING (MOPS)

We consider the following version of the MOPS algorithm of Agarwal & Zhang (2022a)11 . Similar
as E2D-TA, MOPS also maintains a posterior µt P ∆pMq over models, initialized at a suitable
prior µ1 . The policy in the t-th episode is directly obtained by posterior sampling: π t “ πM t where
M t „ µt . After executing π t and observing pot , rt q, the algorithm updates the posterior as
                                   ´                              t          ›             ›2 ¯
    µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp γ ´1 f M pπM q ` ηp log PM,π pot q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .         (27)
This update is similar as Tempered Aggregation (3), and differs in the additional optimism term
γ ´1 f M pπM q which favors models with higher optimal values. (Full algorithm in Algorithm 5.)
We now state the structural condition and theoretical guarantee for the MOPS algorithm.
Definition E.1 (Posterior sampling coefficient). The Posterior Sampling Coefficient (PSC) of model
class M with respect to reference model M P M and parameter γ ą 0 is defined as
                                          ”                                                     ı
  pscγ pM, M q :“ sup EM „µ EM 1 „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπM q ´ γDRL        2
                                                                          pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq .
                     µP∆pMq

Theorem E.2 (Regret bound for MOPS). Choosing ηp “ 1{6, ηr “ 0.6 and the uniform prior
µ1 “ UnifpMq, Algorithm 5 achieves the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                              ”                       ı
                RegDM ď T pscγ{6 pM, M ‹ q ` 2{γ ` 4γ ¨ logp|M| {δq.

Theorem E.2 (proof in Appendix F.1) is similar as Agarwal & Zhang (2022a, Theorem 1) and is
slightly more general in the assumed structural condition, as the PSC is bounded whenever the
“Hellinger decoupling coefficient” used in their theorem is bounded (Proposition F.5).

Relationship between DEC and PSC The definition of the PSC resembles that of the DEC. We
show that the DEC can indeed be upper bounded by the PSC modulo a (lower-order) additive con-
stant; in other words, low PSC implies a low DEC. The proof can be found in Appendix F.4.
Proposition E.3 (Bounding DEC by PSC). Suppose Π is finite, then we have for any γ ą 0 that
                           decγ pMq ď sup pscγ{6 pM, M q ` 2pH ` 1q{γ.
                                         M PM


E.2    O PTIMISTIC M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD E STIMATION (OMLE)

Standard versions of the OMLE algorithm (e.g. Liu et al. (2022a)) use the log-likelihood of all
observed data as the risk function. Here we consider the following risk function involving the
log-likelihood of the observations and the negative L22 loss of the rewards, to be parallel with E2D-
TA and MOPS:
                                  řt´1 ”          s         ›              ›2 ı
                       Lt pM q :“        log PM,π pos q ´ ›rs ´ RM pos q› .
                                       s“1                                        2
                                                                                                  (28)
In the t-th iteration, the OMLE algorithm plays the greedy policy of the most optimistic model
within a β-superlevel set of the above risk (Full algorithm in Algorithm 6):
             pM t , π t q :“ arg max f M pπq such that Lt pM q ě max
                                                                   1
                                                                     Lt pM 1 q ´ β.                      (29)
                           pM,πqPMˆΠ                                         M


We now state the structural condition and theoretical guarantee for the OMLE algorithm.
Definition E.4 (Maximum likelihood estimation coefficient). The maximum likelihood estimation
coefficient (MLEC) of model class M with respect to reference model M P M, parameter γ ą 0,
and length K P Zě1 is defined as
                                             K
                                         1 ÿ ” Mk                         ı
          mlecγ,K pM, M q :“ sup                 f pπM k q ´ f M pπM k q
                               tM k uPM K k“1
                                       «˜                                          ¸   ff
                                     γ            ÿ
                                                        2
                                ´         max         DRL  pM pπM t q, M k pπM t qq _ 1 .
                                    K     kPrKs
                                                tďk´1
   11
      Our version is equivalent to Agarwal & Zhang (2022a, Algorithm 1) except that we look at the full obser-
vation and reward vector (of all layers), whereas they only look at a random layer ht „ UnifprHsq.


                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 5 MOPS (Agarwal & Zhang, 2022a)
 1: Input: Parameters η, γ ą 0; prior distribution µ1 P ∆pMq; optimistic likelihood function P.
                                                                                             r
 2: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
 3:   Sample M t „ µt p¨q and set π t “ πM t .
 4:   Execute π t and observe pot , rt q.
 5:   Update posterior of models by Optimistic Posterior Sampling (OPS):
                                 ´                                                       › ¯
                                                          rM,πt pot q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 . (30)
                                                                           ›
       µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp γ ´1 f M pπM q ` ηp log P                               2


Theorem E.5 (Regret bound for OMLE). Choosing β “ 3 logp|M|{δq ě 1, with probability at
least 1 ´ δ, Algorithm 6 achieves
                   RegDM ď inf tT ¨ mlecγ,T pM, M ‹ q ` 12γ ¨ logp|M|{δqu.
                                γą0


Existing sample-efficiency guarantees for OMLE-type algorithms are only established on specific
RL problems through case-by-case analyses (Mete et al., 2021; Uehara et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2022a;b). By contrast, Theorem E.5 shows that OMLE works on any problem with bounded
MLEC, thereby offering a more unified understanding. The proof of Theorem E.5 is deferred to Ap-
pendix G.2.
We remark that the MLEC is also closely related to the PSC, in that bounded MLEC (under a slightly
modified definition) implies bounded PSC (Proposition G.4 & Appendix G.3).

F     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION E.1
F.1   A LGORITHM MOPS

Here we present a more general version of the MOPS algorithm where we allow M to be a pos-
sibly infinite model class, and require a prior µ1 P ∆pMq and an optimistic likelihood function P   r
(cf. Definition D.5) as inputs. The algorithm stated in Appendix E.1 is a special case of Algorithm 5
with |M| ă 8, P  r “ P, and µ1 “ UnifpMq.
We state the theoretical guarantee for Algorithm 5 as follows.
Theorem F.1 (MOPS). Given a ρ-optimistic cover pP,   r M0 q, Algorithm 5 with ηp “ 1{6, ηr “ 0.6
     1
and µ “ UnifpM0 q achieves the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
                           „                      ȷ
                                                2
            RegDM ď T pscγ{6 pM, M ‹ q `            ` γrlog |M0 | ` 3T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                                                γ
Choosing the optimal γ ą 0, with probability at least 1 ´ δ, suitable implementation of Algorithm 5
achieves
                              "                                                      *
                                                      T
           RegDM ď 12 inf T pscγ pM, M ‹ q ` ` γrestpM, T q ` logp1{δqs .
                          γą0                         γ

When M is finite, clearly pP, Mq itself is a 0-optimistic covering, and hence Theorem F.1 implies
Theorem E.2 directly.
It is worth noting that Agarwal & Zhang (2022a) state the guarantee of MOPS in terms of a general
prior, with the regret depending on a certain “prior around true model” like quantity. The proof of
Theorem F.2 can be directly adapted to work in their setting; however, we remark that, obtaining
an explicit upper bound on their “prior around true model” in a concrete problem likely requires
constructing an explicit covering, similar as in Theorem F.1.
Proof of Theorem F.1       By definition,
                   T          ” ‹                      ı
                   ÿ                            ‹
       RegDM “          EM „µt f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπM q
                  t“1


                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     T
                     ÿ             ” ‹                                 γ         “ 2                            ‰ı
                 “       EM „µt f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπM q ` Eπ„pt DRL                       pM ‹ pπq, M pπqq
                     t“1
                                                                       6
                     looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                       Bounded by Corollary F.3
                         T
                         ÿ          ”                      ‹           γ         “ 2                            ‰ı
                     `     EM „µt f M pπM q ´ f M pπM q ´ Eπ„pt DRL                       pM ‹ pπq, M pπqq
                                                                       6
                       t“1 loooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                                Bounded by psc
                                                                     2T
                 ďγrlog |M0 | ` 3T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs `                    ` T pscγ{6 pM, M ‹ q.
                                                                      γ


F.2   O PTIMISTIC POSTERIOR SAMPLING

In this section, we analyze the following Optimistic Posterior Sampling algorithm under a more
general setting. The problem setting and notation are the same as the online model estimation
problem introduced in Appendix D.1. Additionally, we assume that each M P M is assigned with
a scalar VM P r0, 1s; in our application, VM is going to be optimal value of model M .
Theorem F.2 (Analysis of posterior in OPS). Fix a ρ ą 0 and a ρ-optimistic covering pP,      r M0 q of
M. Under the assumption of Theorem D.1, the following update rule
                                      ´                                                   › ¯
                                                         rM pot |π t q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .
                                                                            ›
         µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp γ ´1 VM ` ηp log P                                     2
                                                                                                 (31)

with 2ηp ` 4σ 2 ηr ă 1 and µ1 “ UnifpM0 q achieves with probability at least 1 ´ δ that
         T
         ÿ                                                         T
               EM „µt V‹ ´ VM ` c0 γ ErrtM ď
                     “                    ‰
                                                                                 ` γ log |M0 |
         t“1
                                                          8γp1 ´ 2ηp ´ 4σ 2 ηr q
                                                             “                                   ‰
                                                          ` γ T ρp2γ ´1 ` 2ηp ` ηr q ` 2 logp2{δq ,
                                                                 2     2
where V‹ “ VM ‹ and c0 “ mintηp , 4σ 2 ηr p1 ´ e´D {8σ q{D2 u, as long as there exists M P M0
such that M ‹ is covered by M (cf. Definition D.5) and VM ě V‹ ´ 2ρ.
The proof of Theorem F.2 can be found in Appendix F.2.1.
As a direct corollary of Theorem F.2, the posterior µt maintained in the MOPS algorithm (Algo-
rithm 5) achieves the following guarantee.
Corollary F.3. Given a ρ-optimistic covering pP,r M0 q, subroutine (30) within Algorithm 5 with
ηp “ 1{6, ηr “ 0.6, γ ě 1 and uniform prior µ1 “ UnifpM0 q achieves with probability at least
1 ´ δ that
               T
              ÿ           ” ‹                       γ       “ 2                    ‰ı
                  EM „µt f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπM q ` Eπ„pt DRL      pM ‹ pπq, M pπqq
              t“1
                                                    6
                         2T
                     ď      ` γrlog |M0 | ` 3T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                          γ

Proof. Note that subroutine (30) in Algorithm 5 is exactly an instantiation of (31) with context
π t sampled from distribution pt (which depends on µt ), observation o”t , reward rt , and VM “ı
f M pπM q. Furthermore, EM „µt ErrtM corresponds to EM
                                “     ‰                                    2     ‹ t xt t
                                                         xt „µt Eπ t „pt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq
(cf. Corollary D.2).
Therefore, in order to apply
                        › M Theorem ‹F.2, ›we have to verify: as long as M P M0 covers the ground
                                                         M
truth model M (i.e. R poq ´ R poq 1 ď ρ and P p¨|πq ě P‹ p¨|πq for all π), it holds that
                ‹       ›    0            ›            r
                                      ‹
VM ě V‹ ´ 2ρ. We note that V‹ ě f M pπM q, thus
                               ˇ            ‹
                                                 ˇ              `              ˘
             V‹ ´ VM ď sup ˇf M pπq ´ f M pπqˇ ď sup DTV P‹ p¨|πq, PM p¨|πq ` ρ               (32)
                               ˇ                 ˇ
                               π                                  π


                                                           31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by definition. An important observation is that, for π P Π,
       `                 ˘    ÿ“                         ‰  ÿ
 DTV P‹ p¨|πq, PM p¨|πq “          P‹ po|πq ´ PM po|πq ` ď    rM po|πq ´ PM po|πq ď ρ2 . (33)
                                                              P
                                oPO                               oPO

Therefore, V‹ ´ VM ď ρ ` ρ2 ď 2ρ. Now we can apply Theorem F.2 and plug in σ 2 “ 1{4, D2 “ 2
as in Corollary D.2. Choosing ηp “ 1{6, ηr “ 0.6, and γ ě 1, we have 4ηr ` γ ´1 ` ηp ď 3,
8p1 ´ 2ηp ´ ηr q ě 1{2, and c0 “ 1{6. This completes the proof.

F.2.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM F.2
For all t P rT s define the random variable
                                 «     ˜                                                   ¸ff
                                                                    rM pot |π t q
                                                                    P
             t                              ´1                                    t
           ∆ :“ ´ log EM „µt exp γ               pVM ´ V‹ q ` ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM               ,
                                                                    P po |π q
       t
where δM is defined as in (11).
Similar as the proof of Theorem D.1, we begin by noticing that
                                          «   ˜                                                ¸ff
          “    `      ˘‰                                                    rM pot |π t q
                                                                            P
                    t                             ´1                                         t
   log Et exp ´∆ “ log EM „µt Et exp γ pVM ´ V‹ q ` ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM
                                                                            P po |π q
                                                         „    ˆ                           ˙ȷ
                                          2                            VM ´ V‹
                         ďp1 ´ 2ηp ´ 4σ ηr q log EM „µt exp
                                                                γp1 ´ 2ηp ´ 4σ 2 ηr q
                                                «    ˜                     ¸ff
                                                       1     rM pot |π t q
                                                             P
                           ` 2ηp log EM „µt Et exp       log ‹ t t
                                                       2     P po |π q
                                                  „    ˆ        ˙ȷ
                                                           1 t
                           ` 4σ 2 ηr log EM „µt Et exp       δ      ,                            (34)
                                                         4σ 2 M
which is due to Jensen’s inequality. For the first term, we abbreviate η0 “ 1 ´ 2ηp ´ 4σ 2 ηr and
consider aM :“ pV‹ ´ VM q{γη0 . Then by the boundedness of aM and Hoeffding’s Lemma,
                                           ˆ                    ˙        ˆ          ˙
                                              EM „µt rVM s ´ V‹              1
               EM „µ rexpp´aM qs ď exp
                     t                                             ¨ exp             .       (35)
                                                      γη0                  8γ 2 η02
The second term can be bounded as in (22):
               «    ˜                     ¸ff
                      1     rM pot |π t q
                            P
                                                              „
                                                                   1 “ 2 M                            ‰
                                                                                                           ȷ
log EM „µt Et exp       log ‹ t t             ď log EM „µt 1 ´ Et DH         pP p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t qq ` ρ
                      2      P po |π q                             2
           1          “ 2 M                         ‰
      ď ´ EM „µt Et DH     pP p¨|π t q, P‹ p¨|π t qq ` ρ,                                               (36)
           2
and the third term can be bounded by Lemma D.3 (similar to (14)):
                  „     ˆ        ˙ȷ                         „   ˆ                               ˙ȷ
                           1 t                                     1 ›› M t           ‹ t ›2
                                                                                            ›
    log EM „µt Et exp         δ       ď   log E M   „µ t Et exp          R  po  q ´ R  po  q
                          4σ 2 M                                  8σ 2                        2
                          ”                2    2                             2
                                                                                ı
                                                                                                        (37)
                                                          ›                  ›
          ď log EM „µt Et 1 ´ p1 ´ e´D {8σ q{D2 ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2
                        2   2
                                               ” ›                     ›2 ı
          ď ´p1 ´ e´D {8σ q{D2 EM „µt Et ›RM pot q ´ R‹ pot q›2 .
Plugging (35), (36), and (37) into (34) gives
          “     `     ˘‰ V‹ ´ EM „µt rVM s             1
  ´ log Et exp ´∆t ě                           ´ 2
                                     γ             8γ η0
                                  „                                           ȷ
                                    1           “ 2 M          t  ‹     t
                                                                           ‰
                           ` 2ηp EM „µt Et DH pP p¨|π q, P p¨|π qq ´ ρ
                                    2                                                      (38)
                                     ´                 ¯               ”›              › ı
                                 2          ´D 2 {8σ 2     2                M t   ‹ t ›2
                           ` 4σ ηr 1 ´ e                 {D ¨ EM „µt Et R po q ´ R po q 2
                                                                         ›
                                                                          1
                          ěEM „µt γ ´1 pV‹ ´ VM q ` c0 ErrtM ´
                                 “                          ‰
                                                                                ´ 2ηp ρ.
                                                                        8γ 2 η0

                                                     32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


On the other hand, by Lemma B.2, we have with probability at least 1 ´ δ{2 that
                           T
                           ÿ                       T
                                                   ÿ             “   `   ˘‰
                                 ∆t ` logp2{δq ě         ´ log Et exp ´∆t .                         (39)
                           t“1                     t“1
                      řT     t
It remains to bound     t“1 ∆ . By the update rule (31) and a telescoping argument similar to (16),
we have
                                       ˜                                                    ¸
         T                                 T                   rM pot |π t q
         ÿ                                 ÿ                   P
             ∆t “ ´ log EM „µ1 exp     γ ´1 pVM ´ V‹ q ` ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δMt
                                                                                                .
         t“1                       t“1
                                                               P po |π q

The following argument is almost the same as the argument we make to bound (24). Fix a M P M0
that covers M ‹ and VM ´ V‹ ě ´2ρ. We bound the following moment generating function
      «    ˜        ¸ff    »                                                                           fi
              T
             ÿ                                              1
    E exp        ∆t     “E–              ´ř                                  rM pot |π t q
                                                                                                     ¯ fl
                                            T     ´1                         P                     t
             t“1             EM „µ1 exp     t“1 γ    pV M ´ V ‹ q `  η p log   ‹  t
                                                                             P po |π qt    ` η r δ M
                                 «     ˜                                                             ¸ff
                                           T                                     t
                                                                           rM po |π q t
                                          ÿ
                                                ´1                         P                       t
                        ď |M0 | E exp ´       γ pVM ´ V‹ q ` ηp log ‹ t t ` ηr δM
                                          t“1
                                                                            P po |π q
                                                «                     ff
                                                  źT
                             `         ˘                  `       t
                                                                    ˘
                        ď exp 2T γ ´1 ρ |M0 | E       exp ´ηr δM
                                                         t“1
                                 `    ´1
                                                    ˘
                         ď exp 2T γ        ρ ` T ρηr |M0 | ,

where the first inequality is because µ1 pM q “ 1{ |M0 |, the second inequality is due to P      rM ě
 ‹
P , and the last inequality follows from the same argument as (26): by Lemma D.3 we have
             t
E r expp´ηr δM  q| ot s ď exppηr ρq, and applying this inequality recursively yields the desired result.
Therefore, with at least with probability 1 ´ δ{2,
                           T
                           ÿ                       `           ˘
                               ∆t ď log |M0 | ` T ρ 2γ ´1 ` 2ηr ` logp2{δq.                         (40)
                         t“1

Summing (38) over t P rT s, then taking union of (40) and (39) establish the theorem.

F.3   B OUNDING PSC BY H ELLINGER DECOUPLING COEFFICIENT

The Hellinger decoupling coefficient is introduced by Agarwal & Zhang (2022a) as a structural
condition for the sample efficiency of the MOPS algorithm.
Definition F.4 (Hellinger decoupling coefficient). Given α P p0, 1q, ε ě 0, the coefficient
dcph,α pM, M , εq is the smallest positive number ch ě 0 such that for all µ P ∆pMq,
               ”                                            ı
EM „µ EM ,πM QM,π h
                     M
                       ps h , ah q ´  rh ´  V M,πM
                                              h`1    psh`1 q
   ˆ                       „       ´                                ¯ ˇ                             ˇ2 ȷ˙α
 ď ch EM,M 1 „µ EM ,πM 1 DH     2
                                     PM               M                ˇ M               M
                                              , a             , a              , a     R      , a          ` ε.
                                                                                                    ˇ
                                      h  p¨|sh h  q, Ph p¨|s h h  q  ` ˇR h psh h  q ´   h psh h ˇq

The Hellinger decoupling coefficient dcp is defined as
                                     ˜                              ¸p1´αq{α
                                           H
                   α                   1 ÿ        h,α       α{p1´αq
                dcp pM, M , εq :“             dcp pM, M , εq                 .
                                       H h“1

We remark that the main difference between the PSC and the Hellinger decoupling coefficient is that,
the Hellinger decoupling coefficient is defined in terms of Bellman errors and Hellinger distances
within each layer h P rHs separately, whereas the PSC is defined in terms of the overall value
function and Hellinger distances of the entire observable (o, r).


                                                    33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The following result shows that the PSC can be upper bounded by the Hellinger decoupling coeffi-
cient, and thus is a slightly more general definition12 .
Proposition F.5 (Bounding PSC by Hellinger decoupling coefficient). For any α P p0, 1q, we have
                                      ˜                                ˙α{p1´αq   ¸
                                                   2αH dcpα pM, M , εq
                                                ˆ
             pscγ pM, M q ď H inf p1 ´ αq                                       `ε .
                                  εě0                      γ

Proof. Fix M, M P M, and α P p0, 1q. Consider
                            ´                                ¯ ˇ                               ˇ2
                          2
                             PM                M                ˇ M                M
    ∆h,sh ,ah pM, M q :“ DH           , a              , a              , a      R       , a   ˇ .
                                                                                               ˇ
                              h p¨|sh    h q, Ph p¨|sh    h q ` ˇRh psh    h q ´  h  psh    h q

By the definition of DRL and Lemma B.4, we have for any h P rHs that
                             “                 ‰       `                     ˘
                     EM ,πM 1 ∆h,sh ,ah pM, M q ď 2DRL
                                                    2
                                                         M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q .

Fix ε ě 0 and and write ch “ dcph,α pM, M , εq. For any µ P ∆pMq, we have
        ”                     ı
  EM „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπM q
    H
    ÿ                 ”                                      ı
“         EM „µ EM ,πM QM,π
                        h
                           M
                             psh , ah q ´ rh ´ V M,πM
                                                h`1   psh`1 q
    h“1
    H ´
    ÿ                       “                  ‰¯α
ď      ch EM,M 1 „µ EM ,πM 1 ∆h,sh ,ah pM, M q     ` Hε
    h“1
    H
    ÿ ` h ˘α `           “ 2 `                     ˘‰˘α
ď      c       2EM,M 1 „µ DRL  M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q     ` Hε
    h“1
                                               ˆ      ˙α{p1´αq ÿ H
             2
                “     `              ˘‰          2αH                 ` h ˘α{p1´αq
ďγEM,M 1 „µ DRL  M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q ` p1 ´ αq                       c           ` Hε
                                                   γ            h“1
                                                                               ˙α{p1´αq
                                                           2α dcpα pM, M , εq
                                                         ˆ
           “ 2 `                     ˘‰
“γEM,M 1 „µ DRL  M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q ` p1 ´ αqH 1{p1´αq                                ` Hε,
                                                                    γ
where the last inequality is due to the fact that for all x, y ě 0, α P p0, 1q,
                                  ˆ       ˙α{p1´αq                      ˆ       ˙α{p1´αq
     α α          γx                 αHy                  γx              αH
    x y ďα¨           ` p1 ´ αq                       “       ` p1 ´ αq                  ¨ y α{p1´αq ,
                  αH                  γ                   H                 γ
by weighted AM-GM inequality.

F.4     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION E.3

Our overall argument is to bound the DEC by strong duality and the probability matching argument
(similar as Foster et al. (2021, Section 4.2)), after which we show that the resulting quantity is related
nicely to the PSC.
In the following, we denote pscγ pMq :“ supM PM pscγ pM, M q. By definition, it suffices to bound
decγ pM, µq for any fixed µ P ∆pMq. We have
                                             “                                              ‰
         decpM, µq “ inf sup EM „µ Eπ„p f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γDRL    2
                                                                          pM pπq, M pπqq
                          pP∆pΠq M PM

   12
      We remark that Agarwal & Zhang (2022a) defines the Hellinger decoupling coefficient in terms of a general
function πgen ph, µq that maps a µ P ∆pMq to a p P ∆pΠq, and we only present the version that πgen ph, µq
                                          d                                                     d   est
follows a sample from µ, i.e. πgen ph, µq “ πM , M „ µ. For the general case that πgen ph, µq “ πM,h     ,M „
µ, the corresponding Hellinger decoupling coefficient can be bounded by pscest (Definition K.23), by a same
argument.


                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 6 OMLE
 1: Input: Parameter β ą 0.
 2: Initialize confidence set M1 “ M.
 3: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
 4:    Compute pM t , π t q “ arg maxM PMt ,πPΠ f M pπq.
 5:    Execute π t and observe τ t “ pot , rt q.
 6:    Update confidence set with (28):
                                    "                                         *
                             Mt`1 :“ M P M : Lt`1 pM q ě max
                                                          1
                                                             L t`1 pM 1
                                                                        q ´ β  .
                                                                            M PM


                                         “                                          ‰
        “     inf     sup EM „µ,M „µ Eπ„p f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γDRL
                                                                  2
                                                                     pM pπq, M pπqq
             pP∆pΠq µP∆pMq
                                          “                                         ‰
        “      sup     inf EM „µ,M „µ Eπ„p f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γDRL
                                                                   2
                                                                      pM pπq, M pπqq ,
             µP∆pMq pP∆pΠq


where the last equality follows by strong duality (Theorem B.1).
Now, fix any µ P ∆pMq, we pick p P ∆pΠq by probability matching: π „ p is equal in distribution
to π “ πM 1 where M 1 „ µ is an independent copy of M . For this choice of p, the quantity inside
the sup-inf above is
                                  “                                                                     ‰
         EM „µ,M 1 „µ EM „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπM 1 q ´ γDRL               2
                                                                            pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                  „                                                                        ȷ
                                                                     5γ 2
     “EM „µ,M 1 „µ EM „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπM 1 q ´                       DRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                                                      6
                              ”
                                 M                 M             γ 2                                  ı
         ` EM „µ EM „µ f pπM 1 q ´ f pπM 1 q ´ DRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                  „                              6                                        ȷ
     piq                              M               M             5γ 2
     “EM „µ,M „µ EM „µ f pπM q ´ f pπM q ´
                    1                                                   D pM pπM q, M pπM qq
                                                                                         1            1
                                                                     6 RL
                              ”                                  γ 2                                  ı
         ` EM „µ EM „µ f M pπM 1 q ´ f M pπM 1 q ´ DRL                     pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                                                 6
    piiq                          ”
                                      M               M             γ 2                                  ı
     ď EM „µ,M 1 „µ EM „µ f pπM q ´ f pπM q ´ DRL                            pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                                                    6
         looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                    ďEM „µ rpscγ{6 pM,M qsďpscγ{6 pMq
                                     ”?                                                 γ 2                          ı
            ` EM „µ,M 1 „µ EM „µ          H ` 1DRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq ´               DRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                                                                        6
    piiiq                  2pH ` 1q
     ď pscγ{6 pMq `                 .
                              γ

Above, (i) uses the fact that f M pπM 1 q is equal in distribution to f M pπM q (since M „ µ and M 1 „
                                                  2                               2
µ); (ii) uses Lemma B.7 and the fact that 5DRL       pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq ě DRL   pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                                     ?              γ 2    3pH`1q
that is due to Lemma B.6; (iii) uses the inequality H ` 1x ď 6 x ` 2γ for any x P R. Finally,
by the arbitrariness of µ P ∆pΠq, we have shown that decγ pMq ď pscγ{6 pMq ` 2pH ` 1q{γ. This
is the desired result.


G      P ROOFS FOR S ECTION E.2

G.1         A LGORITHM OMLE

In this section, we present the Algorithm OMLE (Algorithm 6), and then state the basic guarantees
of its confidence sets, as follows.


                                                              35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem G.1 (Guarantee of MLE). By choosing β ě 3 estpM, 2T q ` 3 logp1{δq, Algorithm 6
achieves the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ: for all t P rT s, M ‹ P Mt , and it holds that
      ÿ
            2
          DRL  pM ‹ pπ s q, M pπ s qq ď 2β ` 6 estpM, 2T q ` 6 logp1{δq ď 4β,        @M P Mt .
      săt


Proof of Theorem G.1 The proof of Theorem G.1 is mainly based on the following lemma.
Lemma G.2. Fix a ρ ą 0. With probability at least 1 ´ δ, it holds that for all t P rT s and M P M,
            ÿ
                   2                                                             N pM, ρq
                  DRL pM ‹ pπ s q, M pπ s qq ď 2pLt pM ‹ q ´ Lt pM qq ` 6 log             ` 8T ρ.
            săt
                                                                                    δ

Now, we can take ρ that attains estpM, 2T q and apply Lemma G.2. Conditional on the success of
Lemma G.2, it holds that for all t P rT s and M P M,
                              Lt pM q ´ Lt pM ‹ q ď 3 estpM, 2T q ` 3 logp1{δq.
Therefore, our choice of β is enough to ensure that M ‹ P Mt . Then, for M P Mt , we have
                                 Lt pM q ě max
                                            1
                                               Lt pM 1 q ´ β ě Lt pM ‹ q ´ β.
                                             M PM

Applying Lemma G.2 again completes the proof.



The proof of Lemma G.2 is mostly a direct adaption of the proof of Theorem D.1 and Theorem D.8.
                                                                             ‹
Proof of Lemma G.2               For simplicity, we denote P‹ po|πq :“ PM ,π poq and R‹ poq :“ RM poq.
                                 r M0 q of M such that |M0 | “ N pM, ρq.
We pick a ρ-optimistic covering pP,
Recall that the MLE functional is defined as
                                            t´1
                                            ÿ             s        ›             ›2
                              Lt pM q :“          log PM,π pos q ´ ›rs ´ RM pos q›2 .
                                            s“1

For M P M0 , we consider
                           rM pot |π t q
                           P                                 ›             ›2 ›               ›2
            ℓtM :“ log                      t
                                         ` δM ,         t
                                                       δM :“ ›rt ´ R‹ pot q›2 ´ ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 ,
                           P‹ pot |π t q
where the definition of δ agrees with (11). We first show that with probability at least 1 ´ δ, for all
M P M0 and all t P rT s,
             »d                  fi
                   rM pos |π s q
                                 fl ` 1 Es ›R‹ pos q ´ RM pos q›2 ď ´                   |M0 |
  ÿ                P                      ”›                   › ı     ÿ
      1 ´ Es –       ‹  s   s                                   2
                                                                           ℓsM ` 3 log        . (41)
  săt
                   P po |π q          2                                săt
                                                                                          δ

This is because by Lemma B.2, it holds that with probability at least 1 ´ δ, for all t P rT s and
M P M0 ,
                   ÿ 1                                      „     ˆ      ˙ȷ
                                               ÿ                    1 s
                       ´ ℓsM ` logp|M0 |{δq ě      ´ log Es exp       ℓM .
                   săt
                        3                      săt
                                                                    3

Further,
                                                   «    ˜                       ¸ff
                „      ˆ
                           1 s
                                 ˙ȷ
                                           2              1       rM pos |π s q
                                                                  P                  1              s
    ´ log Es exp            ℓ         ě ´ log Es exp        log ‹ s s               ´ log Es rexp pδM  qs
                           3 M             3              2        P po |π q         3
                                          ¨        »d               fi˛
                                        1˝            rM pos |π s q
                                                                    fl‚` 1 Es ›R‹ pos q ´ RM pos q›2 ,
                                                      P                          ”›                 › ı
                                      ě     1 ´ Es –
                                        3             P‹ pos |π s q        6                          2


                                                          36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the second inequality is due to the fact that ´ log x ě 1 ´ x and Lemma D.3 (with σ 2 “ 1{4).
Hence (41) is proven.
Now condition on the success of (41)
                                  › M  for all M0 P M  › 0 . Fix a MMP M, thereMis a M0 P M0
                                                 M
such that M is covered by M0 (i.e. R poq ´ R poq
                                  ›     0
                                                     › 1 ď ρ and P p¨|πq› ě P p¨|πq for all π).
                                                       ›           r 0
Notice that
            ř     rM0 po|πq ď 1 ` ρ2 , and therefore ›P
                  P
                                                     › rM0 p¨|πq ´ PM p¨|πq›› ď ρ2 . Then the first
                  oPO
                                                                                                1
term in (41) (plug in M0 ) can be lower bounded as
                        »d                  fi
                             rM0 pos |π s q
                             P              fl ě 1 Es DH
                                                     “ 2` M                     ˘‰
                 1 ´ Es –      ‹   s  s
                                                         P p¨|π s q, P‹ p¨|π s q ´ ρ,
                              P po |π q          2
                                                               ›                ›
by (22). For the second term, by the fact that R P r0, 1sH and ›RM0 poq ´ RM poq›1 ď ρ, we have
                      ”›                   ›2 ı    ”›                   ›2 ı
                  Es ›R‹ pos q ´ RM pos q›2 ěEs ›R‹ pos q ´ RM pos q›2 ´ 2ρ.
            s       s
                       ´ 2ρ, and hence ´ săt ℓsM0 ď Lt pM ‹ q ´ Lt pM q ` 2T ρ, which completes
                                           ř
Similarly, δM 0
                ě δM
the proof.



G.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.5

In the following, we show the following general result.
Theorem G.3 (Full version of Theorem E.5). Choosing β ě 3 estpM, 2T q ` 3 logp1{δq ě 1, with
probability at least 1 ´ δ, Algorithm 6 achieves
                                 RegDM ď inf tT ¨ mlecγ,T pM, M ‹ q ` 4γβu.
                                               γą0


Especially, when M is finite, we can take β “ 3 logp|M| {δq (because estpM, 2T q ď log |M|),
and Theorem G.3 implies Theorem E.5 directly.
Proof of Theorem G.3 Condition on the success of Theorem G.1. Then, for t P rT s, it holds that
                                                                      t            ‹
M ‹ P Mt . Therefore, by the choice of pM t , π t q, it holds that f M pπ t q ě f M pπM ‹ q. Then,
               T ”                        ı ÿT ”                        ı
               ÿ     ‹             ‹               t            ‹
RegDM “           f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπ t q ď    f M pπ t q ´ f M pπ t q
               t“1                                       t“1
          #                                              «˜                                                      ¸       ff+
               T
           1 ÿ ” Mt t                    ‹
                                                ı γ                   ÿ
   “T ¨             f pπ q ´ f M pπ t q ´                     max          DRL2
                                                                                 pM ‹ pπM s q, M t pπM s qq _ 1
          T t“1                                       T       tPrT s
                                                                     sďt´1
        looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                      bounded by mlecγ,T pM,M ‹ q
              ˜                                                    ¸
                        ÿ
                                  2
      `γ¨       max              DRL pM ‹ pπM s q, M t pπM s qq        _1
                tPrT s
                       sďt´1
              looooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                      bounded by 4β
                             ‹
   ďT mlecγ,T pM, M q ` 4γβ.
Taking inf γą0 completes the proof.



G.3    R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PSC AND MLEC

The MLEC resembles the PSC in that both control a certain decoupling error between a family of
models and their optimal policies. The main difference is that the MLEC concerns any sequence of
models whereas the PSC concerns any distribution of models. Intuitively, the sequential nature of
the MLEC makes it a stronger requirement than the PSC.


                                                             37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Formally, we show that low MLEC with a slightly modified definition of MLEC (where the
maxkPrKs is replaced by the average; cf. (42)) indeed implies low PSC. Note that the modified
MLEC defined in (42) is larger than the MLEC defined in Definition E.4; however, in most concrete
applications they can be bounded by the same upper bounds. We present Definition E.4 as the main
definition of MLEC in order to capture generic classes of problems such as RL with low Bellman-
Eluder dimensions or (more generally) low-Eluder-dimension Bellman representations (Proposi-
tion K.7).
Proposition G.4 (Bounding PSC by modified MLEC). Consider the following modified MLEC:
                                           K ”
           Ć γ,K pM, M q :“ sup 1
                                          ÿ        k
                                                                        ı
           mlec                                f M pπM k q ´ f M pπM k q
                               tM k uPM K k“1
                                              ˜
                                                 K
                                                                                     ¸       (42)
                                           γ    ÿ    ÿ
                                                             2              k
                                        ´ 2                D pM pπM t q, M pπM t qq .
                                          K k“1 tďk´1 RL
Then it holds that                ˜                                                        ¸
                                                                 c
                                                                     2 log p|Π| ^ |M| ` 1q
          pscγ pM, M q ď inf       mlec
                                   Ć γ,K pM, M q ` pγ ` 1q                                  .
                            Kě1                                                 K

Proof of Proposition G.4          Fix a K ě 1 and µ P ∆pMq. We first prove the bound in terms
of |Π|. The proof uses the probabilistic method to establish the desired     ␣ deterministic  ( bound. We
draw K i.i.d samples M 1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , M K from µ, and we write µ    p “ Unifp M 1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , M K q. Then with
probability at least 1 ´ p|Π| ` 1qδ, the following holds simultaneously:
                                                                 c
                                   ”
                                     M              M
                                                           ı        2 logp1{δq
               pEM „µ ´ EM „µp q f pπM q ´ f pπM q ď                             ,
                                                                         K
                                                                c
                                   “ 2 `                 ˘‰        2 logp1{δq
               pEM „µp ´ EM „µ q DRL       M pπq, M pπq ď                      ,      @π P Π.
                                                                        K
Therefore, with probability at least 1 ´ p|Π| ` 1qδ (over the randomness of µ        p), we have
                     ”                                                         ı
                        M            M               2
    EM „µ EM 1 „µ f pπM q ´ f pπM q ´ γDRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq
                                                                                            c
                     ”
                        M            M               2
                                                                               ı               2 logp1{δq
  ďEM „µp EM 1 „µp f pπM q ´ f pπM q ´ γDRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq ` p1 ` γq
                                                                                                   K
                                                  ˜                                         ¸
         K ”                                          K ÿK
      1  ÿ        k
                                         ı    γ      ÿ
  ď           f M pπM k q ´ f M pπM k q ´ 2                  D2 pM pπM t q, M k pπM t qq
     K k“1                                   K k“1 t“1 RL
                 c
                    2 logp1{δq
     ` p1 ` γq
                        K
                                    c
                                      2 logp1{δq
  ďmlecγ,K pM, M q ` p1 ` γq
     Ć                                            .
                                           K
In particular, for any δ ă 1{p1 ` |Π|q, the above holds with positive probability, and thus there exists
one µp such that the above holds. Taking δ Ò 1{p1 ` |Π|q on the right-hand side and supremum over
µ P ∆pMq on the left-hand side, we get
                                                                   c
                                                                       2 logp|Π| ` 1q
                       pscγ pMq ď mlecγ,K pM, M q ` p1 ` γq
                                     Ć                                                  .
                                                                             K
The bound in term of |M| follows analogously, by noticing that with probability at least 1 ´ p|M| `
1qδ, the following holds simultaneously:
                                                           c
                              ”
                                 M           M
                                                       ı       2 logp1{δq
          pEM „µ ´ EM „µp q f pπM q ´ f pπM q ď                            ,
                                                                   K
                                                                  c
                                “ 2 `                       ˘‰        2 logp1{δq
          pEM 1 „µp ´ EM 1 „µ q DRL    M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q ď                      ,      @M P M,
                                                                           K
and repeating the same argument as above.



                                                   38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 7 Exploartive E2D with Tempered Aggregation (E XPLORATIVE E2D)
Input: Parameter γ ą 0; Learning rate ηp P p0, 21 q, ηr ą 0.
 1: Initialize µ1 Ð UnifpMq.
 2: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
                                                            µt                            µt
 3:    Set pptexp , ptout q Ð arg minppexp ,pout qP∆pΠq2 Vppac,γ ppexp , pout q, where Vppac is defined in (6).

 4:    Sample π t „ ptexp . Execute π t and observe pot , rt q.
 5:    Update randomized model estimator by Tempered Aggregation:
                                               ´                t  ›             ›2 ¯
                 µt`1 pM q 9M µt pM q ¨ exp ηp log PM,π pot q ´ ηr ›rt ´ RM pot q›2 .                        (43)

                                        řT
Output: Policy ppout :“ T1                      t
                                           t“1 pout .



H     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.1
We describe the full E XPLORATIVE E2D algorithm in Algorithm 7.

H.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

We first show that Algorithm 7 achieves the following:
                       ‹
                                          ” ‹ ı                       EstRL
                   f M pπM ‹ q ´ Eπ„pout f M pπq ď edecγ pMq ` γ            ,                                (44)
                                                                        T
where EstRL denotes the following online estimation error (cf. (18)):
                                             T
                                             ÿ                        ”                    ı
                                                                        2   xt t     ‹ t
                            EstRL :“                            xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq .
                                                    Eπt „ptexp EM
                                             t“1

We have
            T               ” ‹                      ı
            ÿ                                 ‹
                  Eπt „ptout f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπ t q
           t“1
            T
            ÿ                                                      ”                     ı
                                                                      2           t
       “          Eπ„ptout rfM pπM q ´ fM pπqs ´ γEπ„ptexp EM
                                                            xt „µt  DRL pM pπq, M
                                                                                x   pπqq
            t“1
                        T
                        ÿ                       ”                     ı
                                                  2    ‹ t xt t
               `γ¨                        xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq
                              Eπt „ptexp EM
                        t“1
           T
       piq ÿ                                                             ”                    ı
                                                                            2           t
       ď            sup Eπ„ptout rfM pπM q ´ fM pπqs ´ γEπ„ptexp EM
                                                                  xt „µt  DRL pM pπq, M
                                                                                      x   pπqq
            t“1 M PM
                        T
                        ÿ                       ”                     ı
                                                  2    ‹ t xt t
               `γ¨                        xt „µt DRL pM pπ q, M pπ qq
                              Eπt „ptexp EM
                        t“1
              T
       piiq
                        p µt ppt , pt q
              ÿ
        “               Vpac,γ exp out
                        looooooooomooooooooon               `γ ¨ EstRL
              t“1
                    “inf ppexp ,p                  p µt
                                                 2 Vpac,γ
                                    out qP∆pΠq

             T
       piiiq ÿ
        “           edecγ pM, µt q ` γ ¨ EstRL ď T ¨ edecγ pMq ` γ ¨ EstRL .
              t“1

Above, (i) follows by the realizability assumption M ‹ P M; (ii) follows by definition of the risk
   µt                                                                    µt
Vppac,γ (cf. (6)) as well as the fact that pptexp , ptout q minimizes Vppac,γ p¨, ¨q in Algorithm 7; (iii) follows
by definition of edecγ pM, µt q. Dividing both sides by T proves (44).


                                                                   39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Combining (44) with the online estimation guarantee of Tempered Aggregation (Corollary D.2)
completes the proof.
Theorem 5 can be extended to the more general case with infinite model classes. Combining
(44) with Proposition D.6, we can establish the following general guarantee of E XPLORATIVE
E2D WITH COVERING.
Theorem H.1 (E XPLORATIVE E2D WITH COVERING). Suppose model class M admits a ρ-
                  r M0 q. Then, Algorithm 7 with the Tempered Aggregation subroutine (3) replaced
optimistic cover pP,
by by (19) with ηp “ ηr “ 1{3 and µ1 “ UnifpM0 q achieves the following with probability at least
1 ´ δ:
                                              10γ
                   SubOpt ď edecγ pMq `            rlog |M0 | ` T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                                               T
By tuning γ ą 0, with probability at least 1 ´ δ, Algorithm 7 achieves
                                      !               γ                         )
                 SubOpt ď C inf edecγ pMq ` restpM, T q ` logp1{δqs ,
                                 γą0                  T
where C is a universal constant.

H.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 6

We present the full version of Proposition 6 here, and then provide its proof, which is a generalization
of Foster et al. (2021, Theorem 3.2).
Proposition H.2 (PAC lower bound). Consider a model class M and T ě 1 a fixed integer. Define
                                M
V pMq :“ 3 supM,M supπ,o PM po|πq , CpT q :“ 213 logp2T ^ V pMqq and εγ :“ CpTγ qT . Then we
                              P    po|πq
can assign each model M P M with a reward distribution (with r P r´2, 2sH almost surely), such
that for any algorithm A, there exists a model M P M for which
                                            1
                      EM,A rSubOpts ě         max sup edecγ pM8
                                                              εγ pM q, M q,
                                            6 γą0 M PM

where we define g M pπq :“ f M pπM q ´ f M pπq and the localization
                                !           ˇ                ˇ              )
                                            ˇ M         M
                   M8            M     M  :           g           ε,      Π   .                    (45)
                                                             ˇ
                      ε  pM q “      P      ˇg  pπq ´     pπqˇ ď     @π P

Proof. First, we need to specify the reward distribution for each M P M, given its mean reward
function RM : O Ñ r0, 1sH : conditional on the observation o, we let r “ prh q be a random vector,
with each entry rh independently sampled from
                                  3 RhM poq                                  1 RM poq
                ˆ             ˙                           ˆ            ˙
              M    h     1 ˇˇ                           M    h    3 ˇˇ
            P     r “ ´ ˇo “ ´                 ,      P     r “ ˇo “ ` h                 .
                         2        4       2                       2          4       2
                                    ´                 ¯      ˇ                   ˇ2
                                  2                        1 ˇ M
Then a simple calculation gives DH    RM      R M
                                                                         R M
                                                                                 ˇ . Therefore, by the
                                                                                 ˇ
                                       h poq,   h poq   ď  2 ˇR h poq  ´   h  poq
fact that prh q are mutually independent conditional on o, we have
     1 2´ M                  ¯ źˆ          1 2´ M                 ¯˙ ź ˆ     1 ˇˇ M              ˇ2 ˙
1 ´ DH       R poq, RM poq “          1 ´ DH      Rh poq, RM             1                R M    ˇ
                                                            h poq   ě      ´    ˇRh poq ´   h poqˇ
     2                             h
                                           2                           h
                                                                             4
                    ˆ            ›                 ›2 ˙               ›               ›2
            ě exp ´ logp4{3q ›RM poq ´ RM poq› ě 1 ´ logp4{3q ›RM poq ´ RM poq› ,
                                 ›                 ›                  ›               ›
                                                       2                                       2

where the second inequality is because 1 ´ x{4 ě expp´ logp4{3qxq for all x P r0, 1s. Therefore,
by Lemma B.4,
     `             ˘         ´               ¯            ”    ´                 ¯ı
   2                      2
 DH    M pπq, M pπq ď 3DH      PM pπq, PM pπq ` 2Eo„PM pπq DH2
                                                                 RM poq, RM poq
              ´                 ¯             „›               ›2 ȷ
            2    M       M                     › M         M               2
                                                                              `              ˘
       ď 3DH P pπq, P pπq ` 3Eo„PM pπq ›R poq ´ R poq› ď 3DRL                   M pπq, M pπq .
                                                               ›
                                                                        2



                                                  40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                             !          )T Ť
                                                                ptq
Next, suppose that algorithm A is given by rules p “ pexp p¨ | ¨q             tpout p¨ | ¨qu, where
                                                                         t“1
 ptq `         ˘
pexp ¨|Hpt´1q P ∆pΠq is the rule of interaction at t-th step (given Hpt´1q the history before t-
                  `       ˘
th step), and pout ¨|HpT q P ∆pΠq is the rule of the output policy. For M P M, we define
                  «                         ff
                       T
              M,A    1 ÿ ptq ´             ¯                                “           ‰
 pM,exp “ E               pexp ¨ | H pt´1q
                                               P ∆pΠq,      pM,out “ EM,A pout p¨|HT q P ∆pΠq,
                    T t“1

where PM,A is the probability“ distribution
                                      ‰      induced by A when interacting with M . Notice that
EM,A rSubOpts “ Eπ„pM,out g M pπq .
                                           `             ˘
Let us abbreviate edec :“ supM PM edecγ M8      ε pM q, M , and let M P M attains the supremum.
Then
                         “                     ‰               “ 2 `              ˘‰
       sup    Eπ„pM ,out f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γEπ„pM ,exp DRL        M pπq, M pπq ě edec .
   M PM8
       ε pM q


Let M P M8    ε pM q attain the supremum above. Then we have
            “       ‰                   “ 2 `                  ˘‰           γ            “ 2`              ˘‰
Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ě γ¨Eπ„pM ,exp DRL            M pπq, M pπq `edec ě ¨Eπ„pM ,exp DH           M pπq, M pπq `edec .
                                                                            3
                                                ˇ                 ˇ
                                                ˇ M          M
Recall from the definition of M8           that            g      ˇ ď ε for all π. Hence, by Lemma B.3,
                                                                  ˇ
                                    ε pM q      ˇg   pπq ´     pπq
it holds that
 ˇ            ”                   ı                ”                  ıˇ
 ˇEπ„pM ,out g M pπq ´ g M pπq ´ Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ´ g M pπq ˇ
 ˇ                                                                     ˇ
    c      ´             ”                   ı               ”                   ı¯      ´            ¯
  ď 8ε ¨ Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` g M pπq ` Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` g M pπq ¨ DH              2 PM,A , PM ,A

           ´               ¯ 1´                 ”                   ı               ”              ı¯
         2
  ď 4εDH     PM,A , PM ,A `          Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` g M pπq ` Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` g M pπq ,
                                2
which implies
                “       ‰                ”         ı 1              “       ‰ 1              ”     ı
    Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ě Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq
                                                       3                         3
                                                         8 2 ´ M,A M ,A ¯
                                                       ´ εDH P           ,P       .
                                                         3
Furthermore, by the subadditivity of the squared Hellinger distance (Foster et al., 2021, Lemma
A.13), we have
                      ´            ¯    T
                                        ÿ      ”   ´                       ¯ı
                    2
                   DH  PM,A , PM ,A ďCT   EM ,A DH
                                                 2
                                                     M pπ ptq q, M pπ ptq q
                                                 t“1
                                                             “ 2`             ˘‰
                                           “CT T ¨ Eπ„pM ,exp DH  M pπq, M pπq ,

where CT :“ 28 plogp2T q ^ log pV pMqqq as in the proof of Foster et al. (2021, Theorem 3.2). As
long as 24CT T ε ď γ, it holds that
                                  “     ‰            ”       ı 1
                      Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ` Eπ„pM ,out g M pπq ě edec .
                                                                   3
This completes the proof.

H.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 7

Fix a µ P ∆pMq, and we take
                                                      !       “                   ‰
       ppexp , pout q :“       arg min        sup      Eπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq
                           ppexp ,pout qP∆pMq2 M PM
                                                                       “ 2                ‰)
                                                       ´ γEπ„pexp EM „µ DRL pM pπq, M pπqq .


                                                        41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then consider p “ αpexp ` p1 ´ αqpout . By definition,
  decpM, µq
          “                   ‰             “ 2                 ‰
ď sup Eπ„p f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γEπ„p EM „µ DRL pM pπq, M pπqq
 M PM
      !         “                 ‰                  “ 2                 ‰
“ sup αEπ„pexp f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γαEπ„pexp EM „µ DRL  pM pπq, M pπqq
  M PM
                   “                   ‰                       “ 2                 ‰)
     p1 ´ αqEπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γp1 ´ αqEπ„pout EM „µ DRL pM pπq, M pπqq
      !                   “                 ‰                   “ 2                 ‰)
ď sup α ` p1 ´ αqEπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ αγEπ„pexp EM „µ DRL   pM pπq, M pπqq
  M PM
“α ` p1 ´ αq edecαγ{p1´αq pM, µq.



H.3.1    A DDITIONAL DISCUSSIONS ON BOUNDING DEC BY EDEC
Here we argue that, for classes with low EDEC, obtaining a PAC sample complexity through the
implied DEC bound is in general worse than the bound obtained by the EDEC bound directly.
Consider any model class M with edecγ pMq À d{γ, where d is some dimension-like complexity
measure. Using the E XPLORATIVE E2D algorithm, by Theorem 5, the suboptimality of the output
policy scales as
                    ‹
                                       ” ‹ ı                     γ logp|M| {δq
                 f M pπM ‹ q ´ Eπ„ppout f M pπq ď edecγ pMq ` 10
                                          c                            T
                  d    γ                    d logp|M| {δq
                À ` ¨ logp|M| {δq À                       ,
                  γ   T                           T
where the last inequality follows by choosing the optimal γ ą 0. This implies a PAC sample
complexity d logp|M| {δq{ε2 for finding an ε near-optimal policy.
By contrast, suppose we use an algorithm designed for low DEC problems (such as E2D-TA). To
first bound the DEC by the EDEC, by Proposition 7, we have
                                                               "               * d
                                                                          2 d        d
                        ␣                              (
        decγ pMq ď inf α ` p1 ´ αqedecγα{p1´αq pMq ď inf α ` p1 ´ αq             À     .
                   αą0                                     αą0              γα       γ
Then, using the E2D-TA algorithm, by Theorem 2 and the online-to-batch conversion, the subopti-
mality of the average policy scales as
                             T
                  RegDM   1 ÿ M‹                   ” ‹         ı
                        “       f pπM ‹ q ´ Eπt „pt f M pπ t q
                    T     T t“1
                                           γ logp|M| {δq
                           ď decγ pMq ` 10
                             d                   T
                                                      ˆ               ˙1{3
                               d    γ                   d logp|M| {δq
                           À      ` ¨ logp|M| {δq À                        ,
                               γ    T                         T
where the last inequality follows by choosing the optimal γ ą 0. This implies a PAC sample
complexity d logp|M| {δq{ε3 for finding an ε near-optimal policy, which is an 1{ε factor worse
than that obtained from the EDEC directly. Note that this 1{ε3 rate is the same as obtained from
the standard explore-then-commit conversion from PAC algorithms with sample complexity 1{ε2 to
no-regret algorithms.
We remark that the same calculations above also hold in general for problems with edecγ pMq À
1{γ β (when only highlighting dependence on γ) for some β ą 0. In that case, the EDEC yields
                              β`1
PAC sample complexity p1{εq β , whereas the implied DEC bound only yields a slightly worse
      β`2
p1{εq β sample complexity.


                                              42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.4    E XAMPLE : EDEC LOWER BOUND FOR TABULAR MDP S

In this section, we follow Domingues et al. (2021); Foster et al. (2021) to construct a class
                                                                                            ` of tabular˘
MDPs whose (localized) EDEC has a desired lower bound, and hence establish a Ω HSA{ε2
lower bound of sample complexity for PAC learning in tabular MDPs, recovering the result of
Domingues et al. (2021).
Proposition H.3 (EDEC lower bound for tabular MDPs). There exists M a class of MDPs with
S ě 4 states, A ě 2 actions, horizon H ě 2 log2 pSq and the same reward function, such that
                                                                "          *
                                        8                            HSA
                          sup edecγ pMε pM q, M q ě c1 min 1,                ,
                          M PM                                         γ

for all γ ą 0 such that ε ě c2 HSA{γ, where c1 , c2 are two universal constants. As a corollary,
applying the PAC lower bound in EDEC (Proposition H.2), we have that for any algorithm A that
interacts with the environment for T episodes,
                                                        # c         +
                                 M,A                          HSA
                          sup E      rSubOpts ě c0 min 1,              ,
                          M PM                                  T

where c0 is a universal constant.
                                                                `          ˘
Proposition H.3 implies a sample complexity lower bound of Ω HSA{ε2 for learning ε-optimal
policy in tabular MDPs. This simple example illustrates the power of edec as a lower bound for PAC
learning, analogously to the DEC for no-regret learning.
Moreover, notice that all models in M have the same reward function (denote it by R), hence for
this class M it holds that
                           edecγ pM8                      8,rf
                                   ε pM q, M q ď rfdecγ pMε    pPq, Pq                              (46)

for all M “ pP, Rq P M. Combining this fact with Proposition H.3 gives a lower bound of RFDEC
of M, and hence we can also obtain a sample complexity lower bound for reward-free learning in
tabular MDPs.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume that S “ 2n`1 ` 1 and let S 1 “ 2n . We also write
A1 “ A ´ 1, H 1 “ H ´ n ě H{2.
Fix a ∆ P p0, 13 s, we consider M∆ the class of MDPs described as follows.
                                  Ů
 1. The state space S “ Stree ts‘ , sa u, where Stree is a binary tree of level n ` 1 (hence
                 n`1
    |Stree | “ 2     ´ 1), and s‘ , sa are two auxiliary nodes. Let s0 be the root of Stree , and S 1 be
    the set of leaves of Stree (hence |S 1 | “ 2n ).
 2. Each episode has horizon H.
 3. The reward function is fixed and known: arriving at s‘ emits a reward 1, and at all other states
    the reward is 0.
 4. For h‹ P H1 :“ tn ` 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , Hu, s‹ P S 1 , a‹ P rA1 s, the transition dynamic of M “ Mh‹ ,s‹ ,a‹
    is defined as follows:
      • The initial state is always s0 .
      • At a node s P Stree such that s is not leaf of Stree , there are two available actions left and
        right, with left leads to the left children of s and right leads to the right children of s.
      • At leaf s P S 1 , there are A actions: wait, 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , A´1. The dynamic of M “ Mh‹ ,s‹ ,a‹ P M
        at s is given by: PM                                      1
                             h ps|s, waitq “ 1, and for a P rA s, h P rHs

                                            1
                            PM
                             h ps‘ |s, aq “   ` ∆ ¨ 1ph “ h‹ , s “ s‹ , a “ a‹ q,
                                            2
                                            1
                            PM
                             h psa |s, aq “   ´ ∆ ¨ 1ph “ h‹ , s “ s‹ , a “ a‹ q,
                                            2

                                                   43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     • The state s‘ always transits to sa , and sa is the absorbing state (i.e. Ppsa |s‘ , ¨q “ 1,
       Ppsa |sa , ¨q “ 1).

Let M be the MDP model with the same transition dynamic and reward function as above, except
                                                                                      1
that for all h P rHs, s P S 1 , a P rA1 s it holds PM                 M
                                                    h ps‘ |s, aq “ Ph psa |s, aq “ 2 . Note that M does
not depend on ∆. We then define
                                 ␣ (ď␣                                             (
                       M∆ “ M                 Mh,s,a : ph, s, aq P H1 ˆ S 1 ˆ rA1 s .

Before lower bounding edecγ pM∆ , M q, we make some preparations. Define

                νπ ph, s, aq “ PM ,π psh “ s, ah “ aq,               @ph, s, aq P H1 ˆ S 1 ˆ rA1 s.
Note that due to the structure of M , the events Ah,s,a :“ tsh “ s, ah “ au are disjoint for
ph, s, aq P H1 ˆ S 1 ˆ rA1 s; therefore,
                                         ÿ
                                                νπ ph, s, aq ď 1.
                                         hPH1 ,sPS 1 ,aPrA1 s

Furthermore, for M “ Mh,s,a P M∆ , we have
               `             ˘                           ´                         ¯
             2
          DH     M pπq, M pπq “ PM ,π psh “ s, ah “ aqDH
                                                       2
                                                           PM            M
                                                            h p¨|s, aq, Ph p¨|s, aq

because M pπq and M pπq only differs
                                   ´ at the conditional probability
                                                           ¯        of sh`1 |sh “ s, ah “ a.
                                                                  `                       ˘
Therefore, due to the fact that DH Ph p¨|s, aq, Ph p¨|s, aq “ DH Bernp 12 ` ∆q, Bernp 12 q ď
                                 2  M            M              2

3∆2 , we have                         `             ˘
                                    2
                                   DH   M pπq, M pπq ď 3νπ ph, s, aq∆2 .

Now, that for pexp , pout P ∆pπq and M P M1 , we have
                    “                  ‰            “ 2`              ˘‰
           Eπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γEπ„pexp DH     M pπq, M pπq
                              „                      ȷ
           1                    1     M,π ‹ ‹ ‹
                                                                 “ 2`               ˘‰
        “ ` ∆ ´ Eπ„pout           ` ∆P   ph , s , a q ´ γEπ„pexp DH     M pπq, M pπq
           2                    2
         ě∆p1 ´ Eπ„pout rνπ ph‹ , s‹ , a‹ qsq ´ 3γ∆2 Eπ„pexp rνπ ph‹ , s‹ , a‹ qs.
Therefore, we define
          νpexp ph, s, aq “ Eπ„pexp rνπ ph, s, aqs,              νpout ph, s, aq “ Eπ„pout rνπ ph, s, aqs.
Then, for any fixed pexp , pout P ∆pΠq, by the fact that
                       ÿ          ␣                                    (
                                   νpexp ph, s, aq ` 3γ∆νpout ph, s, aq ď 1 ` 3γ∆,
                  hPH1 ,sPS 1 ,aPrA1 s

we know that there exists ph1 , s1 , a1 q P H1 ˆ S 1 ˆ rA1 s such that
                                                                               1 ` 3γ∆
                          νpexp ph1 , s1 , a1 q ` 3γ∆νpout ph1 , s1 , a1 q ď              .
                                                                               H 1 S 1 A1
Then we can consider M 1 “ Mh1 ,s1 ,a1 , and
                                “                   ‰                  “ 2`             ˘‰
                 sup Eπ„pout f M pπM q ´ f M pπq ´ γEπ„pexp DH              M pπq, M pπq
                M PM1
                        ” 1                1
                                               ı                 “ 2` 1             ˘‰
             ěEπ„pout f M pπM 1 q ´ f M pπq ´ γEπ„pexp DH               M pπq, M pπq
                  `                      ˘
             ě∆ 1 ´ νpexp ph1 , s1 , a1 q ´ 3γ∆2 νpout ph1 , s1 , a1 q
                         1 ` 3γ∆
             ě∆ ´ ∆ ¨ 1 1 1 .
                          HSA
By the arbitrariness of pexp , pout P ∆pΠq, we derive that
                                                                        1 ` 3γ∆
                                   edecγ pM∆ , M q ě ∆ ´ ∆ ¨                       .
                                                                        H 1 S 1 A1

                                                            44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 8 R EWARD -F REE E2D
    1: Input: Parameters η “ 1{3, γ ą 0; prior distribution µ1 P ∆pPq.
    2: // Exploration phase
    3: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
                                                           t
                                                     µ
    4:       Set ptexp “ arg minpexp P∆pΠq supRPR Vprf,γ ppexp , Rq, where (cf. (7))
                                                                                                ”                  ı
                µt                               “                         ‰
             Vprf,γ ppexp , Rq :“ inf sup Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq ´ γEπ„pexp EPp t „µt DH
                                                                                                  2        p t pπqq .
                                                                                                    pPpπq, P
                                 pout PPP


    5:       Sample π t „ ptexp . Execute π t and observe ot .
    6:       Compute µt`1 P ∆pPq by Tempered Aggregation with observations only:
                                                               ´        t
                                                                              ¯
                                       µt`1 pPq 9P µt pPq ¨ exp η log Pπ pot q .                        (47)

 7: // Planning phase
 8: Input: R‹ P R
 9: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
10:    Compute
                                               ”     ‹               ‹
                                                                         ı                     ”                  ı
             ptout pR‹ q :“ arg min sup Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq ´ γEπ„ptexp EPp t „µt DH
                                                                                                 2        p t pπqq .
                                                                                                   pPpπq, P
                           pout P∆pΠq PPP
                                     řT
11: Output: ppout pR‹ q “ T1                 t     ‹
                                        t“1 pout pR q.


                                                                    3
Also, by definition, it holds that M∆           ∆ 13
                                    ε,8 pM q “ M , ! V pM
                                                          ∆
                                                            q “ 1´∆   ď 6. Therefore, given
                                                       b          )
                                                          1  1  1
T ě 1 and algorithm A, we set C0 “ 214 , ∆ “ min 13 , H     S A
                                                         12C0 T , γ “ C0 T ∆, then applying
Proposition H.2 to M∆ gives a M P M∆ such that
                              ˆ                ˙            # c            +
           M,A              1         1 ` 3γ∆    ∆              H 1 S 1 A1
          E    rSubOpts ě       ∆´∆¨ 1 1 1 ě        ě c0 min 1,             ,
                            6         HSA        24                 T
                                                    1`3γ∆        3
where the second inequality is due to the fact that H 1 S 1 A1 ď 4 which follows from simple calcula-
tion, and c0 is a universal constant.
On the other hand, we can similarly provide lower bound of edecpM,
                                                            !         M q)for the model class M “
          ∆                                                   1 H 1 S 1 A1
Ť
  ∆ą0 M : For any given γ ą 0, we can take ε “ ∆ “ min 3 , 12γ             , and then
                                                                                   "              *
            8                       ∆                 1 ` 3γ∆       ∆       1        1 H 1 S 1 A1
 edecγ pMε pM q, M q ě edecγ pM , M q ě ∆ ´ ∆ ¨ 1 1 1 ě                  “ min        ,            .
                                                       HSA           4      4        3 12γ



I         P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.2
I.1        A LGORITHM R EWARD -F REE E2D

Algorithm 8 presents a slightly more general version of the R EWARD -F REE E2D algorithm where
we allow |P| to be possibly infinite. The algorithm described in Section 4.2 is a special case of Al-
gorithm 8 with |P| ă 8 and we pick the uniform prior µ1 “ UnifpPq.
More generally, just as Algorithm 7, Algorithm 8 can also apply to the case when M only admits a
finite optimistic covering. Its guarantee in this setting is stated as follows.
Theorem I.1 (R EWARD -F REE E2D). Given a ρ-optimistic cover pP,           r P0 q of P, we can replace the
subroutine (47) in Algorithm 8 with
                                                          ´                 ¯
                               µt`1 pPq 9P µt pPq ¨ exp η log P   r πt pot q .                        (48)
     13
          Here to avoid confusion, we move the 8 in the superscript (cf. (45)) to the subscript.


                                                           45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and let η “ 1{2, µ1 “ UnifpP0 q, then Algorithm 8 achieves the following with probability at least
1 ´ δ:
                                                       2γ
                    SubOptrf ď rfdecγ pMq `               rlog |P0 | ` T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                                                       T
By tuning γ ą 0, with probability at least 1 ´ δ, Algorithm 8 achieves the following:
                                       !               γ                         )
                 SubOptrf ď 4 inf rfdecγ pMq ` restpP, T q ` logp1{δqs .
                                  γą0                  T

I.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 9 AND T HEOREM I.1

For P P P, R P R, pexp , pout P ∆pΠq, we consider the function
                                    “                         ‰               “ 2             ‰
 V t ppexp , R; pout , Pq :“ Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq ´γEP„µt Eπ„pexp DH pPpπq, Ppπqq .

Then the policy played by Algorithm 8 at step t is exactly
                                   t
                             µ
      ptexp “ arg min sup Vprf,γ ppexp , Rq “ arg min sup               inf     sup V t ppexp , R; pout , Pq.
             pexp P∆pΠq RPR                        pexp P∆pΠq RPR pout P∆pΠq PPP

Therefore, for any R‹ P R, using the definition of the infs and sups in the risks, we have that
                                                                  t                   t
                  rfdecγ pMq ě rfdecγ pM, µt q “ sup Vp µ pptexp , Rq ě Vp µ pptexp , R‹ q
                                                        RPR
              ě      inf    sup V t pptexp , R‹ ; pout , Pq
                  pout P∆pΠq PPP

              “ sup V t pptexp , R‹ ; ptout pR‹ q, Pq ě V t pptexp , R‹ ; ptout pR‹ q, P‹ q.
                  PPP

Therefore, for any R‹ P R and the associated M ‹ “ pP‹ , R‹ q, we have
                ” ‹               ‹
                                      ı                                “ 2 ‹           ‰
  Eπ„ptout pR‹ q f M pπM ‹ q ´ f M pπq ď rfdecγ pMq ` γEP„µt Eπ„ptexp DH  pP pπq, Ppπqq ,

Taking average over t P rT s and taking supremum over R‹ P R on the left-hand side, we get
              ! ‹ ‹                            ” ‹ ‹ ı)                          EstH
         sup f P ,R pπP‹ ,R‹ q ´ Eπ„ppout pR‹ q f P ,R pπq ď rfdecγ pMq ` γ ¨          ,                        (49)
          ‹
         R PR                                                                      T
where
                                       T
                                       ÿ                   “ 2 ‹            ‰
                           EstH :“           EP„µt Eπ„ptexp DH pP pπq, Ppπqq .
                                       t“1


Note that (52) holds regardless of the subroutine ((47) or (48)) we use. Therefore, it remains to
bound EstH for (47) and (48).
When |P| ă 8, Corollary D.2 implies that subroutine (47) (agrees with (3) with ηr “ 0 and ηp “ η)
achieves with probability at least 1 ´ δ that
                                                      1
                                             EstH ď     logp|P| {δq.
                                                      η
This proves Theorem 9.
                                         r P0 q is given, Theorem D.8 implies that: subroutine (48)
Similarly, when a ρ-optimistic covering pP,
(agrees with (19) with ηr “ 0 and ηp “ η) achieves with probability at least 1 ´ δ that
                                             1
                                EstH ď         rlog |P0 | ` T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                                             η
This completes the proof of Theorem I.1.


                                                       46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 10

We state and prove the formal version of Proposition 10 as follows.
Proposition I.2 (Reward-free lower bound). Consider a model class M “ P ˆ R and T ě 1 a
fixed integer. Define V pMq, CpT q and εγ as in Proposition H.2. Then for any algorithm A that
returns a mapping pout : R Ñ ∆pΠq after T episodes, there exists a model P P P for which
                                           “                            “              ‰‰
             EP,A rSubOptrf s ě sup EP,A f P,R pπP,R q ´ Eπout „pout pRq f P,R pπ out q
                                   RPR
                                 1
                                ě ¨ max sup rfdecγ pM8,rf
                                                     εγ pPq, Pq,
                                 6 γą0 PPP
where the localization is defined as M8,rf
                                      ε    pPq :“ Pε8,rf pPq ˆ R, where
                              !       ˇ                    ˇ                   )
                Pε8,rf pPq “ P P P : ˇg P,R pπq ´ g P,R pπqˇ ď ε, @π P Π, R P R ,                  (50)
                                      ˇ                    ˇ

and g P,R pπq :“ f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq for any pP, R, πq P P ˆ R ˆ Π.
                                                                !          )T Ť
                                                                   ptq
Proof. Suppose that algorithm A is given by rules p “ pexp p¨ | ¨q                 tpout p¨ | ¨qu, where
                                                                            t“1
 ptq `    pt´1q
                ˘                                                         pt´1q
pexp ¨|H          P ∆pΠq is the rule of interaction at t-th step with H         the history before t-th
               ` pT q ˘
step, and pout ¨|H , ¨ : R Ñ ∆pΠq is the rule of outputting the policy given a reward. Let PP,A
refers to the distribution (of HpT q ) induced by the exploration phase of A under transition P.
For any P P M and R P R, we define
                 «                         ff
                      T
             P,A   1 ÿ ptq ´              ¯                                   ”             ı
pexp pPq “ E             pexp ¨ | H pt´1q
                                               P ∆pΠq, pout pP, Rq “ EP,A pout p¨|HpT q , Rq P ∆pΠq.
                   T t“1
                 “                              “              ‰‰               “        ‰
Notice that EP,A f P,R pπP,R q ´ Eπout „pout pRq f P,R pπ out q “ Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq .
Let us abbreviate rfdec :“ supPPP rfdecγ pM8,rf
                                           εγ pPq, Pq, and let P P P attain the supremum. Plug
in pexp “ pexp pPq and by definition of rfdecγ (which considers inf pexp ), we have
                                  “                      ‰                  “ 2`            ˘‰
sup     inf      sup Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq ´γEπ„pexp pPq DH           Ppπq, Ppπq ě rfdec .
RPR pout P∆pΠq PPPε8,rf pPq
                    γ


Let R P R attain the supremum above, and plug in pout “ pout pP, Rq and by definition of the above
(which considers inf pout ), we have
                            “                    ‰                “ 2`              ˘‰
     sup Eπ„pout pP,Rq f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq ´ γEπ„pexp pPq DH      Ppπq, Ppπq ě rfdec .
  PPPε8,rf
      γ
           pPq

Let P P Pε8,rf
          γ
               pPq attain the supremum above. Then we have
                             “        ‰                 “ 2`           ˘‰
               Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq ě γ ¨ Eπ„pexp pPq DH  Ppπq, Ppπq ` rfdec .
Similar to the proof of Proposition H.2, it holds that
                         “         ‰                 ”       ı
           Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq ` Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq
            1              “         ‰ 1               ”       ı 8       ´            ¯
         ě Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq ` Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq ´ εDH     2
                                                                           PP,A , PP,A ,
            3                           3                         3
and
                        ´             ¯                    “ 2`           ˘‰
                      2
                    DH    PP,A , PP,A ď CT T ¨ Eπ„pexp pPq DH   Ppπq, Ppπq ,

where we recall that PP,A refers to the distribution induced by the exploration phase of A. Requiring
8CT T ε ď γ gives
                                 “         ‰                 ”        ı 1
                  Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq ` Eπ„pout pP,Rq g P,R pπq ě rfdec,
                                                                           3
which completes the proof.


                                                  47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I.4   T RACTABLE UPPER BOUND OF RFDEC

In the following, we provide a more intuitive upper bound of rfdec useful for later proofs, which we
call rrec:
                                               ˇ     ”                           ıˇ             “ 2             ‰
rrecγ pM, µq :“        inf           sup       ˇEP„µ̃ f P,R pπ 1 q ´ f P,R pπ 1 q ˇ ´ γEP„µ Eπ„p DH pPpπq, Ppπqq .
                                               ˇ                                  ˇ
                  pP∆pΠq,µ̃P∆pPq PPP,RPR,π 1 PΠ


Proposition I.3. Suppose that Π is finite. Then
                                         rfdecγ pM, µq ď 2 rrecγ{2 pM, µq

Proof. Fix any µ̃ P ∆pPq. By definition,
                piq                                                          “                          ‰
 rfdecγ pM, µq “          inf      sup     sup        inf        EP„µ Eπ„pout f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπq
                       pexp P∆pΠq RPR µP∆pMq pout P∆pΠq
                                                                                   “ 2               ‰
                                                             ´ γEP„µ EP„µ Eπ„pexp DH   pPpπq, Ppπqq
                                                                 “             ‰               ”         ı
                 “        inf      sup sup           inf     EP„µ f P,R pπP,R q ´ Eπ„pout EP„µ̃ f P,R pπq
                       pexp P∆pΠq RPR µP∆pPq pout P∆pΠq
                                                                            ”                     ı
                                                    ` EP„µ Eπ„pout EP„µ̃ f P,R pπq ´ f P,R pπq
                                                                              “ 2               ‰
                                                    ´ γEP„µ EP„µ Eπ„pexp DH        pPpπq, Ppπqq
               piiq                                  ”                             ı
                ď         inf      sup sup EP„µ EP„µ̃ f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπP,R q
                       pexp P∆pΠq RPR µP∆pPq
                                                               ”                                 ı
                                           ` EP„µ EP1 „µ EP„µ̃ f P,R pπP1 ,R q ´ f P,R pπP1 ,R q
                                                                   “ 2                ‰
                                           ´ γEP„µ EP„µ Eπ„pexp DH     pPpπq, Ppπqq
                                                „                                     ıˇȷ
               piiiq                                   ˇ     ”
                                                                 P,R 1        P,R 1 ˇ
                          inf      sup sup 2EP„µ sup ˇEP„µ̃ f pπ q ´ f pπ q ˇ
                                                       ˇ
                ď
                       pexp P∆pΠq RPR µP∆pPq                π 1 PΠ
                                                                         “ 2                ‰
                                                ´ γEP„µ EP„µ Eπ„pexp DH        pPpπq, Ppπqq
                                              !     ˇ     ”                           ıˇ
                           inf        sup       sup ˇEP„µ̃ f P,R pπ 1 q ´ f P,R pπ 1 q ˇ
                                                    ˇ                                  ˇ
                 “2
                        pexp P∆pΠq RPR,PPP       π 1 PΠ
                                                     γ             “ 2             ‰)
                                                 ´     EP„µ Eπ„pexp DH pPpπq, Ppπqq ,
                                                     2
where (i) is due to strong duality Theorem B.1, in (ii) we upper bound inf pout by letting pout P ∆pΠq
be defined by pout pπq “ µptP : πP,R “ πuq, and in (iii) we upper bound
                         ”                          ı         ˇ     ”                        ıˇ
                 EP„µ̃ f P,R pπP,R q ´ f P,R pπP,R q ď sup ˇEP„µ̃ f P,R pπ 1 q ´ f P,R pπ 1 q ˇ ,
                                                              ˇ                               ˇ
                                                          1
                                                         π PΠ
                       ”                            ı         ˇ     ”                        ıˇ
        EP1 „µ EP„µ̃ f pπP1 ,R q ´ f pπP1 ,R q ď sup ˇEP„µ̃ f P,R pπ 1 q ´ f P,R pπ 1 q ˇ .
                           P,R          P,R                   ˇ                               ˇ
                                                                     π 1 PΠ

Taking inf µ̃ over µ̃ P ∆pPq gives the desired result.

J     M ODEL - ESTIMATION COEFFICIENT

Define
                                                              ”    ´            ¯ı                “ 2             ‰
mdecpP, µq :“                inf              sup     EP„µ
                                                       p  out
                                                               DTV  Ppπ̄q, Ppπ̄q
                                                                           p       ´ γEπ„pexp EP„µ DH pPpπq, Ppπqq .
                 pexp P∆pΠq,µout P∆pPq PPP,π̄PΠ
                                                                                                            (51)

J.1   A LGORITHM M ODEL -EST E2D


                                                            48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 9 Model-EST E2D
 1: Input: Parameters η “ 1{3, γ ą 0; prior distribution µ1 P ∆pPq.
 2: for t “ 1, . . . , T do
                                                              µt
 3:   Set pptexp , µtout q “ arg minppexp ,µout qP∆pΠqˆ∆pPq Vpme,γ ppexp , µout q, where
                                                                                      ”                  ı
          µt
                                                “   `            ˘‰                     2
        Vpme,γ ppexp , µout q :“ sup sup EP„µout DTV Ppπ̄q, Ppπ̄q ´ γEπ„pexp EPp t „µt DH        p t pπqq .
                                                                                          pPpπq, P
                                     PPP π̄PΠ

 4:     Sample π t „ ptexp . Execute π t and observe ot .
 5:     Compute µt`1 P ∆pPq by Tempered Aggregation with observations only:
                                                          ´                ¯
                                                                 r πt pot q .
                                  µt`1 pPq 9P µt pPq ¨ exp η log P
                                řT
 6: Compute µout “ T1                   t
                                   t“1 µout P ∆pPq.        “           `     ˘‰
 7: Output: P
            p “ arg min
                       PPP supπ̄PΠ EP„µout DTV Ppπ̄q, Ppπ̄q


Theorem J.1. Given a ρ-optimistic cover pP,   r P0 q of P, we choose η “ 1{2, µ1 “ UnifpP0 q,
then Algorithm 9 achieves the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ:
   Π
       ´     ¯               ´
         p P‹ :“ max DTV Ppπ̄q,
                                            ¯                     4γ
  DTV   P,                     p     P‹ pπ̄q ď 2mdecγ pMq `          rlog |P0 | ` T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                   π̄PΠ                                            T

For P P P, π̄ P Π, pexp P ∆pΠq, µout P ∆pPq, we consider the function
                                      “   `            ˘‰                   ”                  ı
                                                                              2
  V t ppexp , µout ; P, π̄q :“ EP„µout DTV Ppπ̄q, Ppπ̄q ´ γEπ„pexp EPp t „µt DH        p t pπqq .
                                                                                pPpπq, P

Then, using the definition of the infs and sups in the risks, we have that
                                         µt
          mdecγ pMq ě mdecγ pM, µt q “ Vpme,γ pptexp , µtout q ě             sup      V t pptexp , µtout ; P, π̄q
                                                                           PPP,π̄PΠ

        ě sup V t pptexp , µtout ; P‹ , π̄q
          π̄PΠ
                              “   `              ˘‰                    ”                     ı
                                                                         2          p t pπqq
        “ sup EP„µt            DTV P‹ pπ̄q, Ppπ̄q ´ γEπ„ptexp EPp t „µt DH pP‹ pπq, P
                        out
          π̄PΠ

Taking average over t P rT s gives
                                                T
                       “   `              ˘‰ 1 ÿ               “ `              ˘‰
            sup EP„µout DTV P‹ pπ̄q, Ppπ̄q ď       sup EP„µt DTV P‹ pπ̄q, Ppπ̄q                                     (52)
            π̄PΠ                             T t“1 π̄PΠ    out


                                                                             EstH
                                                         ďmdecγ pMq ` γ ¨         ,                                 (53)
                                                                              T
where
                                              T
                                              ÿ                  “ 2 ‹            ‰
                                 EstH :“           EP„µt Eπ„ptexp DH pP pπq, Ppπqq .
                                             t“1

By definition, it holds that
                           ” ´           ¯ı            “   `              ˘‰
             sup EP„µout DTV Ppπ̄q,
                               p    Ppπ̄q ď sup EP„µout DTV P‹ pπ̄q, Ppπ̄q ,
                 π̄PΠ                                               π̄PΠ

and therefore,
          ´           ¯     "                     ”     ´             ¯ı                                         *
                                                                                         “     ` ‹            ˘‰
max DTV Ppπ̄q,
            p  P‹ pπ̄q ď sup E             P„µout  D TV   Ppπ̄q,
                                                          p      Ppπ̄q    ` sup  EP„µout  D TV  P  pπ̄q, Ppπ̄q
π̄PΠ                                π̄PΠ                                    π̄PΠ
                                                 “     ` ‹             ˘‰
                                   ď2 sup EP„µout DTV P pπ̄q, Ppπ̄q
                                      π̄PΠ


                                                               49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    EstH
                           ď2mdecγ pMq ` 2γ ¨            .
                                                     T

Note that Theorem D.8 implies that: subroutine (48) (agrees with (19) with ηr “ 0 and ηp “ η)
achieves with probability at least 1 ´ δ that
                                        1
                              EstH ď      rlog |P0 | ` T ρ ` 2 logp2{δqs.
                                        η
This completes the proof of Theorem J.1.

K     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5

This section provides the proofs for Section 5 along with some additional discussions, organized
as follows. We begin by presenting some useful intermediate results in Appendix K.1 for prov-
ing Proposition 12; The proof of Proposition 12 then follows by combining several statements
therein (see Appendix K.2). The proofs of Example 13-15 are provided in Appendix K.3. Ap-
pendix K.4 presents some discussions regarding the definition of Bellman representability (com-
pared with (Foster et al., 2021)) along with some useful results regarding the complexities of general
function classes. Finally, unless otherwise specified, the proofs of all new results in this section are
presented in Appendix K.5.

K.1   I NTERMEDIATE RESULTS ON B ELLMAN R EPRESENTABILITY

Complexity measures for general function classes We begin by introducing the concept of de-
coupling coefficient for a (general) function class, which acts as a convenient interface for both
bounding the DECs and proving the examples.
Definition K.1 (Decoupling coefficient). Given a function class F Ă pX Ñ Rq, the decoupling
coefficient dcpF, γq is defined as
                                                                       ”        ı
                                                                              2
                dcpF, γq :“       sup Epf,xq„ν r|f pxq|s ´ γEf „ν Ex„ν |f pxq| .
                              νP∆pF ˆX q


As examples, the decoupling coefficient can be bounded for linear function classes, and more gener-
ally any function class with low Eluder dimension (Russo & Van Roy, 2013) or star number (Foster
et al., 2020).
Example K.2. Suppose that there exists ϕ : X Ñ Rd such that F Ă tfθ : x Ñ xθ, ϕpxqyuθPRd ,
then dcpF, γq ď d{p4γq.
Definition K.3 (Eluder dimension). The eluder dimension epF, ∆q is the maximum of the length of
sequence pf1 , π1 q, ¨ ¨ ¨ , pfn , πn q P F ˆ Π such that there is a ∆1 ě ∆, and
                                                  ÿ            2
                              |fi pπi q| ě ∆1 ,      |fi pπj q| ď p∆1 q2 ,    @i.
                                              jăi

Definition K.4 (Star number). The star number spF, ∆q is the maximum of the length of sequence
pf1 , π1 q, ¨ ¨ ¨ , pfn , πn q P F ˆ Π such that there is a ∆1 ě ∆, and
                                                   ÿ             2
                                |fi pπi q| ě ∆1 ,      |fi pπj q| ď p∆1 q2 , @i.
                                              j‰i

Example K.5. When F Ă pΠ Ñ r´1, 1sq and γ ě e, it holds that
                                #                                   +
                                  min s2 pF, ∆q, epF, ∆q log2 pγq
                                     ␣                    (
              dcpF, γq ď 24 inf                                   `∆ .
                           ∆ą0                   γ

More generally, the decoupling coefficient can be bounded by the disagreement coefficient intro-
duced in (Foster et al., 2021, Definition 6.3). The proof of Example K.5 along with some further
discussions can be found in Appendix K.4.


                                                    50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bounding DEC/EDEC by decoupling coefficient of M We now state our main intermediate
result for bounding the DEC/EDEC for any M admitting a low-complexity Bellman representation,
in the sense of a bounded decoupling coefficient.
Proposition K.6 (Bounding DEC/EDEC by decoupling coefficient of Bellman representation). Sup-
pose that G “ pGhM qM PM,hPrHs is a Bellman representation of M. For any M P M, we define
                                                                       6H
                      comppG M , γq :“ H max dcpGhM , γ{12HL2 q `         ,                 (54)
                                             h                          γ
and let comppG, γq :“ maxM PM comppG M , γq. Then we have for any γ ą 0 that
        est
(1) If πM,h   “ πM (the on-policy case), we have decγ pMq ď comppG, γq and pscγ pM, M ‹ q ď
            ‹
comppG M , γq for all M ‹ P M.
(2) For G with general estimation policies, we have edecγ pMq ď comppG, γq.
                                                                                             ‹
Similarly, we show that the MLEC can also be bounded in terms of the Eluder dimension of G M .
Proposition K.7. Suppose that G “ pGhM qM PM,hPrHs is a Bellman representation of M in the
                 est
on-policy case (πM,h “ πM for all ph, M q). Then we have for any γ ą 0, K P Zě1 that
                                                 #                           +
                                                                  M‹
                                                   max hPrHs  epGh   , ∆q
                mlecγ,K pM, M ‹ q ď CH 2 L2 inf                           `∆ ,
                                             ∆ą0             γ
where C ą 0 is an absolute constant.

Bounding RFDEC under strong Bellman representability We define a strong Bellman repre-
sentation as follows.
Definition K.8 (Strong Bellman representation). Given a pair pM “ P ˆ R, P P Pq, its strong
Bellman representation is a collection of function classes G M “ tGhM uhPrHs with GhM “ tg M ;P :
Π Ñ r´1, 1suM PM such that:
1. For M “ pP, Rq P M, π P Π, it holds that for M “ pP, Rq,
                  ˇ     ”                                   ıˇ ˇ            ˇ
                  ˇ M ,π M,π                     M,π
                         Qh psh , ah q ´ rh ´ Vh`1   psh`1 q ˇ ď ˇghM ;P pπqˇ .
                                                             ˇ ˇ            ˇ
                  ˇE

2. For M “ pP, Rq P M, π P Π, it holds that
                           ˇ         ˇ
                           ˇ M ;P ˇ
                           ˇgh pπqˇ ď LDH pPpπhest q, Ppπhest qq,
for some constant L ě 1.
Given a strong Bellman representation G of M, the RFDEC of M can be bounded in terms of
certain complexity measure of G as follows.
Proposition K.9 (Bounding RFDEC by decoupling coefficient of strong Bellman representation).
Suppose G is a strong Bellman representation of M. Then for µ P ∆pPq,
                                                      ´            ¯ H
                    rfdecγ pM, µq ď 2H ¨ max max dc GhP , γ{4HL2 ` .
                                          PPP hPrHs                   γ

The proof of Proposition K.9 can be found in Appendix K.5.4. For its applications, see Ap-
pendix K.3.4.

K.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 12

The claims about bounded DEC/EDEC/RFDEC in (1)-(3) follows by combining the bounds in terms
of the decoupling coefficients (Proposition K.6(1), Proposition K.6(2), and Proposition K.9) with
the bound of decoupling coefficient by the Eluder dimension/star number (Example K.5). Then, the
claims about the sample complexities of the E2D algorithms follow by applying Theorem 2, Theo-
rem 5, and Theorem 9 and optimizing γ ą 0, respectively.


                                                 51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 12 can be directly extended to the more general case with infinite model classes, by
using the T EMPERED AGGREGATION WITH COVERING subroutine (19) (and (48) for reward-free
learning) in the corresponding E2D algorithms (see Theorem D.7, Theorem H.1 and Theorem I.1).
We summarize this in the following proposition.
Proposition K.10 (Variant of Proposition 12 with covering). Suppose M admits a Bellman repre-
sentation G with low complexity: mintepGhM , ∆q, spGhM , ∆q2 u ď Or pdq, where O
                                                                               r p¨q contains pos-
sibly polylogp1{∆q factors. Further assume that M and P admits optimistic covers with bounded
covering numbers: log N pM, ρq ď O   r pdimpMqq and log N pP, ρq ď O   r pdimpPqq for any ρ ą 0,
where dimpMq, dimpPq ą 0 and O p¨q contains possibly polylogp1{ρq factors. Then with subrou-
                                   r
tines changed correspondingly to the versions with covering, we have
                             est
(1) (No-regret learning) If πM,h  “ πM for all M P M (the on-policy case), then Algorithm
                                          a
    E2D-TA achieves RegDM ď OpHL  r         d ¨ dimpMqT q.
                                      est
(2) (PAC learning) For any general tπM,h   uM PM,hPrHs , Algorithm E XPLORATIVE E2D achieves
                           `                       ˘
    SubOpt ď ε within O  r d ¨ dimpMqH 2 L2 {ε2 episodes of play.
(3) (Reward-free learning) If G is a strong Bellman                    ˘ Algorithm R EWARD -
                                                   ` representation, then
    F REE E2D achieves SubOptrf ď ε within O     r d ¨ dimpPqH 2 L2 {ε2 episodes of play.

K.3   P ROOF OF EXAMPLES

We first present some definitions and properties as preparations. The proofs of Example 13-15 are
then presented in Appendix K.3.1-K.3.3 for the regret/PAC bounds, and in Appendix K.3.4 for the
reward-free bounds.
Definition K.11 (Model-based bilinear class, Jin et al. (2021); Foster et al. (2021)). G is a bilinear
Bellman representation of rank d if there exists maps Xh p¨; ¨q : MˆM Ñ Rd , Wh p¨; ¨q : MˆM Ñ
Rd , such that
                   1
                ghM ;M pM q “ Xh pM ; M q, Wh pM 1 ; M q ,
                               @                           D
                                                                   @M, M 1 , M P M.
Suppose that G is bilinear with rank d, then by Example K.2,
                                                  2H 2 L2 ` 2H ` 2
                                 comppG, γq ď                       .
                                                          γ
                                                            `         ˘
Similarly, by Proposition K.7 we have mlecγ,K pMq ď O     r dH 2 L2 {γ .
Example K.12 (Bellman error as Bellman representation). For a model class M, its Q-type Bellman
error is defined as       ”                                     ı
          1                        1                       1
     ghM ;M pM q :“ EM ,πM QM ,‹ psh , ah q ´ rh ´ Vh`1
                                                    M ,‹
                                                         psh`1 q ,   @M, M 1 , M P M.
                            ?
Along with π est “ π and L “ 2, it gives a Bellman representation of M, which we term as its
QBE.
Similarly, we can consider the V-type Bellman error
      1
                                ”                                       ı
                                     1                    M 1 ,‹
   ghM ;M pM q :“ EM ,πM ˝h πM 1 QM ,‹ psh , ah q ´ rh ´ Vh`1    psh`1 q ,     @M, M 1 , M P M,
where πM ˝h πM 1 stands for the policy which executes πM for the first h ´?1 steps, and then follows
πM 1 from the h-th step. Along with πhest “ π ˝h UnifpAq and L “ 2A, it gives a Bellman
representation of M, which we term as its VBE.

Relation to Model-based Bellman-Eluder dimension Take Q-type Bellman error for example.
                              1
Note that the argument of ghM ;M pM q corresponds to the roll-in policy πM . Therefore, one can
check that                            ‹
                                epGhM , ∆q “ dimDE pEh , Πh , ∆q,
             !                       )
where Eh “ QM,‹ h
                                 M,‹
                   ´ rh ´ P‹h Vh`1          is the model-induced Bellman residual function class,
       ! ‹ )                           M PM
Πh “ d M   h
             ,π
                    is the collection of distributions over S ˆ A at h-step induced by policies.
                 πPΠ
                 ‹
Therefore, epG M q is indeed equivalent to the model-based version of the Q-type (model-induced)
Bellman Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021).


                                                 52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K.3.1     P ROOF OF E XAMPLE 13, REGRET BOUND

Clearly, for the tabular
                     ` 2 MDP˘ model class M of S states and A actions, its estimation complexity
log N pM, ρq “ O S AH (see Example K.13) and its QBE is bilinear with
                   r
                                                                         `     rank SA.
                                                                                    ˘     Thus by
the definition of comp in (54) and Example K.2, we have comppG, γq “ O SAH 2´     {γ , and further
                                                                                   ?              ¯
by Proposition K.6(1) and Proposition K.10, E2D-TA achieves RegDM ď O           r    S 3 A2 H 3 T
regret.
We remark that the same regret bound also holds for MOPS and OMLE, by the PSC bound
in Proposition K.6(1) and Proposition K.7 combined with Theorem F.1 and Theorem G.3.
In the following, we demonstrate briefly how to construct an optimistic covering of the class of
tabular MDPs. Without loss of generality, we only cover the class of transition dynamic P.
Example K.13 (Optimistic covering of tabular MDP). Consider M, the class of MDPs with S
states, A actions, H steps. Fix a ρ1 P p0, 1s, and ρ “ ρ21 {eHS. For M P M, we compute its
ρ1 -optimistic likelihood function as follows: define
                                    R               V                 R          V
                  rM ps1 |s, aq :“ ρ 1 PM ps1 |s, aq ,
                  P                                     PrM psq :“ ρ 1 PM psq ,             (55)
                    h
                                      ρ h                 1
                                                                        ρ 1
and for Markov policy π, let
rM,π ps1 , a1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , sH , aH q :“P
P                                   rM ps1 qπ1 pa1 |s1 qP
                                                        rM ps2 |s1 , a1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ P
                                                                                rM psH |sH´1 , aH´1 qπpaH |sH q
                                     1                   1                        H´1
                                             H
                                             ź                      H´1
                                                                    ź
                               rM ps1 q ˆ
                              “P                   πh pah |sh q ˆ         rM psh`1 |sh , ah q.
                                                                          P
                                1
                                             h“1                    h“1

A direct calculation shows that PrM,π ě PM,π for all π, and }P  rM,π p¨q ´ PM,π p¨q}1 ď ρ2 . Clearly,
                                                                                          1
                       S 2 AH
there are at most r1{ρs       different optimistic likelihood functions defined by (55), and we can
form M0 by picking`a representative in M   ˘ for each optimistic likelihood function (if possible).
Then, log |M0 | “ O S 2 AH logpSH{ρ1 q .

K.3.2     P ROOF OF E XAMPLE 14, REGRET BOUND

We follow the commonly used definition of linear mixture MDPs (Chen et al., 2021), which is
slightly more general than the one in Ayoub et al. (2020).
Definition K.14 (Linear mixture MDPs). A MDP is called a linear mixture MDP (of rank d) if there
exists feature maps ϕh p¨|¨, ¨q : S ˆ S ˆ A Ñ Rd and parameter pθh qh Ă Rř   d
                                                                               , such that Ph ps1 |s, aq “
xθh , ϕh ps |s, aqy. We further assume that }θh }2 ď B for all h P rHs, and } s1 ϕh ps1 |s, aqV ps1 q}2 ď
           1

1 for all V : S Ñ r0, 1s and tuple ps, a, hq P S ˆ A ˆ rHs.
Suppose that M is a linear mixture MDP model with the given feature map ϕ. Then the definition
above directly yields the QBE of M is bilinear´with rank¯d. Therefore, as long as log N pM, ρq “
                                                ?
Or pdHq, by Proposition K.10 we can obtain Or d H 3 T regret of E2D-TA as claimed.

The following proposition provides an upper bound on estpMq via a concrete construction. For the
simplicity of discussion, we assume that the initial distribution is known, and we also assume the
mean reward function is known for no-regret and PAC learning setting.
Proposition K.15 (Optimistic covering for linear mixture MDPs). Given feature map ϕ of dimen-
sion d and constant B. Suppose that M consists of linear mixture MDPs with feature map ϕ and
parameter bounded by B (without reward component). Then for ρ, there exists a ρ-optimistic cov-
       r M0 q with log |M0 | “ O
ering pP,                        r pdHq.



K.3.3     P ROOF OF E XAMPLE 15, PAC BOUND

We consider the broader class of MDPs with low occupancy rank (Du et al., 2021):


                                                      53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition K.16 (Occupancy rank). We say a MDP is of occupancy rank d if for all h P rHs, there
exists map ϕh : Π Ñ Rd , ψh : S Ñ Rd , such that
                        Pπ psh “ sq “ xψh psq, ϕh pπqy ,        @s P S, π P Π.

By definition, low-rank MDP with rank d is of occupancy rank d. Furthermore, for model class M
consisting of MDPs with occupancy rank
                                    ´ a  d, its VBE is bilinear
                                                          ¯     with rank d. Therefore, E XPLO -
RATIVE E2D achieves SubOpt “ O     r H dA log |M| {T on such model class as claimed.

K.3.4    P ROOF OF REWARD - FREE BOUNDS IN E XAMPLE 13-15
Example K.17 (Model estimation error). For model class M “ P ˆ R, its Q-type estimation error
is defined as
                                       ”   ´                                  ¯ı
                      ghP;P pπq :“ EP,π DTV PPh p¨|sh , ah q, PPh p¨|sh , ah q .
                                 ?
Along with π est “ π and L “ 2, it gives a strong Bellman representation of M, which we term
as its QER.
Similarly, we can consider the V-type estimation error
                                       „          ´                          ¯ȷ
                      P;P          P,π               P           P
                     gh pπq :“ E         max DTV Ph p¨|sh , aq, Ph p¨|sh , aq .
                                         aPA
                                               ?
Along with πhest “ π ˝h UnifpAq and L “            2A, it gives a strong Bellman representation of M,
which we term as its VER.
As the following proposition indicates, the two choices of strong Bellman representation above
are enough for us to bound the RFDEC for tabular MDP, linear mixture MDP and MDP with low
occupancy complexity. The proof of Proposition K.18 is mainly based on the decoupling behavior
of linear function classes (cf. Example K.2), and can be found in Appendix K.5.6.
Proposition K.18. For model class M of linear mixture MDPs (of a given feature ϕ), by its QER G
and Proposition K.9, we have rfdecγ pMq ď 8dH 2 {γ.
For model class M of MDPs with occupancy rank d, because its VER G is bilinear, we have
rfdecγ pMq ď 8dAH 2 {γ.
Combining Proposition K.18 with Theorem I.1 gives that:
                                                                ´a              ¯
 1. For tabular MDPs, R EWARD -F REE E2D achieves SubOptrf “ O
                                                             r     S 3 A2 H 3 {T ;
                                                                       ´a          ¯
 2. For linear mixture MDPs, R EWARD -F REE E2D achieves SubOptrf “ O
                                                                    r      dH 3 {T ;
 3. For MDPs with occupancy rank at most
                                       ´ad (including low-rank
                                                            ¯ MDPs with rank d), R EWARD -
    F REE E2D achieves SubOptrf “ O  r           2
                                           dAH log |P| {T .



K.4     D ISCUSSIONS ABOUT B ELLMAN REPRESENTATIONS AND DECOUPLING COEFFICIENT

Difference in definition of Bellman representation Our Definition 11 is slightly different
                                                                       1
from Foster et al. (2021, Definition F.1): They define the function ghM ;M pM q in terms of the dis-
                                                                         1
crepancy function ℓM pM 1 ; sh , ah , rh , sh`1 q, while we only require ghM ;M pM q can be upper bound
                        1
by DRL . In general, ghM ;M pM q they define can be only upper bound by the Hellinger distance in the
full observation po, rq (which is in general larger than DRL ), as the expected discrepancy function
may depend on distributional information about the reward that is not captured by the mean. How-
ever, when the reward r is included in the observation o, our definition is more general than theirs.
More importantly, for the majority of known concrete examples, e.g. those in Du et al. (2021); Jin
et al. (2021), the discrepancy function is linear in rh , and hence its expectation can be upper bound
by DRL .


                                                    54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Complexity measure for Bellman representations In Foster et al. (2021), the complexity of
a Bellman representation is measured in terms of disagreement coefficient, which can be upper
bounded by eluder dimension or star number.
Definition K.19. The disagreement coefficient of a function class F Ă pΠ Ñ r´1, 1sq is defined as
                                  " 2                                                     *
                                   ∆          `                            “ 2 ‰      2
                                                                                        ˘
  θ pF, ∆0 , ε0 ; ρq “   sup          ¨ P π„ρ   Df P F : |f pπq| ą ∆, Eπ„ρ  f pπq ď ε       _ 1.
                       ∆ě∆0 ,εěε0  ε2
By Foster et al. (2021, Lemma 6.1), for ∆, ε ą 0, ρ P ∆pΠq, it holds that
                                                  ␣                   (
                           θpF, ∆, ε; ρq ď 4 min s2 pF, ∆q, epF, ∆q .

It turns out that our decoupling coefficient can be upper bound by the disagreement coefficient:
applying Foster et al. (2021, Lemma E.3), we directly obtain the following result.
Lemma K.20. For function class F Ă pΠ Ñ r´1, 1sq, we have
                                     #                                     +
                                                θ F, ∆, γ ´1 log2 pγ _ eq
                                                 `           ˘
                      dcpF, γq ď inf 2∆ ` 6                                  ,
                                 ∆ą0                        γ
         `           ˘
where θ F, ∆, γ ´1 :“ supρP∆pΠq θpF, ∆, ε; ρq.
Lemma K.20 also gives Example K.5 directly.

K.5     P ROOF OF PROPOSITIONS

K.5.1    P ROOF OF E XAMPLE K.2
Under the linearity assumption, we can consider f ÞÑ θf P Rd such that f pxq “ xθf , ϕpxqy @x P X .
                                                        “       ‰
Given a ν P ∆pF ˆ X q, let us set Φλ :“ λId ` Ex„ν ϕpxqϕpxqJ for λ ą 0. Then
                                ”                  ı        ”
                                                                  2
                                                                      ı    1       ”
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                ı
 Epf,xq„ν r|f pxq|s ď Epf,xq„ν }θf }Φλ }ϕpxq}Φ´1 ď γEf „ν }θf }Φλ `          Ex„ν }ϕpxq}Φ´1 .
                                                λ                         4γ                  λ


For the first term, we have
                      ”       ı
                            2           “ `       “         ‰˘ ‰                 2
                 Ef „ν }θf }Φλ “Ef „ν θfJ Ex„ν ϕpxqϕpxqJ θf ` λEf „ν }θf }
                                            ”          ı
                                                     2              2
                                 “Ef „ν Ex„ν |f pxq| ` λEf „ν }θf } .
For the second term, we have
                         ”         ı      ” ´                       ¯ı
                               2               ´1{2            ´1{2
                    Ex„ν }ϕpxq}Φ´1 “Ex„ν tr Φλ ϕpxqϕpxqJ Φλ
                                 λ
                                        ´                    ‰ ´1{2 ¯
                                          ´1{2    “
                                     “tr Φλ Ex„ν ϕpxqϕpxqJ Φλ
                                        ´             ¯
                                          ´1{2   ´1{2
                                     “tr Φλ Φ0 Φλ       ď d.
Letting λ Ñ 0` and then taking inf ν completes the proof.
As a corollary, we have the following result.
Corollary K.21. Suppose that there exists ϕ “ pϕi : X Ñ Rd qiPI such that
                                   !                         )
                              F Ă fθ : x Ñ max |xθ, ϕi pxqy|      ,
                                                i               θPRd
then dcpF, γq ď d{γ.
Corollary K.21 can be obtained similarly to the proof above of Example K.2. However, we believe
the following fact is important:
Proposition K.22. Suppose that W Ă pX ˆ Y Ñ Rě0 q, then for the function class F defined by
                                    "                       *
                                F :“ fw : x ÞÑ max wpx, yq        ,
                                                    yPY
                                                               wPW
we have dcpF, γq ď dcpW, γq.


                                                55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Combining Proposition K.22 and Example K.2 gives Corollary K.21 directly.
Proof of Proposition K.22         Fix a ν P ∆pF ˆ X q. Consider the map W : F Ñ W so
that f pxq “ maxy W pf qpx, yq for all x P X . Further consider Y : F ˆ X Ñ Y defined as
Y pf, xq :“ arg maxyPY W pf qpx, yq (break ties arbitrarily). Then we let ν 1 P ∆pF ˆ X ˆ Yq given
by ν 1 ppw, x, yqq “ νptpf, xq : W pf q “ w, y “ Y pf, xquq, and
                     Epf,xq„ν r|f pxq|s “Epw,x,yq„ν 1 rwpx, yqs
                                                                    “         ‰
                                       ďdcpW, γq ` Ew„ν 1 Epx,yq„ν 1 wpx, yq2
                                                                ”           ı
                                                                          2
                                       ďdcpW, γq ` Ew„ν 1 Ex„ν 1 |fw pxq|
                                                              ”         ı
                                                                      2
                                       “dcpW, γq ` Ef „ν Ex„ν |f pxq| ,

where the second inequality is due to the definition fw pxq “ maxy wpx, yq, and the last equality is
due to the fact that the marginalization of ν 1 to X agrees with marginalization of ν to X , and for
f P F, ν 1 ptw : fw “ f uq “ νptpf 1 , xq : W pf 1 q “ w, fw “ f uq “ νpf q. Taking inf ν completes
the proof.



K.5.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION K.6
To simplify the proof, we first introduce the PSC with estimation policies.
                                      est
                                                                   ␣        est             est
                                                                                                (
Definition K.23. For M P M, let πM        be the uniform mixture of πM,0 , πM,1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , πM,H   , where
we define πM,0 “ πM . Let
                                            ”                                                         ı
 pscest
     γ pM, M q :“     sup EM „µ EM 1 „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπM q ´ γDRL     2
                                                                            pM pπM  est         est
                                                                                       1 q, M pπM 1 qq ,
                     µP∆pMq

where we understand
                                                       H
               2       est        est             1   ÿ
              DRL pM pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 qq “               D2 pM pπM
                                                                 est           est
                                                                   1 ,h q, M pπM 1 ,h qq.
                                                H ` 1 h“0 RL

We further define pscest                est
                     γ pMq “ supM PM pscγ pM, M q.

We can generalize Proposition E.3 to pscest by the same argument, as follows.
Proposition K.24. When π est “ π, it holds that
                                                                2pH ` 1q
                              decγ pM, M q ď pscest
                                                γ{6 pMq `                .
                                                                   γ
Generally, we always have
                                                                  2pH ` 1q
                             edecγ pM, M q ď pscest
                                                γ{6 pMq `                  .
                                                                     γ

Therefore, it remains to upper bound pscest
                                        γ by comppG, γq.
Proposition K.25. It holds that
                                                                               H `1
                    pscest                   M             2
                       γ pM, M q ď H max dcpGh , γ{pH ` 1qL q `                     .
                                            h                                   4γ

Combining Proposition K.25 with Proposition K.24 completes the proof of Proposition K.6.
Proof of Proposition K.25     Fix a M P M and µ P ∆pMq. Then by the standard performance
decomposition using the simulation lemma, we have
      ”                     ı
EM „µ f M pπM q ´ f M pπM q


                                                    56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



          «                                                                               ff
          ”           ı     ”           ı ÿH        ”                                    ı
            M,πM
              M           M   M,πM            M ,πM   M,πM                    M,πM
“ EM „µ E V1     ps1 q ´ E V1      ps1 q `   E       Q     psh , ah q ´ rh ´ Vh`1 psh`1 q
                                                                   h“1
       ”   ´         ¯ı ÿH       ”ˇ          ˇı
                                  ˇ M ;M
ď EM „µ DTV PM ,   M
                                             ˇ .
                                             ˇ
             0   P 0   `   EM „µ  ˇgh    pM q
                                         h“1

Therefore, we bound
ÿH        ”ˇ          ˇı  ÿH          ”ˇ               ˇı                  „ˇ                ˇ2 ȷ      „ˇ          ˇ2 ȷ
           ˇ M ;M                       ˇ M ;M                                  M ;M       1 ˇ            M ;M   1 ˇ
                                                 pM qˇ ´ ηEM,M 1 „µ ˇgh
                      ˇ                                ˇ                     ˇ                          ˇ
    EM „µ ˇgh     pM qˇ “     EM „µ ˇgh                                               pM qˇ `ηEM,M 1 „µ ˇgh    pM qˇ
h“1                       h“1 loooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                                       M ,ηq
                                                                  ďdcpGh
                                    H
                                    ÿ                               “ 2 `                     ˘‰
                               ď         dcpGhM , ηq ` ηL2 EM,M 1 „µ DRL      est
                                                                          M pπM,h        est
                                                                                  q, M pπM,h q ,
                                   h“1

where the inequality is due to the definition of Bellman representation and decoupling coefficient.
Furthermore, we have
      ”      ´          ¯ı             “ 2`                       ˘‰          “     `                   ˘‰
EM „µ DTV PM   0  , PM
                     0     ďEM,M 1 „µ DH      M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q ď EM,M 1 „µ DRL M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q
                                      γ           “ 2 `                     ˘‰ H ` 1
                                ď        EM,M 1 „µ DRL  M pπM 1 q, M pπM 1 q `       .
                                    H `1                                        4γ
Now taking η “ 1{L2 pH ` 1q and combining the above two inequalities above completes the
proof.



K.5.3    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION K.7
                     ␣   (
Fix any set of models M k kPrKs P M. By standard performance decomposition using the simula-
tion lemma, we have
                     K
                 1 ÿ ” Mk              ‹
                                               ı
                        f pπM k q ´ f M pπM k q
                 K k“1
                         K H
                      1 ÿ ÿ M ‹ ,π k ” M k ,π k                 M k ,πM k
                                                                                  ı
                  “             E M   Q      M ps , a q ´ r ´ V
                                                 h h       h    h`1       psh`1 q
                      K k“1 h“1
                         H K
                      1 ÿ ÿ ˇˇ M k ;M ‹       ˇ
                                        pM k qˇ .
                                              ˇ
                  ď             ˇgh
                      K h“1 k“1
On the other hand, by the definition of Bellman representation,
                       k´1
                       ÿˇ                     ˇ2     k´1
                             ˇ M k ;M ‹              ÿ
                                        pM t qˇ ď L2      2
                                                         DRL pM k pπM t q, M ‹ pπM t qq.
                                              ˇ
                             ˇgh
                       t“1                                 t“1

Therefore, defining
                                                 k´1
                                                 ÿ
                                                        2
                                βr :“ max              DRL pM k pπM t q, M ‹ pπM t qq,
                                         kPrKs
                                                 t“1

       řk´1 ˇˇ k ‹        ˇ2
we have t“1 ˇghM ;M pM t qˇ ď L2 βr for all k P rKs.
                          ˇ

Our final step is to use an Eluder dimension argument. By the above precondition, we can apply the
Eluder dimension bound in Jin et al. (2021, Lemma 41) to obtain that, for any h P rHs and ∆ ą 0,
           K                  ˇ O p1q ˆb                                                  ˙
       1 ÿ ˇˇ M k ;M ‹
                        pM k qˇ ď            epGh , ∆qL2 βK
                                                         r ` min tepGh , ∆q, Ku ` K ¨ ∆
                              ˇ
              ˇgh                       ¨
      K k“1                         K


                                                             57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                           ˆc                             ˙
                                 O p1q L                  !    )
                              ď          ¨   epGh , ∆q max β, 1 K ` K∆ ,
                                                            r
                                   K
where O p1q hides the universal constant. Summing over h P rHs gives
           H K                   ˇ O p1q L ˆ c                                       ˙
       1 ÿ ÿ ˇˇ M k ;M ‹       k ˇ
                                                                     !    )
                            pM qˇ ď           H max epGh , ∆q max β, 1 K ` KH∆
                                                                       r
      K h“1 k“1 h
                  ˇg
                                        K          hPrHs
                                         ˆ 2 2                                ˙
                γ        !     )   O p1q H L maxhPrHs epGh , ∆qK
            ď      ¨ max β, 1 `
                           r                                         ` KHL∆ ,
                K                    K                 γ
                                                                            ␣  (
where the last inequality uses AM-GM. Therefore, we have shown that for any M k kPrKs ,
                           K
                      1 ÿ ” Mk                   ‹
                                                         ı    γ       !   )
                               f pπM k q ´ f M pπM k q ´         ¨ max β,
                                                                        r1
                      K k“1                                  K
                                       ˆ 2 2                              ˙
                                        H L maxhPrHs epGh , ∆q
                             ď O p1q ¨                              ` HL∆
                                                    γ
                                              ˆ                        ˙
                                                maxhPrHs epGh , ∆q
                             ď O p1q ¨ H 2 L2                       `∆ .
                                                       γ
By definition of mlecγ,K , taking inf ∆ą0 completes the proof.

K.5.4   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION K.9
By Proposition I.3 and the strong duality, we only need to upper bound the following quantity in
terms of the decoupling coefficient:
                                                         ˇ     ”                         ıˇ
          rrecγ pM, µq “       sup       inf EpP,R,πq„ν ˇEP„µ f P,R pπ 1 q ´ f P,R pπ 1 q ˇ
                                                         ˇ                                ˇ
                               νP∆pPˆRˆΠq pe P∆pΠq
                                                                         “ 2              ‰
                                                       ´ γEP„ν Eπ„pe EP„µ DH pPpπq, Ppπqq
Then,                                              ˇı
                            ”ˇ
             EpP,R,πq„ν EP„µ ˇf P,R pπq ´ f P,R pπqˇ
                              ˇ                    ˇ

         piq                ˇ´          ¯”
                                             pP,Rq,π
                                                          ıˇ
         ď EpP,R,πq„ν EP„µ ˇ EP ´ EP V1
                            ˇ                              ˇ
                                                     ps1 q ˇ
                   H
                   ÿ                     ˇ        ”                                       ıˇ
                                                    pP,Rq,π                    pP,Rq,π
                         EpP,R,πq„ν EP„µ ˇEpP,Rq,π Qh       psh , ah q ´ Rh ´ Vh`1 psh`1 q ˇ
                                         ˇ                                                 ˇ
               `
                   h“1

        piiq                             H                ”ˇ           ˇı
                          “   `       ˘‰ ÿ                 ˇ pP,Rq;P ˇ
         ď EpP,R,πq„ν EP„µ DTV P0 , P0 `   EpP,R,πq„ν EP„µ ˇgh      pπqˇ ,
                                                        h“1
where (i) is because we use the performance decomposition lemma, (ii) is due to the definition of
strong Bellman representation. Similar to the proof of Proposition K.25, we have
 H                                       H "                                    „ˇ           ˇ ȷ*
                                                                                 ˇ pP,Rq;P ˇ2
ÿ                    ”ˇ           ˇı    ÿ
                      ˇ pP,Rq;P ˇ                  P
    EpP,R,πq„ν EP„µ ˇgh        pπqˇ ď         dcpGh , ηq ` ηEpP,Rq„ν Eπ„ν EP„µ ˇgh        pπqˇ
h“1                                          h“1
                                             H
                                             ÿ                          H
                                                                        ÿ                  “ 2                       ‰
                                         ď         dcpGhP , ηq ` L2 η         EP„ν,π„ν EP„µ DH pPpπhest q, Ppπhest qq ,
                                             h“1                        h“1
and
                ”   ´         ¯ı         γ              “ 2               ‰ H `1
           EM „µ DTV PM
                      0 , P M
                            0    ď           EP„ν,π„ν DH    pPpπq, Ppπqq `             .
                                       H `1                                       4γ
We just need to choose pe,h P ∆pΠq as pe,h pπ 1 q “ νptpP, R, πq : πhest “ π 1 uq (here π0est “ π),
       1
          řH                                γ
pe “ H`1    h“0 pe,h P ∆pΠq, and let η “ pH`1qL2 to obtain
                                             H
                                             ÿ                                   H `1
                            rrecγ pM, µq ď         dcpGhP , γ{pH ` 1qL2 q `
                                             h“1
                                                                                  4γ
Applying Proposition I.3 completes the proof.


                                                       58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K.5.5     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION K.15
We construct such a covering directly, which is a generalization of the construction in Example K.13.
An important observation is that, by the definition of feature map (cf. Definition K.14), it must hold
that                       ÿ›             ›
                              ›ϕps1 |s, aq› ď 2d,        @ps, aq P S ˆ A.
                                           1
                                 s1
Then, we set N “ rB{ρs and let B 1 “ N ρ. For θ P r´B 1 , B 1 sd , we define the ρ-neighborhood of θ
as Bpθ, ρq :“ ρ tθ{ρu ` r0, ρsd , and let
                                                   @                D
                              rθ ps1 |s, aq :“ max θ1 , ϕps1 |s, aq .
                              P
                                                         θ 1 PBpθ,ρq

Then, if θ induces a transition dynamic Pθ , then P
                                                  rθ ě Pθ , and
  ÿ ˇˇ                               ˇ ÿ        ˇ@                  Dˇ    ÿ›           ›
     ˇPrθ ps1 |s, aq ´ Pθ ps1 |s, aqˇˇ “   max ˇ θ1 ´ θ, ϕps1 |s, aq ˇ ď ρ ›ϕps1 |s, aq›1 ď 2ρd.
                                         1      θ PBpθ,ρq
   s1                                      s1                                               s1
                               d H´1
Now, for Θ “ pθh qh P pR q            , we define
   π
 P ps1 , a1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , sH , aH q :“P1 ps1 qπ1 pa1 |s1 qP
 r
  Θ
                                                      rθ ps2 |s1 , a1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ P
                                                             1
                                                                              rθ
                                                                                   H´1
                                                                                         psH |sH´1 , aH´1 qπpaH |sH q
                                                H
                                                ź                      H´1
                                                                       ź
                                “P1 ps1 q ¨           πh pah |sh q ˆ         rθ psh`1 |sh , ah q.
                                                                             P h
                                                h“1                    h“1
Suppose that ρ ď 1{p2Hdq, then a simple calculation shows that when Θ induces an MDP,
                                     ›         ›
                                     ›rπ
                                     ›PΘ ´ PπΘ › ď 2eHdρ.
                                               ›
                                                1
                     ?
Therefore, let ρ1 “ 2eHdρ, then by picking representative in each ℓ8 -ρ-ball, we can construct
                                                             Hd     ` P           T˘Hd
a ρ1 -optimistic covering with |M0 | ď p2N qHd “ p2 rB{ρsq       “ 2 2eHdB{ρ21         , which
implies that log |M0 | ď O pdH logpdHB{ρ1 qq.

K.5.6     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION K.18
We deal with linear mixture MDP first. Suppose that for each P P P, P is parameterized by θP “
pθhP qh . Then the QER of P is given by
                  ”    ´                               ¯ı
 ghP;P pπq “EP,π DTV PPh p¨|sh , ah q, PPh p¨|sh , ah q
                                      «                                                                   ff
             1                    P,π
                                        ÿ ´
                                                 P                    P
                                                                                       ¯
           “         max        E             Ph psh`1 |sh , ah q ´ Ph psh`1 |sh , ah q V psh`1 |sh , ah q
             2 V :SˆSˆAÑr´1,1s         sh`1
                                      «                                                           ff
             1                    P,π
                                        ÿ A
                                                P       P
                                                                            E
           “         max        E              θh ´ θh , ϕh psh`1 |sh , ah q V psh`1 |sh , ah q
             2 V :SˆSˆAÑr´1,1s         sh`1
                                C                   «                                           ffG
             1                      P     P     P,π
                                                       ÿ
           “         max           θh ´ θh , E            V psh`1 |sh , ah qϕh psh`1 |sh , ah q
             2 V :SˆSˆAÑr´1,1s                       sh`1
                                ˇC                  «                                            ffGˇ
             1                  ˇ
                                ˇ P                     ÿ                                            ˇ
                     max        ˇ θh ´ θhP , EP,π         V psh`1 |sh , ah qϕh psh`1 |sh , ah q      ˇ.
                                                                                                     ˇ
           “
             2 V :SˆSˆAÑr´1,1s ˇ                      s
                                                                                                     ˇ
                                                                 h`1

Applying Proposition K.9 and Corollary K.21 completes the proof of this case.
              ` the class P ˘of dynamic
We next deal with                                  ˘ occupancy rank at most d.@ For P P P, we
                                      ` of MDPs with                                        D
consider ϕP “ ϕPh : Π Ñ Rd , ψ P “ ψhP : S Ñ Rd , such that PP,π psh “ sq “ ψhP psq, ϕPh pπq .
Then the VER of P is given by
                              „          ´                          ¯ȷ
                P;P       P,π              P           P
              gh pπq “E        max DTV Ph p¨|sh , aq, Ph p¨|sh , aq
                                aPA
                         C                                                     G
                           ÿ                 ´                         ¯
                                 P              P            P            P
                      “        ψh psq max DTV Ph p¨|s, aq, Ph p¨|s, aq , ϕh pπq .
                                                 aPA
                                      s
Applying Proposition K.9 and Example K.2 completes the proof of this case.


                                                              59
