Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ETECTING S MALL Q UERY G RAPHS IN A L ARGE
G RAPH VIA N EURAL S UBGRAPH S EARCH
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
        Recent advances have shown the success of using reinforcement learning and
        search to solve NP-hard graph-related tasks, such as Traveling Salesman Optimiza-
        tion, Graph Edit Distance computation, etc. However, it remains unclear how one
        can efficiently and accurately detect the occurrences of a small query graph in a
        large target graph, which is a core operation in graph database search, biomed-
        ical analysis, social group finding, etc. This task is called Subgraph Matching
        which essentially performs subgraph isomorphism check between a query graph
        and a large target graph. One promising approach to this classical problem is the
        “learning-to-search” paradigm, where a reinforcement learning (RL) agent is de-
        signed with a learned policy to guide a search algorithm to quickly find the solution
        without any solved instances for supervision. However, for the specific task of
        Subgraph Matching, though the query graph is usually small given by the user as
        input, the target graph is often orders-of-magnitude larger. It poses challenges to
        the neural network design and can lead to solution and reward sparsity. In this
        paper, we propose NS UB S with two innovations to tackle the challenges: (1) A
        novel encoder-decoder neural network architecture to dynamically compute the
        matching information between the query and the target graphs at each search state;
        (2) A novel look-ahead loss function for training the policy network. Experiments
        on six large real-world target graphs show that NS UB S can significantly improve
        the subgraph matching performance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the growing amount of graph data that naturally arises in many domains, solving graph-related
tasks via machine learning has gained increasing attention. Many NP hard tasks, e.g. Traveling
Salesman Optimization (Xing & Tu, 2020), Graph Edit Distance computation (Wang et al., 2021),
Maximum Common Subgraph detection (Bai et al., 2021), have recently been tackled via learning-
based methods. These works on the one hand rely on search to enumerate the large solution space, and
on the other hand use reinforcement learning (RL) to learn a good search policy from training data,
thus obviating the need for hand-crafted heuristics adopted by traditional solvers. Such learning-to-
search paradigm (Bai et al., 2021) also allows the training the RL agent without any solved instances
for supervision. However, how to design a neural network architecture under the RL-guided search
framework remains unclear for the task of Subgraph Matching, which requires the detection of all
occurrences of a small query graph in an orders-of-magnitude larger target graph. Subgraph Matching
has wide applications in graph database search (Lee et al., 2012), knowledge graph query (Kim et al.,
2015), biomedical analysis (Zhang et al., 2009), social group finding (Ma et al., 2018), quantum
circuit design (Jiang et al., 2021), etc. As a concrete example, Subgraph Matching is used for protein
complex search in a protein-protein interaction network to test whether the interactions within a
protein complex in a species are also present in other species (Bonnici et al., 2013).
Due to its NP-hard nature, the state-of-the-art Subgraph Matching algorithms rely on backtracking
search with various techniques proposed to reduce the large search space (Sun & Luo, 2020; Kim
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). However, these techniques are mostly driven by heuristics, and as
a result, we observe that such solvers often fail to find any solution on large target graphs under
a reasonable time limit, although they tend to work well on small graph pairs. We denote this
phenomenon as solution sparsity. Such solution sparsity requires the designed model to not only have
enough capacity but also to run efficiently under limited computational budget. Another consequence


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of solution sparsity is that, there can be little-to-no reward signals for the RL agent under an RL
training framework (Silver et al., 2017), which we denote as reward sparsity.
In this paper, we propose NS UB S with two means to address the aforementioned challenges. First, we
propose a novel graph encoder-decoder neural network to dynamically match the query graph with the
target graph and perform aggregation operation only on the query graph to reduce information loss.
The novel encoder decouples the intra-graph message passing module (the “propagation” module)
that yields state-independent node embeddings, and the inter-graph message passing module (the
“matching” module) that refines the node embeddings via subgraph-to-graph matching. Thus, the
intra-graph embeddings can be computed only once at the beginning of search for efficient inference.
We further advance the inter-graph message passing by propagating only between nodes that either are
already matched or can be matched in future by running a local candidate search space computation
algorithm at each search state. Such algorithm leverages the key requirement of Subgraph Matching
that every node and edge in the query graph must be matched to the target graph, and therefore reduces
the amount of candidates from all the nodes in the target graph to a much smaller amount. Compared
with a Graph Matching Network (Li et al., 2019) which computes all the pairwise node-to-node
message passing between two input graphs, our matching module is able to focus on only the node
pairs that can contribute to the solution, and thus is both more effective and more efficient. In addition,
we propose the use of sampling of subgraphs to obtain ground-truth subgraph-to-graph node-node
mappings to alleviate the reward sparsity issue during training. We design a novel look-ahead loss
function where the positive node-node pairs are augmented with positive node-node pairs in future
states to boost the amount of training signals at each search state.
Experiments on synthetic and real graph datasets demonstrate that NS UB S outperforms baseline
solvers in terms of effectiveness by a large margin. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
       • We address the challenging yet important task of Subgraph Matching with a vast amount of
         practical applications and propose NS UB S as the solution.
       • One key novelty is a proposed encoder layer consisting of a propagation module and a
         matching module that dynamically passes the information between the input graphs.
       • We conduct extensive experiments on real-world graphs to demonstrate the effectiveness of
         the proposed approach compared against a series of strong baselines in Subgraph Matching.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   P ROBLEM D EFINITION

We denote a query graph as q = (Vq , Eq ) and a target graph as G = (VG , EG ) where V and E
denote the node and edge sets. q and G are associated with a node labeling function Lg which maps
every node into a label l in a label set Σ. Subgraph: For a subset of nodes S of Vq , q[S] denotes
the subgraph of q with an node set S and a edge set consisting of all the edges in Eq that have
both endpoints in S. In this paper, we adopt the definition of non-induced subgraph. Subgraph
isomorphism: q is subgraph isomorphic to G if there exists an injective node-to-node mapping
M : Vq → VG such that (1) ∀u ∈ Vq , Lg (u) = Lg (M (u)); and (2) ∀e(u,u′ ) ∈ Eq , e(M (u),M (u′ )) ∈
EG . Subgraph Matching: The task of Subgraph Matching aims to find the subgraphs in G that are
isomorphic to q. We call M a solution, or a match of q to G. We call a pair (q, G) is solved if the
algorithm can find any match under a given time limit, which we find a challenge for existing solvers
on input graphs in experiments especially on large graphs. For solved pairs, the number of found
subgraphs by an algorithm is reported.

2.2   R ELATED W ORK

Non-learning methods on Subgraph Matching Existing methods on Subgraph Matching can be
broadly categorized into backtracking search algorithms (Shang et al., 2008; He & Singh, 2008; Han
et al., 2013; 2019; Kim et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022) and multi-way join approaches (Lai et al.,
2015; 2016; 2019; Kankanamge et al., 2017). The former category of approaches employ a branch
and bound approach to grow the solution from an empty subgraph by gradually seeking one matching
node pair at a time following a strategic order until the entire search space is explored. The multi-way
join approaches rely on decomposing the query graph into nodes and edges and performing join


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


operations repeatedly to combine the partially matched subgraphs to q. However, they tend to work
well on small query graphs generally with less than 10 nodes (Sun & Luo, 2020), and thus we follow
and compare against methods in the former category, whose details will be shown in Section 2.3.

Learning-based methods for subgraph-related problems The idea of designing graph neural
networks for graph-graph similarity has been explored, but not Subgraph Matching. GMN (Ling
et al., 2020) captures general notions of graph similarity through inter-graph message passing, but
outputs a similarity score instead of the discrete matching between 2 graphs. D MPNN (Liu & Song,
2022) uses node to edge conversions to obtain node and edge representations that better preserve
isomorphism properties, but outputs approximate subgraph isomorphism counts instead of a discrete
matching.
Representation learning methods for Subgraph Matching use a geometric loss to provide soft node-
node correspondance scores, stops short of providing a discrete mapping of where the query occurs
in the target graph. For example, NM ATCH (Lou et al., 2020) learns node embeddings to predict a
score for an input subgraph-graph pair indicating whether the subgraph is contained in another graph.
I SO N ET (Roy et al., 2022) extends this idea using edge-edge correspondence scores to rank which
query graphs are most likely to appear in the target.
Another direction of research aims to perform subgraph counting (Liu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020)
supervised on the number of specific substructures, and again lacks an explicitly search strategy
and thus falls short of yielding solutions for Subgraph Matching. Researchers tackling consistent
subgraph matching (Yuan et al., 2022) handle complex node or edge constraints using a Subgraph
Matching subroutine. Hence, advancements to Subgraph Matching can directly benefit such works.

Efforts on using RL for graph NP-hard problems The idea of using RL to replace heuristics in
search algorithms for NP-hard graph-related tasks is not new, and we identify three works similar
to the present work. (1) GLS EARCH (Bai et al., 2021) detects the maximum common subgraph
(MCS) in an input graph pair, which is different from Subgraph Matching which requires the entire q
to be matched with G, allowing further improvement in the neural network and search design. (2)
RL-QVO (Wang et al., 2022) tackles Subgraph Matching via ordering the nodes in the query graph
as a global pre-processing step before search, which is an orthogonal direction to our approach to
select nodes in the target graph computed at each search step.

2.3   S EARCH - BASED METHODS FOR S UBGRAPH M ATCHING

Due to the NP-hard nature of Subgraph Match-
ing, backtracking search is a naturally suitable
algorithm since it exhaustively explores the solu-
                                                    Algorithm 1 Search-based Subgraph Matching.
tion space by starting with an empty match and
adding one new node pair to the current match 1: Input: Query graph q, data graph G.
at each step. When the current match cannot be       2: Output: Matches from q to G.
further extended, the search backtracks to its pre- 3: Filter: C ← generate candidate node sets.
vious search state, and explores other node pairs 4: Order: ϕ ← generate an ordering for Vq .
to extend the match. However, naively enumer- 5: Search: Backtracking(q, G, C, ϕ, {}).
ating all the possible states in the entire search
space is intractable in practice, and therefore
existing efforts mainly aim to reduce the total number of search steps
for the backtracking search via mainly three ways (Sun & Luo, 2020): (1) Filter nodes in G to obtain
a small set of candidate nodes for each node in q as a pre-processing step before the backtracking
search; (2) Order the nodes in q before the search; (3) Generate a local candidate set of nodes
in each step of the search based on the current search state. Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall
backtracking search based framework for Subgraph Matching. It is worth noting that the first three
means correspond to the three steps in the algorithm, and therefore any improvement in any of the
three steps can be regarded as orthogonal to each other.
The basic idea of backtracking search is outlined in Algorithm 2. The recursive algorithm starts
with an empty node-node mapping, and tries to add one new node pair to the mapping M at each
recursive call. The action is the new node pair (ut , vt ), where ut ∈ Vq is selected according to the


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


heuristic-based ordering ϕ, and vt ∈ VG is selected according to a policy (which is to be learned by
NS UB S) to be one of the local candidate nodes (line 8), that can be mapped to ut . It is noteworthy
that this local candidate node set “Aut ⊆ VG ” is refined over the global candidate sets C based on the
current search state st . st is defined as (q, G) along with the current mapping M and ut . Aut ⊆ VG
ensures any node in Aut would lead to the extended subgraphs at st still being isomorphic to each
other. Thus, the local candidate set Aut for ut is the action space, for which we learn a policy (line 9)
to order the nodes, resulting in an ordered list Aut ,ordered .
Despite existing efforts to compute a small C, a
good ϕ, and a small Aut to reduce search space,
we observe that the size of Aut can be up to
thousands of nodes for many real-world large           Algorithm 2 Backtracking(q, G, C, ϕ, M )
target graphs, calling for a smarter policy to or-      1: Input: q, G, C, ϕ, and current mapping M .
der the nodes not only in q but also in G (Aut          2: Output: Subgraph match mappings.
to be specific). To the best of our knowledge, all      3: if |M | = |Vq | then
the existing methods adopt a random ordering            4:     output M ;
in Aut ,ordered . We conjecture it is because exist-    5:     return;
ing local candidate computation techniques can          6: end if
further prune nodes from C, and thus enumer-            7: ut ∈ Vq ← ϕ(M );
ating Aut in a random ordering can be tractable         8: Aut ← st .getLocalCand(ut );
on small graph pairs. We will experimentally            9: Aut ,ordered ← policy(st , Aut );
show that this attributes to their failure to find     10: for vt in Aut ,ordered do
a match for many large graph pairs. In fact, a         11:     M ← M.add(ut , vt );
theoretically perfect policy, policy ∗ , can find      12:     Backtracking(q, G, C, ϕ, M );
the entire match of the query graph in Vq steps        13:     M ← M.remove(ut , vt );
or recursive calls, assuming q has at least one        14: end for
match with G. This again inspires our proposed
method to improve the policy for node selection
from Aut .


3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD

In this section we formulate the problem of Subgraph Matching as learning an RL agent that grows
the extracted subgraphs by adding new node pairs to the current subgraphs. We first describe the
environment setup, then depict our proposed encoder-decoder neural network which provides actions
for our agent to grow the subgraphs in a search context.


3.1   RL F ORMULATION OF S UBGRAPH M ATCHING

We formulate the Subgraph Matching problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where the RL
agent starts with an empty solution, and iteratively matches one node pair at a time until no more
nodes can be matched. As mentioned in Section 2.3, our policy assigns a score to each action in Aut ,
and therefore can be modeled as a policy network Pθ (at |st ) that computes a probability distribution
over Aut for the current state st , where the node pair to select consists of (ut , vt ). However, since
ut is chosen by ϕ, we regard an action as a node vt selected from Aut . Since each action is a target
node in Aut , the neural network must learn good node embeddings that capture the current matching
status in each search state, which will be shown in Section 3.2. We define our reward as R(+) = 1 if
the subgraph is fully matched and R(−) = 0 otherwise.
To provide ample training signals to the neural network model, during training, we randomly sample
subgraphs from the target graph and record the mapping between the nodes in the sampled subgraph
and VG . Therefore, after the search, we collect the positive training signals at each state as all the
node-node pairs (u, v) that lead to a solution. The collection of such positive pairs is denoted as
P (st ). Negative pairs N (st ) can be obtained by randomly sampling node-node pairs at each st from
the action space Aut . However, the solution sparsity issue mentioned previously causes insufficient
positive pairs. We therefore propose the following look-ahead loss function which augments P (st )
with the positive node-node pairs in future states. Overall, the look-ahead loss function can be


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


formulated as
                                                     T
                                                     X −t
                                       Lla (st ) =          Lce (st+k )                               (1)
                                                     k=0

where T corresponds to the final step that matches the entire subgraph, and L′la is the cross-entropy
loss computed at st+k . Specifically, Lce (st+k ) is the cross entropy loss and computed as the negative
of the following:

                                 (+)                             (+)
            P
               (u,v)∈P (st+k ) R     logπ θ (u, v)|st   + (1 − R     )log   1 − π θ (u, v)|st    +
                                                                                                     (2)
                                 (−)
                                     logπθ (u, v)|st + (1 − R(−) )log 1 − πθ (u, v)|st
            P
               (u,v)∈N (st+k ) R


where πθ (u, v)|st = σ Plogit (u, v)|st denotes the raw output of the policy network followed
by applying the Sigmoid function. Since we define R(+) = 1 and R(−) = 0, Lce (st+k ) is simplified
as
             P                               P
          − (u,v)∈P (st+k ) logπθ (u, v)|st − (u,v)∈N (st+k ) log 1 − πθ (u, v)|st             (3)

In addition to the look-ahead loss that encourages the policy network to recognize positive node-node
pairs, we also adopt the max margin loss, Lmm , proposed in Lou et al. (2020) to encourage the
encoder to produce subgraph-graph relation aware node embeddings h. Our overall loss function
is the combination of the novel look-ahead loss function and the max margin loss function, i.e.
Ltotal = Lla + Lmm . More details can be found in the appendix.

3.2     E NCODER -D ECODER D ESIGN FOR P OLICY E STIMATION

Our neural network consists of an encoder which produces node-level embeddings for Vq and VG
and a decoder which transforms the node embeddings into Pθ (at |st ). We identify the following
challenges: (1) Each state st consists of q, G, and the mapping Mt between the matched nodes
St,q ⊆ Vq and St,G ⊆ VG , which should be effectively represented and utilized in predicting
Pθ (at |st ); (2) Pθ (at |st ) is dependent on st and at , potentially requiring the node embeddings to be
recomputed at every search step and incurring too much computational overhead; (3) Existing Graph
Neural Networks (GNN) relying on message passing (e.g. Kipf & Welling (2016); Velickovic et al.
(2018); You et al. (2020)) are inherently local, which are incompatible with the policy estimation
requiring global matching of q to G. Even the more recent GNNs that enhance expressiveness beyond
1-Weisfeiler-Lehman test (Morris et al., 2020; Wijesinghe & Wang, 2022) still cannot guarantee the
capturing of nodes in the solution, since otherwise the NP-hard task would then be solved. This
motivates the following design leveraging the properties of Subgraph Matching as much as possible.

3.2.1    E NCODER : E MBEDDING G ENERATION VIA Q C -S GMNN
The nodes of q and G are encoded into initial one-hot embeddings h(0) ∈ R|Σ| , and fed into
K sequentially stacked Query-Conditioned Subgraph Matching Neural Networks (Q C -S GMNN)
layers to obtain h(K) ∈ RD , where D is the dimension of embeddings, followed by a J UMPING
K NOWLEDGE (Xu et al., 2018) network to combine the node embeddings from the K layers to obtain
the final node embeddings, denoted as “Aggregate” in Figure 5.
We start by observing that Subgraph Matching desires all nodes in q to be matched with G, and
existing works in Subgraph Matching aiming at reduce Aut (Section 2.3) guarantee no false pruning.
In other words, Aut is guaranteed to contain the solution nodes in G that should match with ut ,
that is, Aut provides useful hints of which nodes should be matched together. We then compute
the candidate space Au′ for every remaining query graph node u′ ∈    / St,q , resulting in a mapping
Mt′ = {u′ 7→ Au′ , ∀u′ ∈ Vq \ St,q }. Intuitively, Mt′ can be regarded as hints of future node-node
mappings. In contrast, Mt = {u 7→ {v}, ∀u ∈ St,q } reflects the current state st , which maps each
node in St,q to a unique node in G. We define M̃t as the union of Mt and Mt′ , and define M˜t−1 as the
reverse mapping of M̃t , which serve as the basis for the matching module.
Q C -S GMNN consists of a propagation module, which performs regular intra-graph message passing
on q and G individually, and a matching module, which performs state-dependent subgraph-graph


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  State-independent node embeddings:
                                                Computed at 𝑠! and cached during search
        𝑞        𝐺                                                                                         𝒉!!

            𝑆!
                            𝑆"      Propagate   Propagate       Propagate   …     Propagate


                                                                                              Aggregate          Policy

                          Encoder    Match       Match           Match             Match
                            Layer
            𝑆"

                                                                                                                 Guide
                                                      State-dependent graph matching:
                                                       Computed at every search state

 Time   …            …



Figure 1: The overall process of Subgraph Matching is a search algorithm that matches one node
pair at a time for the input query q and target graph G guided by a learned policy. Due to the large
action space incurred by the large G in practice, we propose to train a policy network to guide the
selection of local candidate nodes in G at each search state. This requires effective node embeddings
to be learned that can reflect the node-to-node mapping at the current state and contribute to the
prediction of the policy and reward. To achieve this end, we propose a novel Q C -S GMNN encoder
layer consisting of a “Propagation” module that performs intra-graph message passing as a typical
GNN and a “Matching” module that performs state-dependent inter-graph matching (Section 3.2.1).
The Pθ (at |st ) is trained using the novel loss functions described in Section 3.1.

matching leveraging M̃t to pass information between q and G. Specifically,
                 (k+1)                    (k)      (k)
               hu,intra = fagg {fmsg (hu,intra , hu′ ,intra )|u′ ∈ N (u)} ,

                 (k+1)                    (k)      (k)
               hv,intra = fagg {fmsg (hv,intra , hv′ ,intra )|v ′ ∈ N (v)} ,

                 (k+1)                  (k+1)
               hq,intra = freadout ({hu,intra |u ∈ Vq }),
                (k+1)                     (k+1)    (k+1)
               hu,G→q = fagg {fmsg (hu,intra , hv,intra )|v ∈ M̃t (u)} ,                                                  (4)
               hv,q→G = fagg {fmsg (hv,intra , hu,intra , hq,intra )|u ∈ M˜t−1 (v)} ,
                (k+1)                     (k+1)    (k+1)      (k+1)
                  (k+1)                (k+1)    (k+1)
                hu      = fcombine (hu,G→q , hu,intra ),
                  (k+1)                (k+1)    (k+1)
                hv      = fcombine (hv,q→G , hv,intra ).
The first two steps can be any intra-graph message passing GNNs such as Graph Attention Net-
works (Velickovic et al., 2018) with a message function fmsg and an aggregation function fagg ,
corresponding to the propagation module. The middle three steps compute intermediate embeddings
                                                                                   (k+1)      (k+1)
that will be used for the last two steps, i.e. the matching module. Specifically, hu,G→q and hv,q→G
compute the cross-graph message passing from G to q and q to G using M̃t and M˜−1 , respectively           t
                                                                                                     (k)
(represented as the red dashed lines in Figure 5). A graph-level embedding hq,intra is computed
via freadout and used in the information passing from q to G to let the embeddings of VG query-
                                                                     (k+1)
conditioned. We do not inject the graph-level embeddings of G into hu,G→q , since the large size of
G could result in too much information loss in the readout operation. The last two steps combine
the intra-graph embeddings and inter-graph embeddings via fcombine to produce the final output
embeddings. It is noteworthy that fmsg and fagg refer to the general class of functions that yield
messages between two nodes and performs aggregation on a set of messages, and in practice, the
propagation and matching modules can use different functions for fmsg and fagg .
                                                                            (k)
To address challenge (2), we make the observation that hintra only depends on q and G and is
independent of Mt , and thus can be computed once and cached at the beginning of the search
(denoted as the top branch in Figure 5) and later reused throughout the search. Our Q C -S GMNN
decouples the propagation and matching steps and outputs two sources of information separately,
allowing the search to cache the state-independent node embeddings and dynamically select the
computational paths during search. Thanks to the caching, only the initial iteration  requires the
O(|Eq |+|EG |) computation, and all the subsequent iterations only involve O |Vq ||Āut | complexity,
where |Āut | is the average size of local candidate space.


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2.2    D ECODER : Pθ (at |st ) E STIMATION

Since the node embeddings of q has received the right amount of information   P from M̃t , we propose
an attention-based mechanism to compute the state embedding: hst = u∈Vq fatt (hu , {h′u |u′ ∈
Vq })hu , where fatt computes one attention score per node normalized across Vq to tackle challenge
(3). Intuitively, the attention function learns which nodes are important for contributing to the eventual
subgraph selected by sT . Due to the cross-graph communication in Q C -S GMNN, we only aggregate
nodes from Vq to obtain the state representation hst , taking advantage of the fact that |Vq | is typically
much smaller than |VG | in Subgraph Matching, further addressing challenge (2).
For the policy, we aim to tackle challenge (3), by using hst . The reasons are two-fold. First, by
definition Pθ (at |st ) requires st as input; Second, the attention mechanism used to compute hst
capturing the future subgraph. Combined with a bilinear tensor product with learnable parameter
W [1:F ] ∈ RD×D×F with a hyperparameter F to allow the action node embeddings               hut and hvt
                                                                    T   [1:F ]
to fully interact, we obtain Plogit (at |st ) = MLP CONCAT(hut W               hvt , hst ) , followed by
a softmax normalization
                              over the logits for all the actions. The decoder has time complexity
O |Vq | + |Āut | .

4     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate NS UB S against seven backtracking-based algorithms for exact Subgraph Matching, and
conduct experiments on six real-word target graphs from various domains, whose details can be found
in the supplementary material. We find NS UB S written in Python can outperform the state-of-the-art
solver under most cases, suggesting the effectiveness of the learned policy for ordering nodes in
G. Code, trained model, and all the datasets used in the experiments are released as part of the
supplementary material for reproducibility. More results and the ablation study can be found in the
supplementary material.

4.1     DATASETS AND E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

We use one synthetic dataset BA and six real-
world target graphs. For D BLP and YOUTUBE,                   Table 1: Target graph description.
we prepare two query sets of small and large
query graphs, denoted as “-S” and “-L”, respec-           Dataset      Domain          |VG |        |EG |
tively, i.e. D BLP -S, D BLP -L, and Y T-S, Y T-L.          BA         Synthetic     10,000        29,991
As shown in Table 1, the largest target graph,            B RAIN       Biology        1,076        90,811
YOUTUBE, has over 1M nodes and 2M edges.                  HPRD         Biology        9,045        34,853
                                                         C OSMOS      Astronomy      21,596       176,830
To train our model, we sample query graphs of              D BLP       Citation      317,080     1,049,866
any sizes and let NS UB S perform the search al-          E THE        Financial     709,351      946,582
gorithm and collect training data from the search        YOUTUBE        Social      1,134,890    2,987,624
tree. Therefore, we sample query graphs from
each target graph of sizes ranging from 4 nodes
to 128 nodes, and validate that no query graph in the testing set is visible to the model, that is, no
graph in the training set is isomorphic to any graphs in the testing set. During the testing stage, for
each target graph, we use the following evaluation protocol. For each graph pair, we set a time limit
of 5 minutes, and record the result of whether a solution is found or not, and the number of solutions
for solved pairs.

4.2     BASELINES AND PARAMETER S ETTINGS

We compare NS UB S against a series of baseline solvers whose source codes are provided by (Sun
& Luo, 2020): L DF (Sun & Luo, 2020), N LF (Sun & Luo, 2020), Q UICK SI (Shang et al., 2008),
G RAPH QL (He & Singh, 2008), T SO (Han et al., 2013), C FL (Bi et al., 2016), C ECI (Bhattarai et al.,
2019), and DP- ISO (Han et al., 2019). We also include NM ATCH (Lou et al., 2020) as a learning-
based method for exact Subgraph Matching, by adapting the original implementation provided by the
authors of (Lou et al., 2020) into our backtracking search framework. Specifically, at each search
step, we invoke the inference step of the released trained NM ATCH model over the input graphs, and
obtain a matching score for each (ut , vt ) action node pair to guide the selection of nodes in Aut .


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since we are among the first to learn a policy for selecting nodes in G, we use DP- ISO for filtering
and G RAPH QL for query node ordering. We implement the backtracking search framework and
DP- ISO’s local candidate computation algorithm in Python.
NS UB S uses 8 layers of the proposed Q C -S GMNN encoders. ω is set to 10 and max_iters is set
to 120. Training is performed on a server with NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs. We train NS UB S for
approximately 2 days with randomly sampled subgraphs for each target graph with the AdamW
optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with the initial learning rate 0.0005 and the ϵ parameter set to
0.01 for numerical stability. Gradient clipping is applied with the maximum norm of the gradients set
to 0.1. We use a validation set to select the best model to evaluate.


              (a) BA                         (b) B RAIN                        (c) HPRD


           (d) C OSMOS                       (e) D BLP -S                     (f) D BLP -L


            (g) E THE                         (h) Y T-S                         (i) Y T-L

                  Figure 2: The growth of the number of solved pairs across time.


4.3   R ESULTS

To examine the efficiency of each method and analyze the efficacy across time, we conduct the
following evaluation. For each (q, G) pair, we record the time the method takes to find a solution,
and accumulate the number of solved pairs across time. From t = 0 to t = 300 seconds, an increase
at t indicates the method solves one graph pair at t. The earlier a method solves the graph pairs, the
faster and better the method is.
In theory, given an infinite amount of time, every method adopting the backtracking search algorithm
would be able to solve a graph pair. However, such assumption is not practical. Thus, the curves in
Figure 2 have the practical implication that under a reasonable amount of time budget, the idea of
using a smarter policy indeed brings better performance to Subgraph Matching. Another observation
is that the baseline solvers flatten towards the end of 5 minutes, indicating that they get stuck in


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Number of solutions found by each method after 5 minutes averaged by the number of the
graph pairs in each dataset. For clarity and compactness, each result has been divided by 1000, i.e.
each number is in the unit of 103 .

    Method      BA     B RAIN   HPRD       C OSMOS     D BLP -S   D BLP -L   E THE    Y T-S    Y T-L
    L DF        1.21   2.05     0.69       4.80        4.82       1.51       2.50     2.73     1.75
    N LF        1.29   2.24     0.37       7.05        4.26       1.06       2.34     2.52     1.06
    G RAPH QL   1.42   3.95     1.24       7.70        5.23       2.55       3.53     2.73     1.23
    T SO        1.41   1.26     0.50       5.53        4.36       1.36       2.30     2.57     1.24
    C FL        1.56   1.12     0.18       6.97        5.70       1.13       2.32     2.84     0.90
    DP- ISO     1.31   2.11     0.54       6.93        4.86       2.63       2.58     3.32     1.88
    C ECI       1.21   1.03     1.05       6.96        4.18       1.35       1.70     1.60     0.55
    NM ATCH     1.02   0.00     0.00       0.24        1.25       0.24       1.39     0.37     0.00
    NS UB S     2.37   4.58     4.17       3.70        8.32       6.24       2.53     7.93     3.62
unpromising search states that are unlikely to contain the solution, confirming the severity of the
aforementioned challenges of solution and reward sparsity.
As shown in Figure 2, NS UB S initially seems not as good as other models in the first few seconds due
to the additional neural network computational overhead at each step, but achieves the same or better
performance on all of the 9 query sets after 5 minutes. We observe baseline solvers tend to fail on
larger target graphs, as search space pruning on its own is not effective enough to guarantee solutions
in such cases with a large amount of candidate nodes. Learning-based methods outperform solver
baselines because they provide a better target graph node ordering, under the same search framework.
Out of the learning-based methods, NS UB S consistently outperforms NM ATCH, as it features a more
powerful encoder that efficiently computes a policy conditioned on the current search state with a
better inter-graph communication mechanism. This also suggests that the target graph node ordering
provided by NS UB S is much better than the random ordering adopted by solver baselines, confirming
that our novelties indeed greatly improve Subgraph Matching performance.
We observe that when the query graph size increase, all methods tend to show lower performance,
which can be attributed to the exponentially growing search space. It is noteworthy that the survey
paper comparing existing solvers (Sun & Luo, 2020) uses query graphs up to 32 nodes, whereas we
challenge all methods by testing on query graphs up to hundreds of nodes. The fact that NS UB S is
able to solve more graph pairs than baselines when the target graphs are large demonstrates good
scalability of NS UB S.
Given the nature of Subgraph Matching, we also evaluate the ability of each method to find as many
solutions as possible. As Table 2 indicates, NS UB S outperforms baseline methods on 7 out of 9
datasets, suggesting that the slower but more intelligent NS UB S can not only ensure one solution
is found, but also provide as many as and even more solutions compared against the faster baseline
solvers. The exceptions are HPRD and E THE, where G RAPH QL solves less pairs as shown in
Figure 2, but on average finds more solutions per graph pair across these two datasets. We empirically
observe that the baseline solvers tend to find many solutions because as soon as one solution is found,
nearby solutions can be found. In contrast, NS UB S continues performing neural network operations
after one solution is found. This indicates the efficiency limitation of the current model, and calls
for the need for future efforts to speed up the neural network computation, design even better policy
network and training methods to allow discovery of more solutions in lesser iterations, etc.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we tackle the challenging and important task of Subgraph Matching, and present a new
method for efficient and effective exact Subgraph Matching. It contains a novel encoder-decoder
neural network architecture trained using a novel look-ahead loss function and a max margin loss to
improve the policy estimation as well as the encoder. The core component, Q C -S GMNN, is a query-
conditioned graph encoder that performs intra-graph propagation and inter-graph node matching
to capture each state. To address the reward sparsity issue posed by the large action space, we
augment the positive node-node pairs at each search step with future states’ node-node pairs. We
experimentally show the utility of the proposed NS UB S method on the important Subgraph Matching
task. Specifically, NS UB S is able to solve more graph pairs than several existing Subgraph Matching
solvers on one synthetic dataset and six large real-world datasets.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Blair Archibald, Fraser Dunlop, Ruth Hoffmann, Ciaran McCreesh, Patrick Prosser, and James
  Trimble. Sequential and parallel solution-biased search for subgraph algorithms. In International
  Conference on Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations
  Research, pp. 20–38. Springer, 2019.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Yunsheng Bai, Derek Xu, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Glsearch: Maximum common subgraph
  detection via learning to search. In ICML, pp. 588–598. PMLR, 2021.
Albert-László Barabási and Réka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. science, 286
  (5439):509–512, 1999.
Bibek Bhattarai, Hang Liu, and H Howie Huang. Ceci: Compact embedding cluster index for scalable
  subgraph matching. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data,
  pp. 1447–1462, 2019.
Fei Bi, Lijun Chang, Xuemin Lin, Lu Qin, and Wenjie Zhang. Efficient subgraph matching by post-
  poning cartesian products. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Management
  of Data, pp. 1199–1214, 2016.
Vincenzo Bonnici, Rosalba Giugno, Alfredo Pulvirenti, Dennis Shasha, and Alfredo Ferro. A
  subgraph isomorphism algorithm and its application to biochemical data. BMC bioinformatics, 14
  (7):1–13, 2013.
Chen Cai and Yusu Wang. A simple yet effective baseline for non-attributed graph classification.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03508, 2018.
Tianyi Chen and Charalampos Tsourakakis. Antibenford subgraphs: Unsupervised anomaly detection
  in financial networks. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 2762–2770, 2022.
Zhengdao Chen, Lei Chen, Soledad Villar, and Joan Bruna. Can graph neural networks count
  substructures? NeurIPS, 33:10383–10395, 2020.
BC Coutinho, Sungryong Hong, Kim Albrecht, Arjun Dey, Albert-László Barabási, Paul Torrey,
 Mark Vogelsberger, and Lars Hernquist. The network behind the cosmic web. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1604.03236, 2016.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 NeurIPS, pp. 1024–1034, 2017.
Myoungji Han, Hyunjoon Kim, Geonmo Gu, Kunsoo Park, and Wook-Shin Han. Efficient subgraph
 matching: Harmonizing dynamic programming, adaptive matching order, and failing set together.
 In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1429–1446,
 2019.
Wook-Shin Han, Jinsoo Lee, and Jeong-Hoon Lee. Turboiso: towards ultrafast and robust sub-
 graph isomorphism search in large graph databases. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGMOD
 International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 337–348, 2013.
Huahai He and Ambuj K Singh. Graphs-at-a-time: query language and access methods for graph
  databases. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of
  data, pp. 405–418, 2008.
Moritz Helmstaedter, Kevin L Briggman, Srinivas C Turaga, Viren Jain, H Sebastian Seung, and
 Winfried Denk. Connectomic reconstruction of the inner plexiform layer in the mouse retina.
 Nature, 500(7461):168–174, 2013.
Hui Jiang, Yuxin Deng, and Ming Xu. Quantum circuit transformation based on subgraph isomor-
  phism and tabu search. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2104, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eric Jonas. circuitdata/mouseretina. https://github.com/ericmjonas/circuitdata/
  tree/master/mouseretina, 2015.
Chathura Kankanamge, Siddhartha Sahu, Amine Mhedbhi, Jeremy Chen, and Semih Salihoglu.
  Graphflow: An active graph database. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Conference
  on Management of Data, pp. 1695–1698, 2017.
Maurice G Kendall. A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1/2):81–93, 1938.
Hyunjoon Kim, Yunyoung Choi, Kunsoo Park, Xuemin Lin, Seok-Hee Hong, and Wook-Shin
  Han. Versatile equivalences: Speeding up subgraph query processing and subgraph matching. In
 Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 925–937, 2021.
Jinha Kim, Hyungyu Shin, Wook-Shin Han, Sungpack Hong, and Hassan Chafi. Taming subgraph
   isomorphism for rdf query processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01973, 2015.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  ICLR, 2016.
Harold W Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics
  quarterly, 2(1-2):83–97, 1955.
Longbin Lai, Lu Qin, Xuemin Lin, and Lijun Chang. Scalable subgraph enumeration in mapreduce.
  Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 8(10):974–985, 2015.
Longbin Lai, Lu Qin, Xuemin Lin, Ying Zhang, Lijun Chang, and Shiyu Yang. Scalable distributed
  subgraph enumeration. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 10(3):217–228, 2016.
Longbin Lai, Zhu Qing, Zhengyi Yang, Xin Jin, Zhengmin Lai, Ran Wang, Kongzhang Hao, Xuemin
  Lin, Lu Qin, Wenjie Zhang, et al. Distributed subgraph matching on timely dataflow. Proceedings
  of the VLDB Endowment, 12(10):1099–1112, 2019.
Jinsoo Lee, Wook-Shin Han, Romans Kasperovics, and Jeong-Hoon Lee. An in-depth comparison of
   subgraph isomorphism algorithms in graph databases. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 6(2):
   133–144, 2012.
Jure Leskovec and Andrej Krevl. SNAP Datasets: Stanford large network dataset collection. http:
  //snap.stanford.edu/data, June 2014.
Yujia Li, Chenjie Gu, Thomas Dullien, Oriol Vinyals, and Pushmeet Kohli. Graph matching networks
  for learning the similarity of graph structured objects. ICML, 2019.
Xiang Ling, Lingfei Wu, Saizhuo Wang, Tengfei Ma, Fangli Xu, Chunming Wu, and Shouling Ji.
  Hierarchical graph matching networks for deep graph similarity learning, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=rkeqn1rtDH.
Xin Liu and Yangqiu Song. Graph convolutional networks with dual message passing for subgraph
  isomorphism counting and matching. In AAAI, volume 36, pp. 7594–7602, 2022.
Xin Liu, Haojie Pan, Mutian He, Yangqiu Song, Xin Jiang, and Lifeng Shang. Neural subgraph
  isomorphism counting. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1959–1969, 2020.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Zhaoyu Lou, Jiaxuan You, Chengtao Wen, Arquimedes Canedo, Jure Leskovec, et al. Neural subgraph
  matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.03092, 2020.
Tinghuai Ma, Siyang Yu, Jie Cao, Yuan Tian, Abdullah Al-Dhelaan, and Mznah Al-Rodhaan. A
  comparative study of subgraph matching isomorphic methods in social networks. IEEE Access, 6:
  66621–66631, 2018.
Christopher Morris, Gaurav Rattan, and Petra Mutzel. Weisfeiler and leman go sparse: Towards
  scalable higher-order graph embeddings. NeurIPS, 33:21824–21840, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Indradyumna Roy, Venkata Sai Baba Reddy Velugoti, Soumen Chakrabarti, and Abir De. Interpretable
  neural subgraph matching for graph retrieval. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8115–8123, 2022.
Haichuan Shang, Ying Zhang, Xuemin Lin, and Jeffrey Xu Yu. Taming verification hardness: an
  efficient algorithm for testing subgraph isomorphism. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 1(1):
  364–375, 2008.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
  human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Shixuan Sun and Qiong Luo. In-memory subgraph matching: An in-depth study. In Proceedings of
  the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1083–1098, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. ICLR, 2018.
Hanchen Wang, Ying Zhang, Lu Qin, Wei Wang, Wenjie Zhang, and Xuemin Lin. Reinforce-
  ment learning based query vertex ordering model for subgraph matching. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11251, 2022.
Runzhong Wang, Zhigang Hua, Gan Liu, Jiayi Zhang, Junchi Yan, Feng Qi, Shuang Yang, Jun Zhou,
  and Xiaokang Yang. A bi-level framework for learning to solve combinatorial optimization on
  graphs. NeurIPS, 34, 2021.
Asiri Wijesinghe and Qing Wang. A new perspective on" how graph neural networks go beyond
  weisfeiler-lehman?". In ICLR, 2022.
Zhihao Xing and Shikui Tu. A graph neural network assisted monte carlo tree search approach to
  traveling salesman problem. IEEE Access, 8:108418–108428, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Chengtao Li, Yonglong Tian, Tomohiro Sonobe, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie
  Jegelka. Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks. ICML, 2018.
Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. Defining and evaluating network communities based on ground-truth.
  In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining Data Semantics, pp. 1–8, 2012.
Jiaxuan You, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Design space for graph neural networks. NeurIPS, 33:
   17009–17021, 2020.
Ye Yuan, Delong Ma, Aoqian Zhang, and Guoren Wang. Consistent subgraph matching over large
  graphs. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp. 2536–2548.
  IEEE, 2022.
Shijie Zhang, Shirong Li, and Jiong Yang. Gaddi: distance index based subgraph matching in
  biological networks. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Extending Database
  Technology: Advances in Database Technology, pp. 192–203, 2009.


A     D ETAILS ON T RAINING AND T ESTING OF NS UB S
A.1   D ETAILS ON C OLLECTING T RAINING S IGNALS

As mentioned in the main text, we utilize the max margin loss proposed in Lou et al. (2020) which
can be written as
                           X                          X
        Lmm (st+k ) =                E(hu , hv ) +              max{0, α − E(hu , hv )}
                        (u,v)∈P (st+k )              (u,v)∈N (st+k )


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                                                                       E(hu , hv ) = ||max{0, hu − hv }||22 .
The intuition behind the loss function is to encourage the encoder to produce node embeddings that
capture the subgraph-graph relationship. Specifically, the loss encourages each dimension of hu to
be less than hv , and the error term E measures the deviation of the current node embeddings from
this desired property.
It is noteworthy that both Lla and Lmm rely on the positive and negative node-node pairs, which are
obtained by performing search on (q, G) pairs where q is the randomly sampled training subgraph
queries from G. Therefore, the overall NS UB S model does not need any pre-solved graph pairs for
training.
Here we describe more details on how we prepare the positive node-node pairs P (st ). During training,
we set a time limit of 5 minutes for each (q, G) pair, and at the end of the search process, we obtain a
search tree where each node in the search tree corresponds to a state st . For a state st , we look ahead
at all sequences of states leading to a solution starting from st , and compute the Lla loss according
to Equation 1 for each sequence, and sum up the loss for all such sequences. To obtain N (st ), we
randomly sample |P (st )| node-node pairs from the action space Aut , where ut is the query graph
node selected by ϕ as described in Section 2.3, and Aut is the local candidate nodes in G to be
selected by the neural network.
We provide an illustration of the collection of positive node-node pairs in Figure 3. In this example,
there are two sequences of states leading to a solution of the full match of q to G, for which we label
the action node pair associated with each action. For clarity, we only show the first few states and
omit the later states. It is noteworthy that search states that do not lead to a solution, e.g. s1 , do
not produce any training signal, since there is insufficient information regarding such states. Since
we always perform random subgraph sampling to generate training graph pairs, we ensure at least
one sequence of actions leading to a solution by forcing the initial search trajectory to follow the
ground-truth node-node mapping obtained when conducting sampling. In Figure 3, this corresponds
to the initial trajectory (0,0), (1,2), (2,5), (3,9), (4,7) . . .

                                           (1,2)          (2,5)         (3,9)        (4,7)
Search Tree                                                                                       …        Positive node-   Positive node-   Positive node- …
                                     𝑠$            𝑠!             𝑠!            𝑠"           𝑠#
                          (0,0)
                                                                                                           node pairs for   node pairs for   node pairs for
                                                                                                           the 𝑠# :         the 𝑠! :         the 𝑠" :
          Initial State                                                                                    (0,0)            (1,2)            (2,5)
               𝑠"
                            (0,11)                                                                         (1,2)            (2,5)            (3,9)
                                                                                                           (2,5)            (3,9)            (4,7)
                                                                                                           (3,9)            (4,7)            …
                                          (1,5)
                                                                                                           (4,7)            …
                                                                                                  …        …
  Node
                                                            (2,2)         (3,9)       (4,10)               (0,11)
   1                        Node
                             5                                                                             (1,5)
                                                  State                  State Transition                  (2,2)
                                                                                                           (4,10)
                                                  Example illustrating an action
                                                                                                           …


Figure 3: The search tree after the 5-minute time budget provides positive training signals. An action
node pair (ut , vt ) where ut ∈ Vq and vt ∈ VG is associated with an edge. Negative training pairs are
randomly sampled from Vq × VG .


A.2      D ETAILS ON T ESTING G RAPH PAIRS

We conduct evaluation on the following testing graph datasets:

         1. The synthetic dataset BA is unlabeled and generated using the Barabási–Albert
            model (Barabási & Albert, 1999) with the parameter of attachment set to 3. We sam-
            ple 50 query graphs each of 64 nodes as the query set. The sampling algorithm starts with a
            randomly selected initial node, and then performs random walk until a subgraph consisting
            of a pre-defined number of nodes is sampled. Each step in the random walk selects a node
            from the neighboring nodes of the current node to visit in the next step, where the node can
            be a new node or an already selected node, i.e. the random walk is allowed to backtrack. We


                                                                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         define the raw sampling probability to be 1/p if the node is the selected subgraph, and p
         otherwise. A small p therefore encourages re-visitation and the final subgraph tends to be
         “star“-like, while a large p typically yields a more “path“-like subgraph. Each of the 50 sam-
         pled subgraphs uses a different p parameter by sweeping across the range from 0.001 to 1000.

         Specifically, the i-th sampled subgraph uses p = 0.001 ∗ exp log(106 )/49 ∗ (i − 1) , i.e.
         the first subgraph uses p = 0.001, the second uses p = 0.00133, the third uses p = 0.00176,
         etc. The 49th subgraph uses p = 754.312, and the last uses p = 1000. Without specific
         mentioning, the sampling of subgraphs for other datasets uses this algorithm.
      2. The B RAIN dataset is obtained from mouse retina connectome (Helmstaedter et al., 2013)
         with node labels representing the coarse type determined from supplemental text (Jonas,
         2015). We sample 50 query graphs each of of 64 nodes. There are 5 types of node labels in
         total.
      3. The HPRD target graph is a protein-protein interaction graph obtained from a recent survey
         paper on Subgraph Matching (Sun & Luo, 2020) without node labels. Similar to B RAIN, we
         sample 50 64-node graphs as the query graphs.
      4. The C OSMOS graph represents the network of galaxies (Coutinho et al., 2016) without node
         labels, for which we sample 50 query graphs each of 32 nodes as queries.
      5. The D BLP and YOUTUBE target graphs are also used in the survey paper (Sun & Luo,
         2020), but instead of sampling subgraphs as query graphs, we rely on ground-truth com-
         munities mined from an algorithm (Yang & Leskovec, 2012) as query graphs. According
         to Leskovec & Krevl (2014), for D BLP, authors who published to a certain journal or
         conference form a community, and for YOUTUBE, user-defined groups are considered as
         ground-truth communities. Since many ground-truth communities are provided by Leskovec
         & Krevl (2014), we sample a 50-graph small query set and a 50-graph larger query set for
         these two datasets. Specifically, D BLP -S contains communities of 20-30 nodes, D BLP -L
         contains communities of 30-60 nodes, Y T-S contains communities of 30-40 nodes, and
         Y T-L contains communities of 40-100 nodes.
      6. The E THE dataset is obtained from a recent paper on financial anomoly detection (Chen &
         Tsourakakis, 2022). The graph represents 1-week Ethereum blockchain transactions where
         each edge represents a transaction with the amount. We run the released code provided by
         the paper to extract top anomalous subgraphs, and filtering subgraphs that are too small or
         too large, yielding 24 subgraphs ranging from 6 to 822 nodes as query graphs. Intuitively,
         these subgraphs are relatively dense and correlate with possibly malicious behavior. We
         remove the transaction amount from the edges, and run Subgraph Matching using the
         mined subgraphs as query graphs and the original transaction graph as the target graph.
         Although NS UB S can potentially be extended for clique or anomaly detection, we leave the
         investigation as future work.

A.3   D ETAILS ON T RAINING AND VALIDATION G RAPH PAIRS

For each target graph, we sample query graphs of various sizes to perform curriculum learning, as
shown effective by earlier graph matching works (Bai et al., 2021; Lou et al., 2020). We ensure the
testing query graphs and training query graphs are different by using different random seeds and
further running an isomorphism checker to ensure none of the testing query graphs are visible during
training. The query graphs come in the following sizes: 8, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64, 96, and 128 nodes. It is
noteworthy that the query graphs are obtained from provided ground-truth communities or mined
subgraphs for D BLP, E THE and YOUTUBE for testing, but during training, all the query graphs are
obtained via subgraph sampling.
Regarding the validation scheme, we use the following validation set for validating the models: 3
query graphs of size 8, 3 query graphs of size 16, 3 query graphs of size 32, 3 query graphs of size 64,
and 3 query graphs of size 128. These 15 query graphs are sampled from the same target graph with
different random seeds, and we ensure they are not isomorphic to any query graphs in the training
set (nor isomorphic to any query in the testing set if the testing set is obtained via random subgraph
sampling).
The overall training process consists of the following iterative steps: (1) Sample a query graph from
G and perform search with a limit of 5 minutes; (2) Collect training signals and add them to a replay


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


buffer; (3) Perform training by sampling a batch of training examples from the replay buffer and
running back-propagation; (4) Once every 5 times of performing search on training graph pairs, we
iterate through the 15 graph pairs in the validation set with a time budget of 40 seconds, and record
the validation reward, which is defined as the average best subgraph size. We accept the trained model
if the validation reward improves, and revert to the previous best model otherwise by loading the best
model’s checkpoint. At the end of the training process, we evaluate the best model that achieves the
best validation performance.

A.4   D ETAILS ON H YPERPARAMETERS

For the encoder, we set the intra-graph fagg and fmsg functions to G RAPH SAGE (Hamilton et al.,
2017), and set the inter-graph fagg function to be SUM and fmsg function to be dot-product style
attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) over incoming messages. Specifically, the message collected by
each query node, hu,G→q ∈ RD , consists of attended node embeddings from v ′ ∈ M̃t (u). Overall,
hu,G→q is computed as
         X
                softmaxv′ ∈M̃t (u) MLPq (hu,intra )T MLPG (hv′ ,intra ) MLPVAL,q (hv′ ,intra ).

                                                                                                (5)
      v ′ ∈M̃t (u)

The message collected by each target node, hv,q→G ∈ R2D , consists of attended node embeddings
from u′ ∈ M˜t−1 (v) and the whole query graph embedding, hq,intra . Overall, hv,q→G is computed as
                                      X
                        hv,q→G =             CONCAT(h′v,q→G , hq,intra ),                      (6)
                                        ˜
                                   u′ ∈Mt−1 (v)

where
  h′v,q→G = softmaxu′ ∈M˜−1 (v) MLPq (hu′ ,intra )T MLPG (hv,intra ) MLPVAL,G (hu′ ,intra ).

                                                                                                   (7)
                            t

In total, we use four different MLPs, i.e. MLPq , MLPG , MLPVAL,q , and MLPVAL,G following
(Vaswani et al., 2017), with an ELU(·) activation after the final layer.
We set the fcombine function to be the concatenation CONCAT followed by MLP. We choose
MEAN as the readout function freadout for computing the query graph-level embedding. We choose
the MAX function as the aggregation function for our Jumping Knowledge network which aggregates
the node embeddings. We apply layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) to the final node embeddings
before feeding into the decoder.
For the encoder, we stack 8 layers of intra-graph message passing with dimension 16. We stack
8layers of the inter-graph message passing with all MLPs outputting dimension 16. For the decoder,
we set MLPatt to dimensions [16, 4, 1] and MLPv to dimensions [16, 32, 16, 8, 4, 1]. We set the
policy head’s bilinear layer, W [1:F ] , to output dimension F = 32 and the policy head’s MLP to
dimensions [48, 32, 16, 8, 1]. For all the MLPs, we use the ELU(x) activation function on the hidden
layers. For MLPv , we apply a LeakyReLU(·) function following the final layer.
The goal of the encoder is to learn good node embeddings that capture the structural matching of
q and G, and thus we do not encode the node labels as initial encodings. Instead, we rely on the
candidate set generation algorithm to handle the constraint that only nodes of the same label can
match. Therefore, it is critical to encode the nodes into initial encodings properly. A simple way to
encode the nodes is to assign a constant encoding to every node in both q and G. To enhance the
initial encodings, we adopt Local Degree Profile (LDP) scheme (Cai & Wang, 2018) concatenated
with a 2-dimensional one-hot vector indicating whether a node is currently selected or not.
Our replay buffer is of size 128. During the training process, we repeatedly run 5 minutes of search,
populating the replay buffer, 3 minutes of replay buffer sampling and back-propagation, training
on as many replay buffer samples as possible, and performing validation to choose whether or not
we commit the learned model. One iteration of this process typically takes around 10 minutes.
Hyperparameters were found by tuning for performance manually against the validation dataset.

B     N OTES ON S EARCH
B.1   I NDUCED VS N ON -I NDUCED S UBGRAPHS


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


One key detail regarding the subgraph definition is whether
the subgraph is induced or non-induced. An induced sub-
graph q[S] consists of all the nodes S ⊆ Vq and requies
that for every edge (u, u′ ) ∈ Eq , if both u and u′ are in S,     𝑞 is an induced    𝑞 is a non-induced
then the edge (u, u′ ) must be included in the edges of q[S]       subgraph of 𝐺.       subgraph of 𝐺.
as well. Intuitively, an induced subgraph does not allow
any edges in the original graph to be dropped, as long as        Figure 4: Comparison between an in-
both endpoints of the edge are included by the subgraph.         duced (left) and a non-induced (right)
In contrast, a non-induced subgraph q[S] consists of all         subgraph. We use the red color to denote
the nodes S ⊆ Vq but allows edges in Eq to be dropped.           the nodes that are included in the match.
In this paper, we adopt the definition of non-induced sub-
graph, which is consistent with Han et al. (2019).


B.2   C HOICE OF F ILTERING , Q UERY N ODE O RDERING , AND L OCAL C ANDIDATE
      C OMPUTATION

Motivated by prior work benchmarking solver baselines (Sun & Luo, 2020), we adopt DP- ISO as
the filtering method, G RAPH QL as the query node ordering method, and G RAPH QL as the local
candidate computation method in NS UB S and NM ATCH. As shown by the experimental results in
the main paper, this design choice plays a much smaller role in Subgraph Matching than smart target
graph node ordering, highlighting the need for NS UB S. Furthermore, we find that optimal filtering,
query node ordering, and local candidate computation settings are highly dataset-dependent and hard
to determine beforehand; however, because NS UB S’s design is orthogonal to such choices, it could
easily be adapted to different filtering and query node ordering algorithms. We leave such study to
future work.
The filtering method produces a global candidate set, C : Vq → Vt , to drastically prune the search
space of possible matchings. A simple method to compute C is to only allow mappings from ut to vt
if vt has degree higher than or equal to the degree of ut . Different filtering algorithms use different
such rules (Sun & Luo, 2020). The query node ordering gives a search plan on which u nodes to
select first. A simple method is picking the u nodes with the least candidate target nodes given by C.
Different node ordering algorithms use different such rules (Sun & Luo, 2020).
During the search process, the local candidate set guarantees all subgraph mappings found throughout
the search process are isomorphic. Specifically, it ensures ut is matchable to vt , i.e. vt ∈ Aut only if
(1) all edges between ut and the currently matched query subgraph (with node set S) exist between
vt and the currently matched target subgraph: (ut , u′ ) ∈ Eq , u′ ∈ S =⇒ (vt , M (u′ )) ∈ EG
and (2) the matching, (ut , vt ) exists in the candidate set: vt ∈ C(ut ). There are many different
implementations and optimizations to ensure these conditions hold. For instance, a query tree data
structure (Han et al., 2019) can be stored, allowing O(1) lookup for (ut , u′ ) ∈ Eq connections given
a particular query node ordering. Different local candidate computation algorithms use different
such optimizations (Sun & Luo, 2020). Even though the subgraph isomorphism constraint is ensured
through the local candidate set, Subgraph Matching is by no means an easy task due to the large
amount of nodes in Aut .
Among different techniques to further improve the accuracy of Subgraph Matching approaches,
learning a state-dependent policy to select nodes from q is one direction worth mentioning. We
currently only learn to select nodes in Aut ⊆ VG partly because there is usually a small amount
of nodes in q, e.g. 32 nodes or 128 nodes, while the number of nodes in Aut is much larger. As
mentioned in the main text, RL-QVO (Wang et al., 2022) learns a state-independent node ordering
policy, ϕ, via RL that is executed before search. We call such ϕ query node ordering. We argue it is a
promising future direction to explore learning to select both nodes in q and nodes in G at each search
iteration.
As shown effective by previous works, we adapt a promise-based search strategy (Bai et al., 2021),
which backtracks to any earlier search state, instead of the immediate parent, whenever a terminal
state is reached. We choose which earlier search state to backtrack to by computing a 2:1 weighted
average of the search depth normalized by the query graph size and the percentage of explored actions,
allowing search to quickly exit local minima. We include this adaptation on all learning methods. We
also tried the promise-based search on the solver baselines, but found the performance difference


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is minimal, typically around 2%. This is because solver baselines do not assign any ordering to the
target graph nodes, thus there is no clear incentive to backtracking early.

C     C OMPARISON WITH R ELATED W ORKS
C.1     C OMPARISON WITH G RAPH M ATCHING N ETWORKS

Although G RAPH M ATCHING N ETWORKS (Ling et al., 2020) provides soft node-node correspon-
dence scores, it does not provide a discrete subgraph matching. A naive solution is thresholding the
soft correspondence matrix to obtain a matching. But thresholding does not guarantee a 1-1 mapping
between query graph and target graph nodes. Another idea is to use the hungarian algorithm (Kuhn,
1955) to obtain a 1-1 mapping, but this doesn’t guarantee the matched subgraphs would be isomorphic.
Hence, a search framework is required to extract the discrete subgraph matching.
We experimentally verify that NS UB S’s Q C -S GMNN encoder is superior to G RAPH M ATCHING
N ETWORKS’s encoder. This is because Q C -S GMNN ignores noisy inter-graph messages by filtering
them out with the local candidate set, learns unique representations for each state by being search
state dependent, and caches intra-graph messages for more efficient execution.

C.2     C OMPARISON WITH D MPNN

Although D MPNN (Yuan et al., 2022) provides soft node scores in the target graph, it does not provide
the discrete subgraph matching. A naive solution is thresholding the soft scores to obtain a discrete
subset of target graph nodes, but this cannot guarantee the extracted nodes are isomorphic to the
query due to the lack of any way to guarantee that. Hence, a search framework is required to extract
the discrete subgraph matching.
We experimentally verify that NS UB S’s Q C -S GMNN encoder is superior to D MPNN’s encoder in
Section D.1.2. This is because Q C -S GMNN is state-dependent and can learn unique representations
for each search state. Furthermore, Q C -S GMNN performs interg-raph message passing, that D MPNN
misses.

C.3     C OMPARISON WITH M AXIMUM C OMMON S UBGRAPH (MCS) D ETECTION AN GLS EARCH

C.3.1    C OMPARISON WITH MCS
Subgraph Matching and MCS detection are highly related tasks, and one can convert Subgraph
Matching to MCS detection by feeding the input (q, G) pair to an MCS solver, and check if the MCS
between q and G is identical to q. However, we note the following differences at the task level:

      1. Subgraph Matching requires all the nodes and edges in q to be matched with G, whereas
         MCS detection does not require one of two input graphs to be contained in another.
      2. Subgraph Matching by definition requires q to be smaller or equal to G, since otherwise the
         solver can immediately return “no solution”. In practice, the query graph is usually given by
         the user as input, and usually contains less than 100 nodes (Sun & Luo, 2020).

The first difference has several consequences. First, although one can solve Subgraph Matching via
an MCS solver, the other way does not hold, i.e. one cannot use a Subgraph Matching solver for MCS
detection, since Subgraph Matching has the stronger constraint of matching the entire q. Second,
the stronger constraint of Subgraph Matching allows existing search algorithms to design pruning
techniques as mentioned in the main text.
The second difference implies that the learning models designed for Subgraph Matching may not
work well for MCS detection and vice versa. For example,   NS UB S has a novel encoder layer with a
matching module that has time complexity O |Vq ||Āut | . However, if q becomes prohibitively large,
e.g. as large as G containing millions of nodes, then the matching step would become a bottleneck
and make the overall approach too slow to be useful in practice. Therefore, NS UB S cannot be used for
MCS detection not only because fundamentally the search algorithm leverages the stronger constraint
if Subgraph Matching, but also because the learning model would be inefficient and thus useless in
practice. By the same reasoning, NS UB S is likely to be ineffective for graph isomorphism checking


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


when both input graphs are of the same size and very large. This suggests the difficulty of designing
a general neural network architecture that works efficiently and effectively for a series of related
but different combinatorial optimization tasks. In theory, many such tasks are equivalent and can
be converted to each other, but in practice, specialized models should be designed to render a truly
useful learning-based approach.

C.3.2    C OMPARISON WITH GLS EARCH
Although GLS EARCH ’s maximum common subgraph (MCS) framework can theoretically be applied
for subgraph matching, in practice, search algorithms designed specifically for subgraph matching
work much better than those designed for maximum common subgraph (Archibald et al., 2019). Thus,
adaptations are needed to effectively use GLS EARCH for Subgraph Matching.
In terms of RL framework, GLS EARCH uses value networks instead of policy networks, which
is not effective for Subgraph Matching. Concretely, GLS EARCH performs the execution of each
action to get its next state st+1 , and compute the value associated with st+1 for the Q(st , at ). This
is named as “factoring out action” in Bai et al. (2021), and requires sequentially going through all
the actions to obtain the next states, for which GLS EARCH adopts a heuristic to reduce the amount
of actions. There is not such a heuristic in Subgraph Matching, and hence value networks become
very inefficient. In contrast, NS UB S efficiently computes one embedding per node for both q and G
using the Q C -S GMNN encoder layer, and computes Pθ (at |st ) in the decoder by batching the node
embeddings that are in the action space, i.e. Plogit (at |st ) = MLP CONCAT(hTut W [1:F ] hvt , hst )
can be turned into a batch operation for all the node embeddings involved in the action space of st .
In terms of model design, GLS EARCH only performs interaction between the 2 graphs in the decoder,
whereas NS UB S interacts the 2 graphs after each graph neural network layer. Because of this, NS UB S
decouples the propagation and matching modules to cache the intra-graph embeddings for efficient
computation. Furthermore, the query-conditioning in NS UB S’s Q C -S GMNN captures the asymmetric
nature of Subgraph Matching, unlike GLS EARCH’s model.
In terms of loss design, GLS EARCH opts for Deep-Q Network loss instead of lookahead loss, because
it uses factored out value-networks. This means it does not fully exploit the loss signal. Most
importantly, GLS EARCH cannot use the max margin geometric loss term (Lou et al., 2020), since
GLS EARCH does not provide node embedding pairs at state st to represent action at .
We experimentally verify that NS UB S’s choice of policy network, model design, and loss is superior
to GLS EARCH.

C.4     C OMPARISON WITH I SO N ET

We appreciate I SO N ET’s contribution towards using edge-centric geometric representations (Roy
et al., 2022); however, it is not directly comparable because I SO N ET aims to rank which query graphs
are most likely to appear in the target graph, without providing the discrete subgraph matching.
While I SO N ET provides soft edge-edge and node-node correspondence scores for interpretability, it
does not guarantee a discrete sugbraph matching. I SO N ET indeed reports some case studies where
the hungarian algorithm can extract some subgraph matchings that satisfies isomorphism constraints,
this fails to scale to very large query and target graphs. Thus, a search framework is required to
reliably extract the discrete subgraph matching.
Model-wise, I SO N ET passes each graph through intra-graph message passing then computes the
edge-egde or node-node alignment/permutation matrix by taking the dot product of node or edge
embeddings from the query and target graphs. NS UB S’s Q C -S GMNN improves this by introducing an
efficient query-conditioned matching module between intra-graph message passing layers. Loss-wise,
NS UB S’s lookahead loss improves I SO N ET by merging contrastive learning loss (Lou et al., 2020;
Roy et al., 2022) with RL loss.

C.5     C OMPARISON WITH RL-QVO

RL-QVO is orthogonal to NS UB S, proposing a better query vertex-ordering scheme for subgraph
matching. For large graphs, target-vertex ordering becomes the bottleneck instead of query vertex-


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ordering, as enumerating all target vertices for each query vertex becomes infeasible by the NP-Hard
nature of subgraph matching.
Unlike RL-QVO, which uses random target vertex-ordering, NS UB S learns a policy network to
perform target vertex-ordering. In addition to RL-QVO ’s single graph encoder, NS UB S considers
the query to target graph matching with Q C -S GMNN. Unlike RL-QVO ’s simple PPO loss, NS UB S
learns geometric node representations with lookahead loss.

D     A BLATION S TUDIES AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
D.1     A BLATION S TUDIES

We perform a series of ablation studies whose results are shown in Table 3. We find our key novelties
indeed greatly contribute to NS UB S’s superior performance on Subgraph Matching, particularly the
encoder-decoder design.

D.1.1    VARIANTS OF NS UB S

Table 3: Ablation study results on Subgraph Matching over HPRD. The ratio of the number of solved
pairs over the 50 pairs in the query set is reported. The average number of solutions (divided by 103 )
is reported too.

                    Model                         Solved %         # Solutions
                    L DF                          0.08             0.69
                    N LF                          0.04             0.37
                    G RAPH QL                     0.16             1.24
                    T SO                          0.06             0.50
                    C FL                          0.02             0.18
                    DP- ISO                       0.06             0.54
                    C ECI                         0.12             1.05
                    NM ATCH                       0.00             0.00
                    NS UB S                       0.48             4.17
                    NS UB S-rand-neg              0.36             3.35
                    NS UB S-no-look-ahead         0.42             3.68
                    NS UB S-no-mm                 0.08             0.73
                    NS UB S-2-encoder-layers      0.24             0.25
                    NS UB S-D = 4                 0.04             0.30
                    NS UB S-G IN                  0.30             2.73
                    NS UB S-no-Q-matching         0.34             2.98
                    NS UB S-no-LDP-encode         0.26             2.39
                    GMN-encoder                   0.30             2.89
                    D MPNN-encoder                0.32             2.25
                    GLS EARCH-adapted             0.22             1.88

Table 3 shows the ablation study results.
      1. We first perform the random sampling of negative node-node pairs (N (st ) in Equation 2)
         from all the node-node pairs in Vq and VG instead of from Aut . We denote the model as
         “NS UB S-rand-neg”, which performs worse than NS UB S but still outperforms baselines.
         This suggests that the negative sampling should be performed using “harder” examples
         sampled from the local candidate space instead of all the possible node-node pairs. Such
         harder negative examples train the model to better identify the promising actions over the
         unpromising ones at each state.
      2. We replace the look-ahead loss with a simpler version, by only looking at the current state’s
         positive node-node pairs without considering future states. NS UB S-no-look-ahead performs
         worse than NS UB S, indicating the usefulness of the look-ahead loss.
      3. We remove the max margin loss, and as a result, NS UB S-no-mm performs much worse,
         suggesting the necessity for training the encoder to produce good node embeddings. Since


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Encoder:                             Policy
                                                             Decoder
                                         QC-SGMNN                             𝑃(𝑎! |𝑠! )
                   𝑞         𝐺    𝑣!
              𝑢!       State 𝑠!
                   Action 𝑎! =         Section D.1.2     Section D.1.2
                    (𝑢! , 𝑣! )         Replaced with:    Replaced with:
                                       1.GMN             1.GLSearch
                                       2.DMPNN
                                       3.GLSearch


Figure 5: Summary of ablation studies performed in Section D.1.2. For GMN and D MPNN, only
the encoder design is changed to other models, and all the other components, including the decoder
choice, the search method, the training data and scheme, etc. are exactly the same as our proposed
NS UB S.

        the encoder training is shown to be important, we then perform a series of ablation study
        experiments on the encoder.
     4. NS UB S-2-encoder-layers uses 2 encoder layers instead of 8. NS UB S-D = 4 decreases the
        embedding dimension from 8 to 4. NS UB S replaces the G RAPH SAGE model with G IN.
        These 3 models perform worse than NS UB S, among which NS UB S-D = 4 performs the
        worst, indicating that a dimension that is too small cannot capture enough information for
        the HPRD dataset.
                                                                (k+1)                       (k+1)
     5. NS UB S-no-Q-matching removes the concatenation of hq,intra in the computation of hv,q→G
        in Equation 4. The worse performance shows the contribution of making the attention from
        q to G conditioned on the whole-graph representation of q.
     6. NS UB S-no-LDP-encode removes the Local Degree Profile encoding mentioned in Sec-
        tion A.4. The worse performance shows the importance of encoding the nodes initially with
        degree information.

D.1.2    E NCODER -D ECODER R EPLACEMENT
In addition, we perform the ablation study by replacing our Q C -S GMNN encoder with the Graph
Matching Neural Network (GMN) (Li et al., 2019) encoder. GMN introduces the idea of inter-graph
message passing, but our novelties make it feasible, in terms of efficiency and effectiveness, for
Subgraph Matching.
We summarize three key differences between GMN and Q C -S GMNN:

        • GMN produces a soft node-node matching matrix between two graphs instead of hard node
          selections indicating which nodes should be matched between q and G. We therefore only
          utilize GMN’s encoder layer and everything else being the same as our model, including the
          decoder, the training scheme, the search framework, etc. In other words, we adapt GMN for
          Subgraph Matching denoted as GMN-encoder in Table 3.
        • To improve GMN’s efficiency, Q C -S GMNN (1) prunes the intergraph interaction space using
          the local candidate set and (2) decouples the intra- and inter- message passing for caching.
          Section D.2 provides more details.
        • To improve GMN’s effectiveness, Q C -S GMNN (1) prunes noisy inter-graph interactions
          with the local candidate set and (2) proposes carefully designed graph-to-node propagation.

The worse performance of GMN indicates the necessity of the proposed Q C -S GMNN designed for
Subgraph Matching.
Although D MPNN outputs an approximate count between q and G, we adapt D MPNN’s encoder in
our framework, and the worse performance of D MPNN-encoder again validates the usefulness of
Q C -S GMNN.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Besides what is mentioned in Section C.3, there are some additional notes regarding how we adapt
GLS EARCH. To adapt GLS EARCH for subgraph matching, we first convert GLS EARCH’s value
network into a policy network by pipelining (1) an action execution engine, which executes each
action, at , in the action space for an input state, st , to obtain a set of next states {st+1 |∀at ∈ Aut },
(2) the GLS EARCH value network, which converts each next state, st+1 , into a single policy network
score, p(at |st ).
Generalizing the equivalence class idea from GLS EARCH to subgraph matching, we use the local
candidate sets in place of bidomains within the adapted GLS EARCH. Notice, since GLS EARCH
does not create node embeddings for action, at , we remove the max margin component of lookahead
loss for these experiments. We use the same graph neural network encoder type as Q C -S GMNN, but
unlike NS UB S, which only runs the graph neural network once, GLS EARCH runs the graph neural
network for each action in the action space. Hence, to prevent out of memory errors, GLS EARCH
only uses 3 layers instead of 8. We use the same hyperparameters for interact and pooling model
architecture, dimensions, and strides as described in the GLS EARCH paper. We call this model
GLS EARCH-adapted.
The worse performance of GLS EARCH-adapted verifies NS UB S’s choice of policy network, model
design, and loss greatly improves performance.

D.2    R EDUCTION OF C ANDIDATE S PACE

We plot the change of global candidate space (CS) size
and the local candidate space (LCS) size across time in
Figure 6. Specifically, at each search iteration, a node ut
from the query graph is chosen by ϕ, and the local candi-
date space is computed for ut . Therefore, we can record
the number of candidates for ut in the global candidate
space and in the local candidate space, and plot the change
of CS and LCS sizes across search iterations. As shown
in Figure 6, there is a large reduction of candidate nodes
from CS to LCS, suggesting the importance of computing
a smaller local candidate space based on the current match-
ing and the selected ut . Without any LCS computation
technique, the action space would be the global CS, which Figure 6: Demonstration of the sizes of
may contain up to 100, 000 nodes. Another important global candidate space (CS) and local
observation is that, the number of local candidate nodes candidate space (LCS) across search it-
varies dramatically across iterations. For example, in the erations, by running NS UB S on a ran-
initial iteration, since no nodes are matched, LCS is of the domly sampled graph pair from HPRD,
same size as CS, but as soon as one node pair is matched, and collecting the size of CS and LCS at
the LCS computation can leverage the matched nodes by each search iteration. The y-axis is in the
narrowing down the action space from all the nodes in CS log scale. We stop recording the CS and
to the first-order neighbors of the matched nodes. Existing LCS sizes after 1000 search iterations.
LCS computation has several other techniques to reduce
the candidate space size other than simply using the first-
order neighbors of the matched subgraphs, and as a result, there can be less than 10 nodes in Aut in
some iterations. However, when the search backtracks to an earlier state, there can be more candidate
nodes in LCS, resulting in the varying LCS sizes across search.
The reduction of candidate space size from CS to LCS confirms the proposed usage of LCS to
compute message passing between q and G, i.e. the computation of M̃t and M˜t−1 used in Equation 4.
The GMN model in contrast does not consider the state-dependent LCS, and uses all the quadratic
node-node pairs in the cross-graph message passing mechanism, as explained in the ablation study
(Section D.1).

D.3    P ERFORMANCE ACROSS I TERATION

We show the number of solved pairs across search iterations in Figure 7, similar to Figure 2 except
for the x-axis which is replaced with search iterations. It is noteworthy that all the methods are


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              (a) BA                          (b) B RAIN                        (c) HPRD


           (d) C OSMOS                       (e) D BLP -S                      (f) D BLP -L


            (g) E THE                          (h) Y T-S                        (i) Y T-L

            Figure 7: The growth of the number of solved pairs across search iterations.


implemented under the same search framework, and therefore the search iteration counting and
measurement are consistent across the methods.

D.4    P ERFORMANCE W. R . T. Q UERY S IZES

We show the performance of each method under different query graph sizes for BA and HPRD. As
shown in Table 4 and 5, the difficulty of solving Subgraph Matching increases as the query graph
sizes increase. When the query graph only contains 8 nodes, all the methods can solve all the graph
pairs under the 5 minutes time budget. However. as |Vq | increases to 128 nodes, all the methods
fail to solve any graph pair, suggesting the room for improvement. In the main text, we report the
results for |Vq | = 64, which is of moderate difficulty. Under other graph sizes, the proposed NS UB S
performs either the best or very close to the best method highlighted in bold.


E     R ESULT V ISUALIZATION

E.1   I LLUSTRATION OF S EARCH T RAJECTORY

We first show an animation of the actions selected by NS UB S across search in Figures 9 10, and 11.
For each plot, we (1) find the search branch with the largest found subgraph across the search tree,
then (2) plot the actions executed in that search branch. For each action, we plot the resulting state,
with the query graph on the left and target graph on the right. For clarity, we do not plot the whole


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Solved percentage (“Sol%”) and number of solutions (“#Sol”) found by each method after 5
minutes averaged by the number of the graph pairs in the BA dataset by varying |Vq | (“BA-|Vq |”).
For clarity and compactness, the number of solutions result has been divided by 1000, i.e. each
number is in the unit of 103 . For BA-128, since all the methods fail to solve any pair, we report the
average ratio of the largest match solution with respect to the query graph size denoted as “Ratio”.

                   BA-8              BA-16             BA-32             BA-64           BA-128
 Method         Sol% #Sol         Sol% #Sol         Sol% #Sol         Sol% #Sol       Sol% Ratio
 L DF           1.00     14.11    0.86     10.70    0.74       7.21   0.18    1.21    0.00    0.19
 N LF           1.00     14.30    0.92     11.18    0.72       6.60   0.16    1.29    0.00    0.23
 G RAPH QL      1.00     14.21    0.94     12.03    0.78       7.64   0.16    1.42    0.00    0.16
 T SO           1.00     14.15    0.64     11.91    0.74       6.95   0.18    1.41    0.00    0.18
 C FL           1.00     14.30    0.94     11.82    0.76       7.13   0.18    1.56    0.00    0.16
 DP- ISO        1.00     14.27    0.94     11.71    0.82       7.35   0.18    1.31    0.00    0.17
 C ECI          1.00     14.00    0.92     11.57    0.72       6.91   0.16    1.21    0.00    0.17
 NM ATCH        1.00     14.55    0.88     11.35    0.66       6.18   0.14    1.02    0.00    0.14
 NS UB S        1.00     13.06    1.00     12.01    0.98       8.27   0.62    2.37    0.00    0.35


         Table 5: Performance of each method by varying |Vq | (“HPRD-|Vq |”) for HPRD.

                  HPRD-8           HPRD-16           HPRD-32           HPRD-64         HPRD-128
 Method         Sol% #Sol         Sol% #Sol         Sol% #Sol         Sol% #Sol       Sol% Ratio
 L DF           1.00     14.50    0.92     11.92    0.64       6.48   0.08    0.69    0.00    0.13
 N LF           1.00     14.74    0.96     12.28    0.64       6.51   0.04    0.37    0.00    0.13
 G RAPH QL      1.00     14.33    1.00     13.07    0.90       9.34   0.16    1.24    0.00    0.13
 T SO           1.00     14.47    0.98     12.64    0.66       6.81   0.06    0.50    0.00    0.11
 C FL           1.00     14.44    0.94     12.12    0.58       5.63   0.02    0.18    0.00    0.11
 DP- ISO        1.00     14.28    0.96     12.44    0.68       6.85   0.06    0.54    0.00    0.12
 C ECI          1.00     14.44    1.00     13.13    0.64       6.28   0.12    1.05    0.00    0.12
 NM ATCH        1.00     16.06    0.82     10.98    0.32       3.03   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.12
 NS UB S        1.00     13.71    1.00     12.68    0.90       9.10   0.50    4.17    0.00    0.19



target graph, instead a fixed percentage of one-hop and two-hop neighbors of that target graph. We
make the following deductions based on the animations. The colors of nodes shows the mapping.
First, NS UB S tends to pick high degree nodes in the tar-
get graph as shown in Figure 8. This makes sense as
every edge in the query must match some edge in the
target. High degree nodes have more edges to satisfy
this constraint. Existing works also find high correla-
tion between static geometric representations and node
degree (Lou et al., 2020), indicating the geometric com-
ponent of lookahead loss is working. A natural question
is then whether a simple degree based policy would work
equally well or even better than the proposed model. To
confirm the necessity of learning-based policy, we find that
setting the raw output of policy to the degree of vt ∈ Aut ,
Praw ((ut , vt )|st ) = Deg(vt ), solves 36% of the pairs in
HPRD, which is worse than NS UB S yet better than many         Figure 8: Correlation between node de-
baselines as in Table 3. Since existing baseline methods       gree and the raw policy output before
place focus on improving node selection in q, i.e. the         normalization learned by NS UB S. The
ordering method ϕ for Vq , the selection of nodes in G is      Kendall’s τ coefficient (Kendall, 1938)
random (Section 2.3). Our work is the first to improve         between the two is shown on the top.
selection from VG , suggesting a new direction for tackling
Subgraph Matching.


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


NS UB S tends to map hub nodes in the query to hub nodes in the target. This suggests QC-SGMNN
effectively captures structural properties of the graph pair, as the model can look beyond 1 hop
neighborhoods to determine whether the node should be in a hub or just a dangling high degree node.
NS UB S tends to map dangling degree one nodes in the query to low degree nodes in the target. This
makes sense in the context of search, as matching a low degree query node to high degree target node
means said higher degree target node cannot be matched later in search on query nodes with more
constraints. This indicates the RL component of lookahead loss is working.


                                  …


              Figure 9: Illustration of the search trajectory on a graph pair pair of BA.


                                  …


          Figure 10: Illustration of the search trajectory on a graph pair pair of C OSMOS.


E.2   V ISUALIZATION OF S OLVED PAIRS

We show five instances of solved graph pairs by NS UB S in Figures 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19.
We first plot (1) the query graph on its own, then plot (2) the query graph matched to the target graph,
and finally plot (3) the target graph.
In other words, the first and second plots correspond to the same query graph but their node posi-
tions/layouts are different due to different layouts. In the second plot we fix the positions of nodes in
q to match the positions of their matched nodes in G, i.e. the nodes in the second and the third plots
have the same relative node positions for visualizing the node-node mapping. The colors of nodes are


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                …


           Figure 11: Illustration of the search trajectory on a graph pair pair of D BLP.


for the purpose of visualizing the mapping. For clarity, we only show a subgraph of G instead of the
entire G as it contains too many nodes and edges to show. Specifically, we include the matched q in
G and grow the matched subgraph by including the first-order neighbors of the matched nodes.


                         Figure 12: Visualization of a solved pair on BA.


                       Figure 13: Visualization of a solved pair on B RAIN.


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Figure 14: Visualization of a solved pair on HPRD.


                     Figure 15: Visualization of a solved pair on C OSMOS.


                      Figure 16: Visualization of a solved pair on D BLP.


                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Figure 17: Visualization of a solved pair on D BLP.


                      Figure 18: Visualization of a solved pair on E THE.


                      Figure 19: Visualization of a solved pair on E THE.


                                              27
