Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NIVERSAL F EW- SHOT L EARNING OF D ENSE P REDIC -
TION TASKS WITH V ISUAL T OKEN M ATCHING

 Donggyun Kim1 , Jinwoo Kim1 , Seongwoong Cho1 , Chong Luo2 , Seunghoon Hong1
 1
   School of Computing, KAIST
 2
   Microsoft Research Asia
 {kdgyun425, jinwoo-kim, seongwoongjo, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr,
 chong.luo@microsoft.com


                                            A BSTRACT
         Dense prediction tasks are a fundamental class of problems in computer vision. As
         supervised methods suffer from high pixel-wise labeling cost, a few-shot learning
         solution that can learn any dense task from a few labeled images is desired. Yet,
         current few-shot learning methods target a restricted set of tasks such as semantic
         segmentation, presumably due to challenges in designing a general and unified
         model that is able to flexibly and efficiently adapt to arbitrary tasks of unseen se-
         mantics. We propose Visual Token Matching (VTM), a universal few-shot learner
         for arbitrary dense prediction tasks. It employs non-parametric matching on patch-
         level embedded tokens of images and labels that encapsulates all tasks. Also,
         VTM flexibly adapts to any task with a tiny amount of task-specific parameters
         that modulate the matching algorithm. We implement VTM as a powerful hierar-
         chical encoder-decoder architecture involving ViT backbones where token match-
         ing is performed at multiple feature hierarchies. We experiment VTM on a chal-
         lenging variant of Taskonomy dataset and observe that it robustly few-shot learns
         various unseen dense prediction tasks. Surprisingly, it is competitive with fully su-
         pervised baselines using only 10 labeled examples of novel tasks (0.004% of full
         supervision) and sometimes outperforms using 0.1% of full supervision. Codes
         are available at https://github.com/GitGyun/visual_token_matching.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Dense prediction tasks constitute a fundamental class of computer vision problems, where the goal is
to learn a mapping from an input image to a pixel-wise annotated label. Examples include semantic
segmentation, depth estimation, edge detection, and keypoint detection, to name a few (Zamir et al.,
2018; Cai & Pu, 2019). While supervised methods achieved remarkable progress, they require a sub-
stantial amount of manually annotated pixel-wise labels, leading to a massive and often prohibitive
per-task labeling cost (Kang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Ouali et al., 2020). Prior work involving
transfer and multi-task learning have made efforts to generally relieve the burden, but they often
assume that relations between tasks are known in advance, and still require a fairly large amount
of labeled images of the task of interest (e.g., thousands) (Zamir et al., 2018; Standley et al., 2020;
O Pinheiro et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021). This motivates us to seek a few-shot learning solution
that can universally learn arbitrary dense prediction tasks from a few (e.g., ten) labeled images.
However, existing few-shot learning methods for computer vision are specifically targeted to solve
a restricted set of tasks, such as classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation (Vinyals
et al., 2016; Kang et al., 2019; Min et al., 2021). As a result, they often exploit prior knowledge and
assumptions specific to these tasks in designing model architecture and training procedure, therefore
not suited for generalizing to arbitrary dense prediction tasks (Snell et al., 2017; Fan et al., 2022;
Iqbal et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022). To our knowledge, no prior work in few-shot learning provided
approaches to solve arbitrary dense prediction tasks in a universal manner.
We argue that designing a universal few-shot learner for arbitrary dense prediction tasks must meet
the following desiderata. First, the learner must have a unified architecture that can handle arbitrary
tasks by design, and share most of the parameters across tasks so that it can acquire generalizable
knowledge for few-shot learning of arbitrary unseen tasks. Second, the learner should flexibly adapt
its prediction mechanism to solve diverse tasks of unseen semantics, while being efficient enough
to prevent over-fitting. Designing such a learner is highly challenging, as it should be general and
unified while being able to flexibly adapt to any unseen task without over-fitting few examples.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this work, we propose Visual Token Matching (VTM), a universal few-shot learner for arbitrary
dense prediction tasks. We draw inspiration from the cognitive process of analogy making (Mitchell,
2021); given a few examples of a new task, humans can quickly understand how to relate input and
output based on a similarity between examples (i.e., assign similar outputs to similar inputs), while
flexibly changing the notion of similarity to the given context. In VTM, we implement analogy-
making for dense prediction as patch-level non-parametric matching, where the model learns the
similarity in image patches that captures the similarity in label patches. Given a few labeled exam-
ples of a novel task, it first adapts its similarity that describes the given examples well, then predicts
the labels of an unseen image by combining the label patches of the examples based on image patch
similarity. Despite the simplicity, the model has a unified architecture for arbitrary dense predic-
tion tasks since the matching algorithm encapsulates all tasks and label structures (e.g., continuous
or discrete) by nature. Also, we introduce only a small amount of task-specific parameters, which
makes our model robust to over-fitting as well as flexible.
Our contributions are as follows. (1) For the first time to our knowledge, we propose and tackle the
problem of universal few-shot learning of arbitrary dense prediction tasks. We formulate the prob-
lem as episodic meta-learning and identify two key desiderata of the learner – unified architecture
and adaptation mechanism. (2) We propose Visual Token Matching (VTM), a novel universal few-
shot learner for dense prediction tasks. It employs non-parametric matching on tokenized image and
label embeddings, which flexibly adapts to unseen tasks using a tiny amount of task-specific param-
eters. (3) We implement VTM as a powerful hierarchical encoder-decoder architecture, where token
matching is performed at multiple feature hierarchies using attention mechanism. We employ ViT
image and label encoders (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and a convolutional decoder (Ranftl et al., 2021),
which seamlessly works with our algorithm. (4) We demonstrate VTM on a challenging variant of
Taskonomy dataset (Zamir et al., 2018) and observe that it robustly few-shot learns various unseen
dense prediction tasks. Surprisingly, it is competitive to or outperforms fully supervised baselines
given extremely few examples (0.1%), sometimes using only 10 labeled images (< 0.004%).

2    P ROBLEM S ETUP
We propose and tackle the problem of universal few-shot learning of arbitrary dense prediction tasks.
In our setup, we consider any arbitrary task T that can be expressed as follows:
                              T : RH×W ×3 → RH×W ×CT ,            CT ∈ N.                             (1)
This subsumes a wide range of vision tasks including semantic segmentation, depth estimation,
surface normal prediction, edge prediction, to name a few, varying in structure of output space, e.g.,
dimensionality (CT ) and topology (discrete or continuous), as well as the required knowledge.
Our goal is to build a universal few-shot learner F that, for any such task T , can produce predictions
Ŷ q for an unseen image (query) X q given a few labeled examples (support set) ST :
                             Ŷ q = F(X q ; ST ),   ST = {(X i , Y i )}i≤N .                          (2)
To build such a universal few-shot learner F, we adopt the conventional episodic training protocol
where the training is composed of multiple episodes, each simulating a few-shot learning problem.
To this end, we utilize a meta-training dataset Dtrain that contains labeled examples of diverse dense
prediction tasks. Each training episode simulates a few-shot learning scenario of a specific task
Ttrain in the dataset – the objective is to produce correct labels for query images given a support
set. By experiencing multiple episodes of few-shot learning, the model is expected to learn general
knowledge for fast and flexible adaptation to novel tasks. At test time, the model is asked to perform
few-shot learning on arbitrary unseen tasks Ttest not included in the training dataset (Dtrain ).
An immediate challenge in handling arbitrary tasks in Eq. 1 is that each task in both meta-training
and testing has different output structures (i.e., output dimension CT varies per task), making it dif-
ficult to design a single, unified parameterization of a model for all tasks. As a simple yet general so-
lution, we cast a task T : RH×W ×3 → RH×W ×CT into CT single-channel sub-tasks T1 , · · · , TCT
of learning each channel, and model each sub-task Tc : RH×W ×3 → RH×W ×1 independently using
the shared model F in Eq. 2. Although multi-channel information is beneficial in general, we ob-
serve that its impact is negligible in practice, while the channel-wise decomposition introduces other
useful benefits such as augmenting the number of tasks in meta-training, flexibility to generalize to
arbitrary dimension of unseen tasks, and more efficient parameter-sharing within and across tasks.
Without loss of generality, the rest of the paper considers that every task is of single-channel label.

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.1 C HALLENGES AND D ESIDERATA
The above problem setup is universal, potentially benefiting various downstream vision applications.
Yet, to our knowledge, no prior work in few-shot learning attempted to solve it. We attribute this to
two unique desiderata for a universal few-shot learner that pose a challenge to current methods.
Task-Agnostic Architecture As any arbitrary unseen task Ttest can be encountered in test-time,
the few-shot learner must have a unified architecture that can handle all dense prediction tasks by
design. This means we cannot exploit any kind of prior knowledge or inductive bias specific to
certain tasks. For example, we cannot adopt common strategies in few-shot segmentation such as
class prototype or binary masking, as they rely on the discrete nature of categorical labels while the
label space of Ttest can be arbitrary (continuous or discrete). Ideally, the unified architecture would
allow the learner to acquire generalizable knowledge for few-shot learning any unseen tasks, as it
enables sharing most of the model parameters across all tasks in meta-training and testing.
Adaptation Mechanism On top of the unified architecture, the learner should have a flexible and
efficient adaptation mechanism to address highly diverse semantics of the unseen tasks Ttest . This is
because tasks of different semantics can require distinct sets of features – depth estimation requires
3D scene understanding, while edge estimation prefers low-level image gradient. As a result, even
with a unified architecture, a learner that depends on a fixed algorithm and features would either
underfit to various training tasks in Dtrain , or fail for an unseen task Ttest that has a completely novel
semantics. Thus, our few-shot learner should be flexibly adapt its features to a given task T based
on the support set ST , e.g., through task-specific parameters. At the same time, the adaptation
mechanism should be parameter-efficient (e.g., using a tiny amount of task-specific parameters) to
prevent over-fitting to training tasks Ttrain or test-time support set STtest .

3       V ISUAL T OKEN M ATCHING
We introduce Visual Token Matching (VTM), a universal few-shot learner for arbitrary dense
prediction tasks that is designed to flexibly adapt to novel tasks of diverse semantics. We first
discuss the underlying motivation of VTM in Section 3.1 and discuss its architecture in Section 3.2.
3.1 M OTIVATION
We seek for a general function form of Eq. 2 that produces structured labels of arbitrary tasks with
a unified framework. To this end, we opt into a non-parametric approach that operates on patches,
where the query label is obtained by weighted combination of support labels. Let X = {xj }j≤M
denote an image (or label) on patch grid of size M = h × w, where xj is j-th patch. Given a query
image X q = {xqj }j≤M and a support set {(X i , Y i )}i≤N = {(xik , yki )}k≤M,i≤N for a task T , we
project all patches to embedding spaces and predict the query label Y q = {yjq }j≤M patch-wise by,
                                     X X
                           g(yjq ) =          σ fT (xqj ), fT (xik ) g(yki ),

                                                                                                 (3)
                                            i≤N k≤M

where fT (x) = f (x; θ, θT ) ∈ R and g(y) = g(y; ϕ) ∈ Rd correspond to the image and label
                                        d

encoder, respectively, and σ : Rd × Rd → [0, 1] denotes a similarity function defined on the image
patch embeddings. Then, each predicted label embedding can be mapped to a label patch ŷjq =
h(g(yjq )) by introducing a label decoder h ≈ g −1 .
Note that Eq. 3 generalizes the Matching Network (MN) (Vinyals et al., 2016), and serves as a gen-
eral framework for arbitrary dense prediction tasks1 . First, while MN interpolates raw categorical
labels y for classification (i.e., g is an identity function), we perform matching on the general em-
bedding space of the label encoder g(y); it encapsulates arbitrary tasks (e.g., discrete or continuous)
into the common embedding space, thus enabling the matching to work in a consistent way agnostic
to tasks. Second, while MN exploits a fixed similarity of images σ(f (xq ), f (xi )), we modulate the
similarity σ(fT (xq ), fT (xi )) adaptively to any given task by switching the task-specific parameters
θT . Having adaptable components in the image encoder fT is essential in our problem since it can
adapt the representations to reflect features unique in each task. Finally, our method employs an
additional decoder h to project the predicted label embeddings to the output space.
Once trained, the prediction mechanism in Eq. 3 can easily adapt to unseen tasks at test-time. Since
the label encoder g is shared across tasks, we can use it to embed the label patches of unseen
    1
        While MN performs image-level classification, we consider its extension to patch-level embeddings.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                       Image Encoder fT             Label Encoder g   Matching Modules     Label Decoder h
                            Shared
                                                                                                                                    v
                                                                                                                        ...               linear                            ·                ...
                ViT Block               ViT Block      ViT Block
                                                                           Token                                 Support label(s)
                                                                          Matching            Fusion (32)
                                                                                                                                                                                            Σ
                ViT Block               ViT Block      ViT Block                                                                    k
                                                                                                                        ...               linear       Scaled               ...
                                                                           Token
                                                                                                                                                    Dot-Product
                                                                          Matching            Fusion (16)                                                                                 linear
                                                                                                                 Support image(s)                   Attention (σ)
                ViT Block               ViT Block      ViT Block
                                                                           Token                                                    q                  linear
                                                                          Matching             Fusion (8)
                ViT Block               ViT Block      ViT Block
                                                                                                                   Query image                                                                            Predicted
                                                                           Token                                                                                                                         Query label
                                                                          Matching             Fusion (4)
Task-specific                                                                                                     Token Matching Module (Eq. 4, 5)
 parameters

                                                                                                                                                                                               H/s x W/s
                ViT Block               ViT Block      ViT Block

                 Embed                   Embed          Embed                                    Head                                         hxw

                                                                                                                                 concat
                                                                                                                                                       1 x 1 conv                 residual conv unit



                                                                ...


                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                                   up/downsample                   upsample (x2)

                                                                                                                                                   residual conv unit                 1 x 1 conv

                                                                                                                                                                H/s x W/s
                                                          ...               Few-shot
                                                                           Support set
                                                                                                                                                                                                   H*2/s x W*2/s
           Query image               Support image and label                             Predicted query label   Fusion Block (s)


Figure 1: Overall architecture of VTM. Our model is a hierarchical encoder-decoder with four main
components: the image encoder fT , label encoder g, label decoder h, and the matching module. See
the text for more detailed descriptions.

tasks with frozen parameters ϕ. Adaptation to a novel task is performed by the image encoder
fT , by optimizing the task-specific parameters θT which take a small portion of the model. This
allows our model to robustly adapt to unseen tasks of various semantics with a small support set. In
experiments, our model becomes competitive to supervised method using less than 0.1% of labels.

3.2 A RCHITECTURE
Figure 1 illustrates our model. Our model has a hierarchical encoder-decoder architecture that imple-
ments patch-level non-parametric matching of Eq. 3 in multiple hierarchies with four components:
image encoder fT , label encoder g, label decoder h, and the matching module. Given the query
image and the support set, the image encoder first extracts patch-level embeddings (tokens) of each
query and support image independently. The label encoder similarly extracts tokens of each support
label. Given the tokens at each hierarchy, the matching module performs non-parametric matching
of Eq. 3 to infer the tokens of query label, from which the label decoder forms the raw query label.
Image Encoder We employ a Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) for our image
encoder. The ViT is applied to query and each support image independently while sharing weights,
which produces tokenized representation of image patches at multiple hierarchies. Similar to Ranftl
et al. (2021), we extract tokens at four intermediate ViT blocks to form hierarchical features. To
aid learning general representation for a wide range of tasks, we initialize the parameters from pre-
trained BEiT (Bao et al., 2021), which is self-supervised thus less biased towards specific tasks.
As discussed in Section 3.1, we design the image encoder to have two sets of parameters θ and θT ,
where θ is shared across all tasks and θT is specific to each task T . Among many candidates to
design an adaptation mechanism through θT , we find that bias tuning (Cai et al., 2020; Zaken et al.,
2022) provides the best efficiency and performance empirically. To this end, we employ separate sets
of biases for each task in both meta-training and meta-testing, while sharing all the other parameters.
Label Encoder The label encoder employs the same ViT architecture as the image encoder and
extracts token embeddings of the support labels. Similar to the image encoder, the label encoder
is applied to each support label independently, with a major difference that it sees one channel at a
time since we treat each channel as an independent task as discussed in Section 2. Then the label
tokens are extracted from multiple hierarchies that matches the image encoder. Contrary to the
image encoder, all parameters of the label encoder are trained from scratch and shared across tasks.
Matching Module We implement the matching module at each hierarchy as a multihead attention
layer (Vaswani et al., 2017). At each hierarchy of the image and label encoder, we first obtain the
tokens of the query image X q as {qj }j≤M and support set {(X i , Y i )}i≤N as {(kik , vki )}k≤M,i≤N
from the intermediate layers of image and label encoders, respectively. We then stack the tokens to


                                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


row-matrices, q ∈ RM ×d and k, v ∈ RN M ×d . Then, the query label tokens at the hierarchy are
inferred as output of a multihead attention layer, as follows:
                         MHA(q, k, v) = Concat(o1 , ..., oH )wO ,                                       (4)
                                                                         !
                                                         qwhQ (kwhK )⊤
                               where oh = Softmax             √              vwhV ,                     (5)
                                                                  dH

where H is number of heads, dH is head size, and whQ , whK , whV ∈ Rd×dH , wO ∈ RHdH ×d .
Remarkably, each attention head in Eq. 5 implements the intuition of the non-parametric matching
in Eq. 3. This is because each query label token is inferred as a weighted combination of support
label tokens v, based on the similarity between the query and support image tokens q, k. Here,
the similarity function σ of Eq. 3 is implemented as scaled dot-product attention. Since each head
involves different trainable projection matrices whQ , whK , whV , the multihead attention layer in Eq. 4
is able to learn multiple branches (heads) of matching algorithm with distinct similarity functions.
Label Decoder The label decoder h receives the query label tokens inferred at multiple hierar-
chies, and combines them to predict the query label of original resolution. We adopt the multi-scale
decoder architecture of Dense Prediction Transformer (Ranftl et al., 2021) as it seamlessly works
with ViT encoders and multi-level tokens. At each hierarchy of the decoder, the inferred query label
tokens are first spatially concatenated to a feature map of constant size (M → h × w). Then, (trans-
posed) convolution layers of different strides are applied to each feature map, producing a feature
pyramid of increasing resolution. The multi-scale features are progressively upsampled and fused
by convolutional blocks, followed by a convolutional head for final prediction.
Similar to the label encoder, all parameters of the label decoder are trained from scratch and shared
across tasks. This lets the decoder to meta-learn a generalizable strategy of decoding a structured
label from the predicted query label tokens. Following the channel split in Section 2, the output of
the decoder is single-channel, which allows it to be applied to tasks of arbitrary number of channels.
3.3 T RAINING AND I NFERENCE
We train our model on a labeled dataset Dtrain of training tasks Ttrain following the standard episodic
meta-learning protocol. At each episode of task T , we sample two labeled sets ST , QT from Dtrain .
Then we train the model to predict labels in QT using ST as support set. We repeat the episodes
with various dense prediction tasks in Dtrain so that the model can learn a general knowledge about
few-shot learning. Let F(X q ; ST ) denote the prediction of the model on X q using the support set
ST . Then the model (fT , g, h, σ) is trained by the following learning objective in end-to-end:
                                                                                   
                                             1        X
                  min EST ,QT ∼Dtrain                       L (Y q , F(X q ; ST ))) ,             (6)
                fT ,g,h,σ                  |QT | q q
                                                  (X ,Y )∈QT

where L is the loss function. We use cross-entropy loss for semantic segmentation task and L1 loss
for the others in our experiments. Note that the objective (Eq. 6) does not explicitly enforce the
matching equation (Eq. 3) in token space, allowing some knowledge for prediction to be handled
by the label decoder h, since we found that introducing explicit reconstruction loss on tokens dete-
riorates the performance in our initial experiments. During training, as we have a fixed number of
training tasks Ttrain , we keep and train separate sets of bias parameters of the image encoder fT for
each training task (which are assumed to be channel-splitted).
After training on Dtrain , the model is few-shot evaluated on novel tasks Ttest given a support set STtest .
We first perform adaptation of the model by fine-tuning bias parameters of the image encoder fT
using the support set STtest . For this, we simulate episodic meta-learning by randomly partitioning
the support set into a sub-support set S̃ and a sub-query set Q̃, such that STtest = S̃ ∪˙ Q̃.
                                                                               
                                               1    X
                        min ES̃,Q̃∼ST                    L Y q , F(X q ; S̃)  ,                     (7)
                         θT            test
                                              |Q̃| q q
                                                (X ,Y )∈Q̃

where θT denotes bias parameters of the image encoder fT . The portion of parameters to be fine-
tuned is negligible so the model can avoid over-fitting on the small support set STtest . After fine-tuned,
the model is evaluated by predicting the label of unseen query image using the support set STtest .

                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4       R ELATED W ORK
To the best of our knowledge, the problem of universal few-shot learning of dense prediction tasks
remains unexplored. Existing few-shot learning approaches for dense prediction are targeted to spe-
cific tasks that require learning unseen classes of objects, such as semantic segmentation (Shaban
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019; Iqbal et al., 2022), instance segmentation (Michaelis et al., 2018; Fan
et al., 2020b), and object detection (Fan et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020), rather than general tasks.
As categorical labels are discrete in nature, most of the methods involve per-class average pooling of
support image features, which cannot be generalized to regression tasks as there would be infinitely
many ”classes” of continuous labels. Others utilize masked correlation between support and query
features (Min et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2022), learn a Gaussian Process on features (Johnander et al.,
2021), or train a classifier weight prediction model (Kang et al., 2019). In principle, these architec-
tures can be extended to more general dense prediction tasks with slight modification (Section 5),
yet their generalizability to unseen dense prediction tasks, rather than classes, has not been explored.
As our method involves task-specific tuning of a small portion of parameters, it is related to transfer
learning that aims to efficiently fine-tune a pre-trained model to downstream tasks. In natural lan-
guage processing (NLP), language models pre-trained on large-scale corpus (Kenton & Toutanova,
2019; Brown et al., 2020) show outstanding performance on downstream tasks with fine-tuning a
minimal amount of parameters (Houlsby et al., 2019; Zaken et al., 2022; Lester et al., 2021). Follow-
ing the emergence of pre-trained Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), similar adaptation
approaches have been proven successful in the vision domain (Li et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022). While these approaches reduce the amount of parameters required for state-of-the-art
performance on downstream tasks, they still require a large amount of labeled images for fine-tuning
(e.g., thousands). In this context, our method can be seen as a few-shot extension of the adaptation
methods, by incorporating a general few-shot learning framework and a powerful architecture.

5       E XPERIMENTS

5.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Dataset We construct a variant of the Taskonomy dataset (Zamir et al., 2018) to simulate few-
shot learning of unseen dense prediction tasks. Taskonomy contains indoor images with various
annotations, where we choose ten dense prediction tasks of diverse semantics and output dimensions:
semantic segmentation (SS), surface normal (SN), Euclidean distance (ED), Z-buffer depth (ZD),
texture edge (TE), occlusion edge (OE), 2D keypoints (K2), 3D keypoints (K3), reshading (RS),
and principal curvature (PC),2 . We partition the ten tasks to construct a 5-fold split, in each of
which two tasks are used for few-shot evaluation (Ttest ) and the remaining eight are used for training
(Ttrain ). To perform evaluation on tasks of novel semantics, we carefully construct the partition such
that tasks for training and test are sufficiently different from each other e.g., by grouping edge tasks
(TE, OE) together as test tasks. The split is shown in Table 1. We process some single-channel tasks
(ED, TE, OE) to multiple channels to increase task diversity, and standardize all labels to [0, 1].
Additional details are in Appendix A.

Baselines We compare our method (VTM) with two classes of learning approaches.
 • Fully supervised baselines have an access to the full supervision of test tasks Ttest during train-
   ing, and thus serve as upper bounds of few-shot performance. We consider two state-of-the-
   art baselines in supervised learning and multi-task learning of general dense prediction tasks –
   DPT (Ranftl et al., 2021) and InvPT (Ye & Xu, 2022), respectively, where DPT is trained on
   each single task independently and InvPT is trained jointly on all tasks.
 • Few-shot learning baselines do not have an access to the test tasks Ttest during training, and are
   given only a few labeled images at the test-time. As there are no prior few-shot method developed
   for universal dense prediction tasks, we adapt state-of-the-art few-shot segmentation methods to
   our setup. We choose three methods, DGPNet (Johnander et al., 2021), HSNet (Min et al., 2021),
   and VAT (Hong et al., 2022), whose architectures are either inherently task-agnostic (DGPNet)
   or can be simply extended (HSNet, VAT) to handle general label spaces for dense prediction
   tasks. We describe the modification on HSNet and VAT in Appendix B.
    2
        We choose all dense prediction tasks defined on RGB images with pixel-wise loss functions.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Quantitative comparison on Taskonomy dataset. Few-shot baselines are 10-shot evaluated
on each fold after being trained on the tasks from the other folds, where fully-supervised baselines
are trained and evaluated on tasks from each fold (DPT) or all folds (InvPT).
                                                      Tasks
                        Fold 1         Fold 2        Fold 3        Fold 4        Fold 5
 Supervision Model
                     SS       SN    ED        ZD  TE        OE  K2        K3  RS        PC
                   mIoU ↑ mErr ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓
              DPT  0.4449 6.4414 0.0534 0.0268 0.0188 0.0689 0.0358 0.0357 0.0860 0.0347
     Full
             InvPT 0.3900 12.9249 0.0589 0.0298 0.0517 0.0788 0.0456 0.0384 0.0949 0.0370
             HSNet 0.1069 24.9120 0.2375 0.0748 0.1746 0.1643 0.1056 0.0651 0.2627 0.0610
   10-Shot    VAT  0.0353 25.8134 0.2718 0.0779 0.1719 0.1655 0.1450 0.0678 0.2709 0.0796
 (< 0.004%) DGPNet 0.0261 29.1668 0.4579 0.2846 0.1881 0.2130 0.1104 0.1308 0.3680 0.3574
             Ours 0.4097 11.4391 0.0741 0.0316 0.0791 0.0912 0.0639 0.0519 0.1089 0.0420


Implementation For models based on ViT architecture (Ours, DPT, InvPT), we use BEiT-B (Bao
et al., 2021) backbone as image encoder, which is pre-trained on ImageNet-22k (Deng et al., 2009)
with self-supervision. For the other baselines (DPGNet, HSNet, VAT), as they rely on convolutional
encoder and it is nontrivial to transfer them to ViT, we use ResNet-101 (He et al., 2016) backbone
pre-trained on ImageNet-1k with image classification, which is their best-performing configuration.
During episodic training, we perform task augmentation based on color jittering and MixUp (Zhang
et al., 2018) to increase the effective number of training tasks. For all few-shot learning models, we
further apply label channel split as described in Section 2. Further details are in Appendix B.
Evaluation Protocol We use the train/val/test split of the Taskonomy-tiny partition provided by
Zamir et al. (2018). We train all models on the train split, where DPT and InvPT are trained with full
supervision of test tasks Ttest and the few-shot models are trained by episodic learning of training
tasks Ttrain only. The final evaluation on test tasks Ttest is done on the test split. During the evalua-
tion, all few-shot models are given a support set randomly sampled from the train split, which is also
used for task-specific adaptation of VTM as described in Section 3.3. For evaluation on semantic
segmentation (SS), we follow the standard binary segmentation protocol in few-shot semantic seg-
mentation (Shaban et al., 2017) and report the mean intersection over union (mIoU) for all classes.
For tasks with continuous labels, we use the mean angle error (mErr) for surface normal prediction
(SN) (Eigen & Fergus, 2015) and root mean square error (RMSE) for the others.

5.2 R ESULTS
In Table 1, we report the 10-shot performance of our model and the baselines on ten dense prediction
tasks. Our model outperforms all few-shot baselines by a large margin, and is competitive with
supervised baselines on many tasks. In Figure 2, we show a qualitative comparison where the few-
shot baselines catastrophically underfit to novel tasks while our model successfully learns all tasks.
We provide further qualitative comparisons of ours and the baselines in Appendix C.3.
The large performance gap between the few-shot learning baselines and our model can be explained
by two factors. (1) The core architectural component of HSNet and VAT (feature masking) implic-
itly relies on the discrete nature of labels, and thus fails to learn tasks with continuous labels whose
values are densely distributed. (2) Since the baselines are designed to solve tasks without any adap-
tation of their parameters, the core prediction mechanism (e.g., hypercorrelation of HSNet and VAT,
kernel of DGPNet) is fixed and cannot adapt to different semantics of tasks. Unlike the baselines,
our model is general for all dense prediction tasks, and has a flexible task adaptation mechanism of
the similarity in matching. Our model can also be robustly fine-tuned on few-shot support, thanks to
the parameter efficiency of adaptation (0.28% of all parameters; see Table 7 for comparison with su-
pervised baselines). To demonstrate how VTM performs task adaptation, we visualize the attention
of the matching module (Eq. 4). Figure 4 shows that, when adapted for different tasks, the model
flexibly changes the similarity to attend to support patches appropriate for the given task.
Surprisingly, with < 0.004% of the full supervision (10 labeled images), our model even performs
better than fully-supervised InvPT on some tasks (e.g., SS and SN). This can be attributed to the
robust matching architecture equipped with a flexible adaptation mechanism that enables efficient
knowledge transfer across tasks. In ablation study, we show that our model can be further improved
by increasing the support size, reaching or sometimes surpassing supervised baselines in many tasks.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



          Image    SS       SN      ED       ZD       TE      OE       K2      K3       RS       PC

Ground
 Truth


  DPT
 (sup.)


 InvPT
 (sup.)



 Ours



 HSNet



  VAT



DGPNet


Figure 2: Qualitative comparison of few-shot learning methods in 10-shot evaluation for ten dense
prediction tasks in Taskonomy. While other approaches fail, our model successfully few-shot learns
all novel tasks with diverse semantics and different label representations.


Figure 3: Performance of VTM on various shots. In general, VTM consistently improves perfor-
mance as more supervision is given, and even surpasses fully supervised baselines on many tasks.

5.2.1     A BLATION S TUDY
Component-Wise Analysis To analyze the effectiveness of our design, we conduct an ablation
study with two variants. (1) Ours w/o Adaptation does not adapt the similarity for each task in the
non-parametric matching. This variant shares all parameters across all training tasks Ttrain as well as
test tasks Ttest , and is evaluated without fine-tuning. (2) Ours w/o Matching predicts the query label
tokens directly from the query image tokens, replacing the matching module with a parametric linear
mapping at each hierarchy. This variant retains the task-specific parameters of ours, thus identical
in terms of task adaptation; it utilizes the separate sets of task-specific biases in the image encoder
to learn the training tasks Ttrain , and fine-tune it on the support set of Ttest in the test time.
The results are in Table 2. Both variants show lower performance than ours in general, which
demonstrates that incorporating non-parametric matching and task-specific adaptation are both ben-
eficial for universal few-shot dense prediction problems. It seems that the task-specific adaptation is
a crucial component for our problem, as Ours w/o Adaptation suffers from the high discrepancy be-
tween training and test tasks. For some low-level tasks whose labels are synthetically generated by
applying a computational algorithm on an RGB-image (e.g., TE, K2), Ours w/o Matching achieves
slightly better performance than Ours. Yet, for tasks requiring a high-level knowledge of object se-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                    Table 2: Ablation study on matching and task-specific adaptation.
                                                                      Tasks
                             Fold 1            Fold 2                Fold 3            Fold 4             Fold 5
          Model
                         SS    SN     ED     ZD      TE    OE      K2     K3     RS     PC
                       mIoU ↑ mErr ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓
    Ours w/o Matching 0.2681 13.0704 0.1111         0.0404       0.0778   0.1061   0.0613   0.0537   0.1559   0.0445
    Ours w/o Adaptation 0.0002 23.4212 0.1515       0.0641       0.1513   0.1152   0.1110   0.0625   0.2033   0.0632
           Ours         0.4097 11.4391 0.0741       0.0316       0.0791   0.0912   0.0639   0.0519   0.1089   0.0420
            Query   Support 1 Support 2 Support 3 Support 4 Support 5 Support 6 Support 7 Support 8 Support 9 Support 10


Image



    SS


    ED



    SN


Figure 4: Attention maps of selected level and head for each task given a query patch (red box in the
1st column). Our model flexibly adapts its similarity to attend to appropriate regions for each task
(e.g., chairs for semantic segmentation, all planes orthogonal to camera view for surface normal).
mantics (e.g., SS) or 3D space (e.g., ED, OE, K3, RS), the introduction of non-parametric matching
fairly improves the few-shot learning performance. Qualitative comparison is in Appendix C.4.
Impact of Support Size As our method already performs well with ten labeled examples, a natural
question arises: can it reach the performance of fully-supervised approaches if more examples are
given? In Figure 3, we plot the performance of VTM by increasing the size of support set from
10 (< 0.004%) to 275 (0.1%). Our model reaches or surpasses the performance of the supervised
methods on many tasks with additional data (yet much smaller than full), which implies potential
benefits in specialized domains (e.g., medical) where the number of available labels ranges from
dozens to hundreds.
Sensitivity to the Choice of Support Set As our model few-shot learns a new task from a very
small subset of the full dataset, we analyze the sensitivity of the performance to the choice of support
set. Table 3 in Appendix reports the 10-shot evaluation results with 4 different support sets disjointly
sampled from the whole train split. We see that the standard deviation is marginal. This shows the
robustness of our model to the support set, which would be important in practical scenarios.
Impact of Training Data The amount and quality of training data is an important factor that can
affect the performance of our universal few-shot learner. In Appendix C.1.4, we analyze the effect of
the number of training tasks and show that few-shot performance consistently improves when more
tasks are added to meta-training data. Also, in a more practical scenario, we may have an incomplete
dataset where images are not associated with whole training task labels. We investigate this setting
in Appendix C.1.5 and show that our model trained with an incomplete dataset still performs well.

6        C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed and addressed the problem of building a universal few-shot learner for
arbitrary dense prediction tasks. Our proposed Visual Token Matching (VTM) addresses the chal-
lenge of the problem by extending a task-agnostic architecture of Matching Networks to patch-level
embeddings of images and labels, and introducing a flexible adaptation mechanism in the image
encoder. We evaluated our VTM in a challenging variant of the Taskonomy dataset consisting of ten
dense prediction tasks, and showed that VTM can achieve competitive performance to fully super-
vised baselines on novel dense prediction tasks with an extremely small amount of labeled examples
(<0.004% of full supervision), and is able to even closer the gap or outperform the supervised
methods with fairly small amount of additional data (∼0.1% of full supervision).


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the Institute of Information & commu-
nications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) (No. 2022-0-00926, 2022-0-00959, and 2019-
0-00075) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (No. 2021R1C1C1012540 and
2021R1A4A3032834) funded by the Korea government (MSIT), and Microsoft Research Asia Col-
laborative Research Project.

Reproducibility Statement To help readers reproduce our experiments, we provided detailed de-
scriptions of our architectures in Section B.1, and implementation details of the baseline methods in
Table 1 in Section B.2. Since our work proposes the new experiment settings for the few-shot learn-
ing of arbitrary dense prediction tasks, we also provide details of the dataset construction process
in the main text (Section 5) and the appendix (Section A), which includes details of the data splits,
specification of tasks, data preprocessing, and evaluation protocols. We plan to release the source
codes and the dataset to ensure the reproducibility of this paper.

Ethics Statement We have read the ICLR Code of Ethics and ensures that this work follows it.
All data and pre-trained models used in our experiments are publically available and has no ethical
concerns.

R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Jihwan Bang, Heesu Kim, YoungJoon Yoo, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jonghyun Choi. Rainbow memory:
   Continual learning with a memory of diverse samples. In CVPR, 2021.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers.
  In ICLR, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. Tinytl: Reduce memory, not parameters for
  efficient on-device learning. NeurIPS, 2020.
Xin Cai and Yi-Fei Pu. Flattenet: a simple and versatile framework for dense pixelwise prediction.
  IEEE Access, 2019.
Zhe Chen, Yuchen Duan, Wenhai Wang, Junjun He, Tong Lu, Jifeng Dai, and Yu Qiao. Vision
  transformer adapter for dense predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08534, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In ICLR, 2020.
David Eigen and Rob Fergus. Predicting depth, surface normals and semantic labels with a common
  multi-scale convolutional architecture. In ICCV, 2015.
Qi Fan, Wei Zhuo, Chi-Keung Tang, and Yu-Wing Tai. Few-shot object detection with attention-rpn
  and multi-relation detector. In CVPR, 2020a.
Qi Fan, Wenjie Pei, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Self-support few-shot semantic segmenta-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11549, 2022.
Zhibo Fan, Jin-Gang Yu, Zhihao Liang, Jiarong Ou, Changxin Gao, Gui-Song Xia, and Yuanqing
  Li. Fgn: Fully guided network for few-shot instance segmentation. In CVPR, 2020b.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.           Gaussian error linear units (gelus).     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
Sunghwan Hong, Seokju Cho, Jisu Nam, Stephen Lin, and Seungryong Kim. Cost aggregation with
  4d convolutional swin transformer for few-shot segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10866,
  2022.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In ICML, 2019.
Ehtesham Iqbal, Sirojbek Safarov, and Seongdeok Bang. Msanet: Multi-similarity and attention
  guidance for boosting few-shot segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09667, 2022.
Menglin Jia, Luming Tang, Bor-Chun Chen, Claire Cardie, Serge Belongie, Bharath Hariharan, and
 Ser-Nam Lim. Visual prompt tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12119, 2022.
Joakim Johnander, Johan Edstedt, Michael Felsberg, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Martin Danelljan.
  Dense gaussian processes for few-shot segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03674, 2021.
Bingyi Kang, Zhuang Liu, Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Jiashi Feng, and Trevor Darrell. Few-shot object
  detection via feature reweighting. In ICCV, 2019.
Nick Kanopoulos, Nagesh Vasanthavada, and Robert L Baker. Design of an image edge detection
  filter using the sobel operator. JSSC, 1988.
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In EMNLP, 2021.
Yanghao Li, Saining Xie, Xinlei Chen, Piotr Dollar, Kaiming He, and Ross Girshick. Benchmarking
  detection transfer learning with vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11429, 2021.
Guosheng Lin, Anton Milan, Chunhua Shen, and Ian Reid. Refinenet: Multi-path refinement net-
  works for high-resolution semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2017.
Wei Liu, Andrew Rabinovich, and Alexander C Berg. Parsenet: Looking wider to see better. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1506.04579, 2015.
Yongfei Liu, Xiangyi Zhang, Songyang Zhang, and Xuming He. Part-aware prototype network for
  few-shot semantic segmentation. In ECCV, 2020.
Claudio Michaelis, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Matthias Bethge, and Alexander S Ecker. One-shot instance
  segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11507, 2018.
Juhong Min, Dahyun Kang, and Minsu Cho. Hypercorrelation squeeze for few-shot segmentation.
  In CVPR, 2021.
Melanie Mitchell. Abstraction and analogy-making in artificial intelligence. Annals of the New York
 Academy of Sciences, 2021.
Pedro O O Pinheiro, Amjad Almahairi, Ryan Benmalek, Florian Golemo, and Aaron C Courville.
  Unsupervised learning of dense visual representations. NeurIPS, 2020.
Yassine Ouali, Céline Hudelot, and Myriam Tami. Semi-supervised semantic segmentation with
  cross-consistency training. In CVPR, pp. 12674–12684, 2020.
René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vision transformers for dense prediction.
  In ICCV, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Amirreza Shaban, Shray Bansal, Zhen Liu, Irfan Essa, and Byron Boots. One-shot learning for
 semantic segmentation. In BMVC, 2017.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning.
  NeurIPS, 2017.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. JMLR, 2014.
Trevor Standley, Amir Zamir, Dawn Chen, Leonidas Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese.
  Which tasks should be learned together in multi-task learning? In ICML, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one
  shot learning. NeurIPS, 2016.
Kaixin Wang, Jun Hao Liew, Yingtian Zou, Daquan Zhou, and Jiashi Feng. Panet: Few-shot image
  semantic segmentation with prototype alignment. In ICCV, 2019.
Xin Wang, Thomas Huang, Joseph Gonzalez, Trevor Darrell, and Fisher Yu. Frustratingly simple
  few-shot object detection. In ICML, 2020.
Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning
  for self-supervised visual pre-training. In CVPR, 2021.
Zhen Wang, Liu Liu, Yiqun Duan, Yajing Kong, and Dacheng Tao. Continual learning with lifelong
  vision transformer. In CVPR, 2022.
Hanrong Ye and Dan Xu. Inverted pyramid multi-task transformer for dense scene understanding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07997, 2022.
Elad Ben Zaken, Yoav Goldberg, and Shauli Ravfogel. Bitfit: Simple parameter-efficient fine-tuning
  for transformer-based masked language-models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 2022.
Amir R. Zamir, Alexander Sax, William B. Shen, Leonidas J. Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio
 Savarese. Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning. In CVPR, 2018.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. In ICLR, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX
A    DATASET D ETAILS
This section describes the details about the dataset we used in experiments (Section 5).
We use ”tiny” version of Taskonomy dataset provided by (Zamir et al., 2018), which consists of
images and labels collected from 35 different buildings. We use the train and val split for training and
early-stopping, respectively, and use the ”muleshoe” building included in the test split for evaluation.
To demonstrate our universal few-shot learner, we use ten dense prediction tasks in Taskonomy
dataset (Zamir et al., 2018), which are semantic segmentation (SS), surface normal (SN), Euclidean
distance (ED), Z-buffer depth (ZD), texture edge (TE), occlusion edge (OE), 2D keypoints (K2), 3D
keypoints (K3), reshading (RS), and principal curvature (PC). All labels are normalized into [0, 1]
with task-specific pre-processing. For details on the pre-processing, we refer readers to Zamir et al.
(2018). Based on the annotations provided by Taskonomy, we preprocess some tasks to increase the
diversity of tasks. Specifically, we modify three single-channel tasks that can be easily augmented:
Euclidean distance, texture edge, and occlusion edge.

1. Texture edge (TE) labels are generated by applying Sobel edge detector (Kanopoulos et al.,
   1988) to RGB images, which consists of a Gaussian filter and image gradient computation.
   The Gaussian filter has two hyper-parameters, namely kernel size and the standard deviation,
   where adjusting those hyper-parameters yield different thickness of detected edges. We use three
   different sets of hyper-parameters – (3, 1), (11, 2), (19, 3) – to produce 3-channel labels. We
   give an example of each channel of TE task in Figure 5.
2. Euclidean distance (ED) labels consists of pixel-wise depth map, where the depth is computed
   by the Euclidean distance from each image pixel to the camera’s optical center. As this task
   is very similar to the Z-buffer depth prediction (ZD) whose label pixels are the distance from
   each image pixel to the camera plane, we augment the ED task by segmenting the depth range
   and re-normalizing within each segment. Specifically, we compute the 5-quantiles of the pixel-
   wise depth labels in the whole dataset, then use each quantile as different channels after re-
   noramlization into [0, 1]. Thus the objective of each channel of the augmented ED task is to
   predict Euclidean distance within a specific range, where the ranges are disjoint for different
   channels. We give an example of each channel of ED task in Figure 6. To visualize 5-channel
   labels, we average the first and the second channels as ”R”-channel, the third and the fourth
   channels as ”G”-channel, and use the fifth channel as ”B”-channel.
3. Occlusion edge (OE) labels are similar to texture edge, but they are constructed to depend on
   only the 3D geometry rather than color or lighting (Zamir et al., 2018). We observe that the
   channel augmentation by quantiles (that we apply to Euclidean distance task) can fairly diversify
   the labels. Therefore, we augment the OE labels into 5-channel labels, where we visualize them
   similar to the ED labels. We give an example of each channel of OE task in Figure 7.

Also, for semantic segmentation, we exclude three classes (”bottle”, ”toilet”, ”book”), as little im-
ages of the classes are included in the Taskonomy dataset. The 12 classes we used in experiments
are: ”chair”, ”couch”, ”plant”, ”bed”, ”dining table”, ”tv”, ”mircrowave”, ”oven”, ”sink”, ”fridge”,
”clock”, and ”base”.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Kernel size = 3, Kernel size = 11, Kernel size = 19,       3-Channel
               RGB Image
                                 Std. = 1         Std. = 2           Std. = 3           Visualization


Figure 5: Channel augmentation on texture edge prediction (TE) task. We apply three different sets
of hyper-parameters (kernel size, standard deviation) in Sobel edge detector to generate a 3-channel
edge task. Second to Fourth columns show the augmented channel with different kernel size and
standard deviation, where the last column shows the 3-channel label visualized as RGB.


                                                                                                       5-Channel
   RGB Image     1st 5-quantile   2nd 5-quantile   3rd 5-quantile   4th 5-quantile   5th 5-quantile
                                                                                                      Visualization


Figure 6: Channel augmentation on Euclidean distance prediction (ED) task. We compute 5-
quantiles of the pixel-wise label distribution, and use each p-th 5-quantile as each channel after
re-normalizing into [0, 1]. Second to Fifth columns show the augmented channel with different
quantile, where the last column shows the 5-channel label visualized as RGB.


                                                                                                       5-Channel
   RGB Image     1st 5-quantile   2nd 5-quantile   3rd 5-quantile   4th 5-quantile   5th 5-quantile
                                                                                                      Visualization


Figure 7: Channel augmentation on occlusion edge prediction (OE) task. We compute 5-quantiles of
the pixel-wise label distribution, and use each p-th 5-quantile as each channel after re-normalizing
into [0, 1]. Second to Fifth columns show the augmented channel with different quantile, where the
last column shows the 5-channel label visualized as RGB.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

This section describes the implementation details in our experiments (Section 5).

B.1   A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS OF VTM

Encoders and Decoders We employ BEiT-B architecture (Bao et al., 2021) pretrained on
Imagenet-22k dataset (Deng et al., 2009) with 224 × 224 resolution as our image encoder. For
our label encoder and decoder, we follow the DPT-B architecture (Ranftl et al., 2021). Specifically,
we use a randomly initialized ViT-B (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) as label encoder g and extract features
from 3, 6, 9, 12-th layers of the encoder to form multi-level label features (label tokens). Similarly,
we extract multi-level image features (image tokens) from 3, 6, 9, 12-th layers of the image encoder
(BEiT). As the DPT-B architecture decodes four-level features using RefineNet-based decoder (Lin
et al., 2017), we pass the predicted query label features from matching module at each layer to the
decoder. As the label values of tasks in Taskonomy are normalized to [0, 1], we use a sigmoid activa-
tion function at the head of the decoder to produce values in [0, 1]. To predict semantic segmentation
task whose label values are discrete (either 0 or 1), we discretize the predicted label with threshold
0.1.

Matching Modules In the implementation of the matching module with multihead attention, we
adopt three conventions in vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) which slightly modifies the
equations described in Section 3.2. Recall that the matching module is computed on three input
matrices q ∈ RM ×d and k, v ∈ RN M ×d as follows:
                        MHA(q, k, v) = Concat(o1 , ..., oH )wO ,                                   (8)
                                                                       !
                                                       qwhQ (kwhK )⊤
                              where oh = Softmax           √               vwhV ,                  (9)
                                                             dH

where H is number of heads, dH is head size, and whQ , whK , whV ∈ Rd×dH , wO ∈ RHdH ×d . First,
we perform layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) before each input projection matrices whQ , whK , whV
and after the output projection matrix wO , where we share the layer normalization parameters for
whQ and whK . Second, we add a residual connection with GELU non-linearity (Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2016) after gathering the outputs from multiple heads as follows:
                             MHA(q, k, v) = o + GELU(owO ),                                       (10)
                                 where o = Concat(o1 , o2 , · · · , oH ).                         (11)
Finally, we apply Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) with rate 0.1 in the attention scores.

B.2   A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS OF BASELINES

Encoders and Decoders For the supervised learning baselines based on transformer encoder
(DPT and InvPT), we use the same encoder backbone with ours (BEiT pretrained on ImageNet-
22k). We use the decoder of DPT-B configuration in Ranftl et al. (2021) for DPT as ours, and use
the original multi-task decoder implementation provided by Ye & Xu (2022) for InvPT. For few-
shot learning baselines (HSNet, VAT, DGPNet), we use ResNet-101 (He et al., 2016) pretrained on
ImageNet-1k (Deng et al., 2009) as their encoder backbones, which is their best configuration. For
the other architectural details, we follow the original implementation of each method provided by
Min et al. (2021) (HSNet), Hong et al. (2022) (VAT), and Johnander et al. (2021) (DGPNet).

Modification on Few-shot Baselines As HSNet and VAT are designed for semantic segmentation,
we slightly modify their architectures to train them on general dense prediction tasks. Specifically,
both models involve a binary masking operation to filter out support image features using their
labels (which are assumed to be binary), before computing 4D correlation tensor between support
and query feature pixels. For continuous labels of general dense prediction tasks, the binary masking
becomes pixel-wise multiplication with labels. However, as the correlation is computed by cosine
similarity between feature pixels that is norm-invariant, all non-zero feature pixels with the same


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


direction are treated in the same manner. This make them unable to discriminate different non-
zero label values, e.g., correlation between query and support feature pixels would be the same
regardless of the assigned support label values. Therefore, we move the masking operation to after
computing the cosine-similarity, so that the models can recognize different non-zero label values
through different norms of the masked features by (non-binary) labels.
We use the DGPNet without modification as it is based on a regression method (Gaussian Processes)
which is inherently applicable to general dense prediction tasks with continuous labels.

B.3   T RAINING D ETAILS

Training We train all models with 300,000 iterations using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba,
2015), and use poly learning rate schedule (Liu et al., 2015) with base learning rates 10−5 for pre-
trained parameters and 10−4 for parameters trained from scratch. The models are early-stopped
based on the validation metric. At each episodic training of iteration, we sample a batch of episodes
with size 8. In each episode, we construct a 5-channel task from the training tasks Ttrain by first
splitting all channels of training tasks and randomly sample 5 channels among them. Then support
and query sets are sampled for the selected channels, where we use support and query size of 4 for
Ours and DGP, while using 1 for HSNet and VAT as they only supports 1-shot training. To train
DPT, we construct a batch of each target task Ttest , whose channels are given at once, with batch size
64. To train InvPT, we construct a batch of all ten tasks, whose channels are all given at once, while
using batch size 16 due to its large memory consumption.

Data Augmentation We apply random crop (from 256 × 256 resolution to 224 × 224) and random
horizontal flip to images, where the random horizontal flip is applied except for surface normal labels
as their values are sensitive to the horizontal direction (flipping images and labels together changes
the semantics of the task). As we apply random crop during training, the resolution of test images
(256 × 256) differs from the training images. To evaluate the models with consistent resolution, we
perform five-crop (cropping the four corners and center of an image) to test query images so that the
model also predicts five-cropped labels, then aggregate them by averaging the overlapping regions
to produce final prediction for evaluation of resolution (256 × 256). For few-shot models, we apply
center crop to support images at test-time.

Task Augmentation For episodic training of few-shot models, we further apply two kinds of task
augmentation. First, for each channel of C-channel labels sampled at each episode (C = 5 in our
experiments), we apply random jittering and gaussian blur on each channel independently. Then
we apply MixUp (Zhang et al., 2018) on the augmented channels and auxiliary channels which
are additionally sampled from the training tasks Ttrain , to create a linearly interpolated label of two
channels. We apply the task augmentation consistently in each episode to preserve the task identity.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
This section provides additional results on our experiments (Section 5).

C.1     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON A BLATION S TUDY

C.1.1        S ENSITIVITY TO THE C HOICE OF S UPPORT S ET
As discussed in Section 5, we evaluate the 10-shot performance of our VTM with four different
support sets that are disjointly sampled from the training data Dtrain . We report the results in Table 3,
which shows that our model is robust to the choice of support set. We use the first support set (#1)
in Table 3 for comparison with other baselines or ablated variants in Section 5, due to the huge
computational cost for evaluating few-shot baselines HSNet and VAT.

Table 3: Ablation study on the choice of support set. We disjointly sample four different support
sets and report the 10-shot performance on each set, with the mean and standard deviation.

                                                            Tasks
                       Fold 1          Fold 2              Fold 3              Fold 4              Fold 5
Support set
                  SS        SN    ED            ZD    TE            OE    K2            K3    RS            PC
                mIoU ↑ mErr ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓
      #1        0.4097 11.4391 0.0741      0.0316    0.0791    0.0912    0.0639    0.0519    0.1089    0.0420
      #2        0.4190 11.8860 0.0845      0.0338    0.0839    0.0926    0.0629    0.0497    0.1131    0.0437
      #3        0.3781 11.7418 0.0776      0.0343    0.0807    0.0944    0.0656    0.0494    0.1101    0.0425
      #4        0.4017 11.6203 0.0794      0.0362    0.0799    0.0908    0.0672    0.0502    0.1158    0.0424
    Mean        0.4021 11.6718 0.0789      0.0340    0.0809    0.0922    0.0649    0.0503    0.1120    0.0427
      Std.      0.0152 0.1640    0.0038    0.0016    0.0018    0.0014    0.0016    0.0010    0.0027    0.0006



C.1.2        A BLATION S TUDY ON T RAINING P ROCEDURE
To understand the source of the generalization performance of our method more clearly, we conduct
an ablation study on training procedure. We compare four models based on DPT architecture with
different training procedures as follows.

 • M1: Randomly initialized DPT, 10-shot trained.
 • M2: DPT with BEiT pre-trained encoder, 10-shot fine-tuned.
 • M3 (Ours w/o Matching): DPT with BEiT pre-trained encoder, multi-task trained with task-
   specific bias tuning, and then 10-shot fine-tuned.
 • M4 (Ours): DPT with BEiT pre-trained encoder, meta-trained with task-specific bias tuning, and
   then 10-shot fine-tuned.

We summarize the quantitative result in Table 4 and qualitative comparison in Figure 8. First, as ex-
pected, we observe that DPT with naive 10-shot training (M1) fails to generalize to the test examples
in most of the tasks, except for two 2D texture-related tasks (TE, K2). We conjecture that TE and K2
are “easy” cases in terms of few-shot learning, as they are defined as low-level computational algo-
rithms on RGB images, while other high-level tasks require knowledge about semantics (SS) or 3D
space (SN, ED, ZD, OE, K3, RS, PC). Second, we note that BEiT pretraining (M2) largely improves
the few-shot generalization performance, allowing the model to produce coarse predictions of the
dense labels. However, it still cannot capture object-level fine-grained details in many tasks. Third,
we observe that multi-task training and few-shot adaptation, combined with an efficient parameter-
sharing strategy of bias tuning (M3, M4), further improves the performance with a clear gap with M2
where the predictions are also qualitatively finer than M2’s. Finally, as discussed in Section 5.2.1,
M4 still further improves over M3 with a clear gap. This shows that in a few-shot learning setting,


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                 Table 4: 10-shot learning performance of ablated variants of DPT and Ours.

                                                                  Tasks
                      Fold 1            Fold 2                   Fold 3               Fold 4                  Fold 5
   Model
                 SS        SN      ED            ZD         TE            OE     K2            K3        RS            PC
            mIoU ↑ mErr ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓ RMSE ↓
     M1      0.0644 21.0976 0.1959          0.0711         0.0995     0.1842    0.0670    0.0600     0.2335         0.0431
     M2      0.0582 15.8135 0.1615          0.0530         0.1136     0.1480    0.0948    0.0606     0.1858         0.0431
     M3      0.2681 13.0704 0.1111          0.0404         0.0778     0.1061    0.0613    0.0537     0.1559         0.0445
     M4      0.4097 11.4391 0.0741          0.0316         0.0791     0.0912    0.0639    0.0519     0.1089         0.0420
                          Image   SS       SN         ED         ZD        TE    OE       K2        K3         RS           PC

    Ground-Truth



        M1
    (Naive DPT)


        M2
    (DPT + BEiT)


         M3
 (Ours w/o Matching)


         M4
        (Ours)



Figure 8: Qualitative comparison of Ours and its ablated variants in training procedure. All models
use 10 labeled examples for each target task, where M3 and M4 observe additional labeled examples
of training tasks (different from the target task) in each fold.

our matching framework and episodic training are more effective than simple multi-task pretraining
employed in M3. In summary, we may conclude that the fast generalization of Ours is benefitted
from episodic training of various tasks followed by parameter-efficient few-shot adaptation as well
as powerful pre-training of the encoder (BEiT).

C.1.3     F INE - TUNING WITH F ULL S UPERVISION
To further explore how our method scales well when a large labeled dataset is given, we also fine-
tuned our VTM with full supervision of test tasks. For the fine-tuning, we used the same training
dataset as the fully-supervised DPT and employed the episodic fine-tuning objective (Section 3.3).
For evaluation, since providing the entire training data as the support set for the matching module
is infeasible, we provide a random subset of the training data as the support set to the model. We
summarize the result in Figure 9, which extends Figure 3 in Section 5. In most tasks, our model
consistently improves when more supervision is given. With full supervision at test tasks, our model
performs slightly worse than the DPT baseline in seven tasks and performs better or similarly in the
other three tasks. We conjecture that the performance degradation comes from two aspects: (1) the
absence of direct input-output connection, i.e., the matching module serves as a bottleneck, and (2)
negative transfer from meta-training tasks to test tasks.

C.1.4     E FFECT OF N UMBER OF T RAINING TASKS
The amount of meta-training tasks is an important factor that can affect the performance of the
universal few-shot learner. To verify this, we fixed two test tasks (SS, SN) and trained our VTM on
five different subsets of the original eight training tasks (three different subsets with two tasks and
two different subsets with five tasks). We summarize the results in the Table 5. As expected, the
performance consistently improves as we increase the number of training tasks. We also note that the


                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Performance of VTM on various shots. In general, VTM consistently improves perfor-
mance as more supervision is given, and even surpasses fully supervised baselines on many tasks.

few-shot performance becomes sensitive to the choice of training tasks when their number is small
(two), presumably as the model becomes reliant on training tasks more correlated to test tasks, while
the variance decreases substantially when more training tasks are added. In addition, the experiment
with incomplete training data (Appendix C.1.5) shows the potential ability of our methods in more
realistic settings where the training dataset is formed by a combination of different task-specific
datasets. From these results, we expect that our model can further enhance its universality on few-
shot learning by utilizing a combined training dataset of much more diverse tasks, which we leave
as future work.
        Table 5: 10-shot learning performance of Ours with various number of training tasks.

                                                              Tasks
                                                              Fold 1
                   Number of Training Tasks
                                                       SS                SN
                                                   mIoU ↑              mErr ↓
                               2               0.2878 ± 0.0565    17.3947 ± 4.8742
                               5               0.3919 ± 0.0132    12.6769 ± 0.1235
                               8                    0.4097             11.4391


C.1.5    E PISODIC T RAINING WITH I NCOMPLETE DATASET
It would make our method more practical if the model could learn from an incomplete dataset where
images are not associated with whole training task labels. To see how our framework extends to
such incomplete settings, we conducted an additional experiment. We simulate the extreme case of
incomplete data by partitioning the training images, such that each image is associated with only a
single task out of 8 training tasks. Specifically, we partitioned the buildings in Taskonomy into eight
groups – each corresponds to a different training task. As this reduces the effective size of training
data by the number of training tasks (1/8 in our case), we also train a baseline where we use complete
data but use only 1/8 of the training images (for each building, we discard 7/8 of the images). The
results are summarized in Table 6. We can see that the performance degradation is marginal when we
give incomplete data, which implies that our method can be promising in handling realistic scenarios
where the training data is a collection of heterogeneous datasets with different label annotations.

C.2     F URTHER A NALYSIS

C.2.1    PARAMETER -E FFICIENCY A NALYSIS
We report the number of task-specific and shared parameters of our VTM and two supervised base-
lines, DPT and InvPT, to compare how our task adaptation is parameter-efficient. As DPT is a
single-task learning model, no parameters are shared across tasks and the whole network should be
trained independently for every new task. InvPT, which is a multi-task learning model, shares a large


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: 10-shot learning performance of Ours trained with incomplete and complete multi-task
dataset.

                                                                          Tasks
                                                                          Fold 1
                                     Training Data
                                                                     SS            SN
                                                                  mIoU ↑       mErr ↓
                           Incomplete (one task per building)      0.3559      13.6207
                              Complete (1/8 training data)         0.3980      12.1633
                            Complete (whole training data)         0.4097      11.4391



portion of its parameters across tasks (e.g., encoder backbone), still consumes many parameters for
each task in the decoder.
Due to the extensive amount of parameter-sharing, our method is also promising in continual learn-
ing setting. As all task-specific knowledge is included in the bias parameters of the image encoder,
the knowledge acquired from past tasks can be recalled without forgetting by keeping the corre-
sponding bias parameters and switching to them whenever a past model is needed. We especially
note that the size of bias parameters is fairly small (288 KB, which amounts to keeping about 3 la-
beled images of 256x256 resolution for each task). This allows our model to retain past knowledge
very efficiently by keeping the tuned bias parameters plus a few-shot support set, whose external
memory requirement is far less compared to memory-based approaches in continual learning that
keep hundreds of images (Bang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). While the continual learning setting
is not our main focus, applying our method to a continual learning setting would be an interesting
future direction.

  Table 7: Number of task-specific and shared parameters for a single-channel task (in million).

                                      Model                  Task-Specific     Shared

                            DPT (supervised learning)           110.55             0
                            InvPT (multi-task learning)         24.57          106.75
                             Ours (few-shot learning)           0.0703         202.95



C.2.2      C OMPUTATION C OST A NALYSIS

To analyze how our method is computationally efficient compared to supervised DPT, we measured
the MACs (multiply–accumulate operations) of our model and DPT using an open-source python
library thop 3 . We report the results in Table 8. Having encoded the support set (e.g., 10-shot), we
can see that the computational cost of our model’s inference on a single query image is about 30%
larger than the cost of DPT’s, due to the Matching part.

         Table 8: MACs of Ours and DPT on a single-query inference for a single-channel task.

                                              Model                       MACs (G)

                                              DPT                            30.15
                             Ours after encoding support (10-shot)           38.79



   3
       https://github.com/Lyken17/pytorch-OpCounter


                                                        20
                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 C.2.3    ROLE OF ATTENTION H EADS
                 To analyze the role of attention heads, in Figure 10, we visualized the attention maps for each head
                 over support images for a given query patch, feature level (3rd level in this example), and task (RS
                 in this example). The figure shows that each head attends to different regions of the support images.
                 Moreover, we can find some patterns in heads; for example, the first head tends to attend to flat areas
                 of the scene, such as the floor or ceiling (low-frequency features), while the third head tends to attend
                 to objects, such as couch or plant (high-frequency features). To further verify the benefit of multi-
                 head attention in the matching module, we also trained our VTM with single head in the matching
                 modules. The result is summarized in the table below and Table 9. We can see the performance
                 drop in both SS and SN tasks, which supports that exploiting multiple heads benefits our matching
                 framework.


5 (non-semseg)        Query              Support           Head 1         Head 2                Head 3      Head 4


                 Figure 10: Visualization of multi-head attention maps of VTM. Here we visualize the matching
                 module at 3rd level for reshading (RS) task.

                 Table 9: 10-shot learning performance of Ours with different number of attention heads in Matching
                 module.

                                                                                  Tasks
                                                                                  Fold 1
                                             Number of Attention Heads
                                                                             SS            SN
                                                                           mIoU ↑     mErr ↓
                                                          1                0.3702     12.5936
                                                          4                0.4097     11.4391


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.3     A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES

We provide additional results on the qualitative evaluation of our model and the baselines. Figure 11-
14 show visualizations on different query image and support set, where we vary the class of semantic
segmentation task included in each support. The result shows consistent trends of that we discussed
in Section 5. Ours is competitive to the fully supervised baselines (DPT and InvPT), while the other
few-shot baselines (HSNet, VAT, DGPNet) fail to learn different dense prediction tasks.
In Figure 12, even the GT label for semantic segmentation (”couch” class) is noisy as it is a pseudo-
label generated by a pre-trained segmentation model (Zamir et al., 2018), our model successfully
segments two couches present in the figure. This can be attributed to the task-agnostic architecture
of VTM based on non-parametric matching.

          Image    SS       SN      ED       ZD        TE    OE       K2       K3      RS       PC

Ground
 Truth


  DPT
 (sup.)


 InvPT
 (sup.)



 Ours



 HSNet



  VAT



DGPNet



      Figure 11: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and the baselines.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Image    SS      SN      ED      ZD        TE     OE      K2      K3      RS      PC

Ground
 Truth


  DPT
 (sup.)


 InvPT
 (sup.)



 Ours



 HSNet



 VAT



DGPNet



      Figure 12: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and the baselines.


          Image    SS      SN      ED      ZD        TE     OE      K2      K3      RS      PC

Ground
 Truth


  DPT
 (sup.)


 InvPT
 (sup.)



 Ours



 HSNet



 VAT



DGPNet



      Figure 13: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and the baselines.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Image    SS      SN      ED      ZD        TE     OE      K2      K3      RS      PC

Ground
 Truth


  DPT
 (sup.)


 InvPT
 (sup.)



 Ours



 HSNet



 VAT



DGPNet



      Figure 14: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and the baselines.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.4   A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON WITH O UR VARIANTS

We also provide additional results on the qualitative evaluation of our model and our ablated vari-
ants, Ours w/o Matching and Ours w/o Adaptation. Figure 15-18 show visualizations on different
query image and support set. The results show a consistent trend with the quantitative results in
Table 1. Interestingly, our method without adaptation already exhibits some degree of adaptation
to the unseen tasks even without fine-tuning and task-specific components, showing that the non-
parametric architecture of our model and the parameter sharing derived from is appropriate to learn
generalizable knowledge to understand the novel tasks. On the other hand, adding a task-specific
component and adaptation mechanism to the model allows more dramatic improvement in under-
standing novel tasks from few-shot examples, showing the importance of the adaptation mechanism
in our task. Finally, we observe that equipping the matching mechanism with the adaptation module
provides much sharper and fast adaptation to the unseen tasks, which verifies our claims.

             Image   SS      SN      ED      ZD        TE    OE      K2      K3      RS      PC

  Ground
   Truth


   Ours


 Ours w/o
 Matching


 Ours w/o
Adaptation


  Figure 15: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and its ablated variants.

             Image   SS      SN      ED      ZD        TE    OE      K2      K3      RS      PC

  Ground
   Truth


   Ours


 Ours w/o
 Matching


 Ours w/o
Adaptation


  Figure 16: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and its ablated variants.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Image   SS     SN      ED      ZD        TE    OE       K2      K3      RS      PC

  Ground
   Truth


   Ours


 Ours w/o
 Matching


 Ours w/o
Adaptation


  Figure 17: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and its ablated variants.


             Image   SS     SN      ED      ZD        TE    OE       K2      K3      RS      PC

  Ground
   Truth


   Ours


 Ours w/o
 Matching


 Ours w/o
Adaptation


  Figure 18: Additional results of qualitative comparison between Ours and its ablated variants.


                                                 26
