Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I S R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING (N OT ) FOR NATURAL
L ANGUAGE P ROCESSING : B ENCHMARKS , BASELINES ,
AND B UILDING B LOCKS FOR NATURAL L ANGUAGE
P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
 Rajkumar Ramamurthy*♠ Prithviraj Ammanabrolu*♡ Kianté Brantley♣ Jack Hessel♡
 Rafet Sifa♠        Christian Bauckhage♠              Hannaneh Hajishirzi♢♡       Yejin Choi♢♡
 ♠                          ♡                                               ♣
   Fraunhofer IAIS            Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence     Cornell University
 ♢
   Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
 rajkumar.ramamurthy@iais.fraunhofer.de
 {raja,jackh}@allenai.org; kdb82@cornell.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

            We tackle the problem of aligning pre-trained large language models (LMs) with
            human preferences. If we view text generation as a sequential decision-making
            problem, reinforcement learning (RL) appears to be a natural conceptual framework.
            However, using RL for LM-based generation faces empirical challenges, including
            training instability due to the combinatorial action space, as well as a lack of open-
            source libraries and benchmarks customized for LM alignment. Thus, a question
            rises in the research community: is RL a practical paradigm for NLP?
            To help answer this, we first introduce an open-source modular library, RL4LMs1 ,2
            for optimizing language generators with RL. The library consists of on-policy RL
            algorithms that can be used to train any encoder or encoder-decoder LM in the
            HuggingFace library (Wolf et al., 2020) with an arbitrary reward function. Next, we
            present the GRUE (General Reinforced-language Understanding Evaluation)
            benchmark, a set of 6 language generation tasks which are supervised not by target
            strings, but by reward functions which capture automated measures of human
            preference. GRUE is the first leaderboard-style evaluation of RL algorithms for
            NLP tasks. Finally, we introduce an easy-to-use, performant RL algorithm, NLPO
            (Natural Language Policy Optimization) that learns to effectively reduce the
            combinatorial action space in language generation. We show 1) that RL techniques
            are generally better than supervised methods at aligning LMs to human preferences;
            and 2) that NLPO exhibits greater stability and performance than previous policy
            gradient methods (e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)), based on both automatic and
            human evaluations.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The ultimate aim of language technology is to interact with humans. However, most language models
are trained without direct signals of human preference, with supervised target strings serving as (a
sometimes crude) proxy. One option to incorporate user feedback is via human-in-the-loop, i.e., a
user would be expected to provide feedback for each sample online as the model trains, but this
degree of dense supervision is often prohibitive and inefficient. Automated metrics offer a promising
compromise: models of human preference like pairwise learned preference models (Ouyang et al.,
2022), BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019), BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020) have significantly improved
correlation with human judgment compared to earlier metrics (BLEU, METEOR, etc.), and are cheap
to evaluate. But — these functions are usually not per-token differentiable: like humans, metrics
        *
       Denotes Equal Contribution
    1
      Code: https://github.com/allenai/RL4LMs
    2
      Project Website: https://rl4lms.apps.allenai.org/


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                        Textual                          Scalar Output
                                                         Input      Preference
                                                                     Rewards

                                                                   Environment                0.13       0.58   0.92

                                                                    Naturalness
                                                                    KL Penalty
 At first anyway, I    An attempt that          Awful awful
 warmed slowly as       fell short fell       awful, I'm going
                                                                                              0.51       0.25   0.87
  I watched on...     short fell short ...   to tell you why ...


                                                                                                     Feedback
                        Exploration                                                                  Learning
                                                                     I loved the book,
                                                                      but really hated
                                                                         the movie…



Figure 1: Natural Language Policy Optimization (NLPO) in the case of sentiment-guided contin-
uation. Here, the LM (i.e., the policy) needs to produce a positive sentiment continuation given a
review prompt (we cover other models of human preference in Sec. 3.2). Two objectives are balanced:
1) an automated proxy of human preference that serves as a reward (here: a sentiment classifier);
and 2) “naturalness" as measured by a KL divergence from an LM not trained with explicit human
feedback. The plots show validation learning curves comparing our NLPO to the popular policy
gradient method PPO. (Top plot:) RL methods can easily achieve high reward if the KL penalty is
removed, (Bottom:) but at the cost of higher perplexity. NLPO+KL, our proposed approach, succeeds
in balancing reward and naturalness more effectively than prior work.


can only offer quality estimates for full generations. Reinforcement Learning (RL) offers a natural
path forward for optimizing non-differentiable, scalar objectives for LM-based generation when it
is cast as a sequential decision-making problem. However, Goodhart’s Law3 looms: particularly
in the case of imperfect metrics that use neural networks, it is easy to find nonsense samples that
achieve high-quality estimates. Recent works have shown promising results in aligning LMs to human
preferences via RL by constraining preference-based rewards to incorporate notions of fluency (Wu
et al., 2021a; Ouyang et al., 2022) but progress in this line of work is heavily hindered by a lack
of open-source benchmarks and algorithmic implementations—resulting in perception that RL is a
challenging paradigm for NLP (Choshen et al., 2020; Kreutzer et al., 2021).
To facilitate research in building RL algorithms to better align LMs, we release a library, a benchmark,
and an algorithm. First, we release the RL4LMs library, which enables generative HuggingFace
models (e.g., GPT-2 or T5) to be trained using a variety of existing RL methods like PPO/A2C/etc.
Next, we apply models trained using RL4LMs to the new GRUE (General Reinforced-language
Understanding Evaluation) benchmark: GRUE is a collection of 7 contemporary NLP tasks (see
Table1 for details); in contrast to other benchmarks, instead of supervised training, we pair each
task with reward function(s). GRUE challenges models to optimize these reward functions while
remaining fluent language generators. We train language models via RL—both with and without
task specific supervised pre-training—to optimize rewards. Finally, beyond existing RL methods, we
introduce a novel on-policy RL algorithm called NLPO (Natural Language Policy Optimization),
that dynamically learns task-specific constraints over the distribution of language at a token level.
Experiments on GRUE and human evaluations show that NLPO better balances learning preference
rewards while maintaining language fluency compared to alternatives, including PPO (Figure 1). We
find that using RL to learn from scalar reward feedback can be more: (1) data efficient than using
additional expert demonstrations via supervised learning (though a combination of both is best)—a
learned reward function enables greater performance when used as a signal for an RL method than
a supervised method trained with 5 times more data, and (2) parameter efficient—enabling a 220
million parameter model trained with a combination of supervision and NLPO to outperform a 3
billion supervised model. We hope that the benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks we release
serve to drive forward research in aligning LMs to human preferences.

     3
         Strathern (1997) paraphrases: When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.


                                                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     R ELATED W ORK
Imitation learning for NLP. Algorithms such as Schedule Sampling (SS) (Bengio et al., 2015),
Parallel SS (Duckworth et al., 2019), SS for Transformers (Mihaylova & Martins, 2019), Diffential SS
(Goyal et al., 2017), LOLS (Lampouras & Vlachos, 2016; Chang et al., 2015), TextGAIL (Wu et al.,
2021b), and SEARNN (Leblond et al., 2017), have been inspired by DAGGER (Ross et al., 2011)
and SEARN (Daumé et al., 2009). However, these algorithms are known to suffer from exposure bias
in generation (Chiang & Chen, 2021; Arora et al., 2022) and the cliff MDP problem (Huszár, 2015;
Agarwal et al., 2019; Swamy et al., 2021).
RL for Large Action Spaces. MIXER (Ranzato et al., 2016) combined ideas from schedule sampling
and REINFORCE (Williams, 1992). Bahdanau et al. (2016) proposed an actor-critic algorithm to
address the variance/large action space problems when using REINFORCE for language generation;
follow-up works such as KG-A2C (Ammanabrolu & Hausknecht, 2020), TrufLL (Martin et al., 2022),
AE-DQN (Zahavy et al., 2018), and GALAD (Ammanabrolu et al., 2022) addressed similar issues by
attempting to eliminate and reduce the action space during exploration.
RL for NLP. RL, often in the form of bandit learning, has been used to improve models in machine
translation (Wu et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2017; Kiegeland & Kreutzer, 2021), summarization
(Stiennon et al., 2020; Paulus et al., 2017), dialogue (Li et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017; Jaques et al.,
2020), image captioning (Rennie et al., 2017), question generation (Pang & He, 2021), text-games
(Narasimhan et al., 2015; Hausknecht et al., 2020), and more (Ranzato et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2022).
Lu et al. (2022) adapt reward-conditioned transformers (Chen et al., 2021) for several language
generation tasks. RL has been the focus of efforts to align LMs with human preferences (Stiennon
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021a; Nakano et al., 2021; Ziegler et al., 2019), e.g., Ouyang et al. (2022)
fine-tuned large language model with PPO Schulman et al. (2017) to align with models of human
preference, but their non-public dataset doesn’t enable comparison. Though RL has been successful
in some of the use cases described above, it has simultaneously been critiqued for being significantly
less stable than supervised LM training (Choshen et al., 2020). As a result, there is relatively
little consensus if RL is a worthwhile consideration for training LMs compared to, say, collecting
additional supervised data.

3     RL4LM S : A L IBRARY FOR T RAINING LM S WITH RL
We introduce RL4LMs, an open-source library with building blocks for fine-tuning and evaluating
RL algorithms on LM-based generation. The library is built on HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2020)
and stable-baselines-3 (Raffin et al., 2021), combining important components from their interfaces.
RL4LMs can be used to train any decoder only or encoder-decoder transformer models from Hug-
gingFace with any on-policy RL algorithm from stable-baselines-3. Furthermore, we provide reliable
implementations of popular on-policy RL algorithms that are tailored for LM fine-tuning such as
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015a), A2C (Mnih et al., 2016), and our own
NLPO (§4). The library is modular, which enables users to plug-in customized environments, reward
functions, metrics, and algorithms. In the initial release, we provide support for 6 different NLP tasks,
16 evaluation metrics and rewards, and 4 RL algorithms.

3.1   E NVIRONMENTS : G ENERATION AS A T OKEN - LEVEL MDP

Each environment is an NLP task: we are given a supervised dataset D = {(xi , y i )}N                  i=1 of N
examples, where x ∈ X is an language input and y ∈ Y is the target string. Generation can be
viewed as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) ⟨S, A, R, P, γ, T ⟩ using a finite vocabulary V. Each
episode in the MDP begins by sampling a datapoint (x, y) from our dataset and ends when the
current time step t exceeds the horizon T or an end of sentence (EOS) token is generated. The input
x = (x0 , · · · , xm ) is a task-specific prompt that is used as our initial state s0 = (x0 , · · · , xm ), where
s0 ∈ S and S is the state space with xm ∈ V. An action in the environment at ∈ A consists of a
token from our vocabulary V. The transition function P : S × A → ∆(S) deterministically appends
an action at to the end of the state st−1 = (x0 , · · · , xm , a0 , · · · , at−1 ). This continues until the end
of the horizon t ≤ T and we obtain a state sT = (x0 , · · · , xm , a0 , · · · , aT ). At the end of an episode
a reward R : S × A × Y → R1 that depends on the (sT , y) (e.g., an automated metric like PARENT
Dhingra et al. (2019)) is emitted. RL4LMs provides an OpenAI gym (Brockman et al., 2016) style


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


API for an RL environment that simulates this LM-Based MDP formulation. This abstraction allows
for new tasks to be added quickly with compatibility across all implemented algorithms.

3.2   R EWARD F UNCTIONS AND E VALUATION M ETRICS

Because RL4LMs provides a generic interface for per-token or per-sequence generation rewards, it
is possible to quickly apply a wide array of RL algorithms to a similarly diverse range of textual
metrics-as-rewards. Specifically, we provide interfaces to 1) n-gram overlap metrics metrics such as
ROUGE (Lin, 2004), BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), SacreBLEU (Post, 2018), METEOR (Banerjee
& Lavie, 2005); (2) model-based semantic metrics such as BertScore (Zhang et al., 2019) and
BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020) which generally provide higher correlation with human judgment;
3) task-specific metrics such as CIDER (Vedantam et al., 2015), SPICE (Anderson et al., 2016)
(for captioning/commonsense generation), PARENT (Dhingra et al., 2019) (for data-to-text) and
SummaCZS (Laban et al., 2022) (for factuality of summarization); 4) diversity/fluency/naturalness
metrics such as perplexity, Mean Segmented Type Token Ratio (MSSTR) (Johnson, 1944), Shannon
entropy over unigrams and bigrams (Shannon, 1948), the ratio of distinct n-grams over the total
number of n-grams (Distinct-1, Distinct-2) and count of n-grams that appear only once in the entire
generated text (Li et al., 2015); 5) task-specific, model-based human preference metrics such as
classifiers trained on human preference data collected in the methodology of Ouyang et al. (2022).

3.3   O N - POLICY ACTOR - CRITIC A LGORITHMS

RL4LMs supports fine-tuning and training LMs from scratch via on-policy actor-critic algorithms
on language environments. Formally, this class of algorithms allows us to train a parameterized
control policy defined as πθ : S → ∆(A), a function that attempts to select an action in a given
                                                                                PT
state so as to maximize long term discounted rewards over a trajectory Eπ [ t=0 γ t R(st , at )]. Our
benchmark experiments focus on fine-tuning a pre-trained LM denoted as π0 from which we initial
our agent’s policy πθ = π0 . Similarly, the value network Vϕ used to estimate the value function is
also initialized from π0 except for the final layer which is randomly initialized to output a single scalar
value. As with other deep RL actor-critic algorithms, we define our value and Q-value functions as
                PT
Vtπ = Eat ∼π [ τ =t γR(sτ , aτ , y)], Qπt (st , at ) = R(st , at , y) + γEst+1 ∼P [Vt+1
                                                                                     π
                                                                                        (st+1 )] leading to
                                                π           π            π
a definition of our advantage function as At (s, a) = Qt (s, a) − Vt . To increase training stability,
advantage is appoximated using Generalized Advantage Estimation (Schulman et al., 2015b).
Given an input-output pair (x, y) and generation predictions from our agent; because the environment
rewards are sequence-level and sparse, following Wu et al. (2021a) we regularize the reward function
using a token-level KL penalty for all on-policy algorithms, to prevent the model from deviating too
far from the initialized LM π0 . Formally, the regularized reward function is:
                      R̂(st , at , y) = R(st , at , y) − βKL (πθ (at |st )||π0 (at |st ))                (1)
where R̂ is the regularized KL reward, y is gold-truth predictions, KL (πθ (at |st )||π0 (at |st )) =
(log π0 (at |st ) − log πθ (at |st )) and the KL coefficient β is dynamically adapted (Ziegler et al., 2019).
Further details on actor-critic methods can be found in Appendix A.

4     NLPO: NATURAL L ANGUAGE P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
Language generation action spaces are orders of magnitude larger than what most discrete action
space RL algorithms are designed for (Ranzato et al., 2016; Ammanabrolu, 2021), e.g., GPT-2/3 and
T5 have a vocabulary size of 50K and 32K respectively. We hypothesize that the size of the action
space is a core cause of instability when training LMs with existing RL methods. To address this issue,
we introduce NLPO (Natural Language Policy Optimization), which is inspired by work on action
elimination/invalid-action masking (Zahavy et al., 2018; Huang & Ontañón, 2020; Ammanabrolu
& Hausknecht, 2020). NLPO, a parameterized-masked extension of PPO, learns to mask out less
relevant tokens in-context as it trains. NLPO accomplishes this via top-p sampling, which restricts
tokens to the smallest possible set whose cumulative probability is greater than the probability
parameter p (Holtzman et al., 2018).
Specifically, NLPO maintains a masking policy πψ : the masking policy is a copy of the current policy
(πθ ), but is updated only every µ steps. A parameterized-invalid-mask is created from πψ by first


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


selecting the top-p tokens from the vocabulary, 4 and then applying an invalid-mask to the remaining
tokens—i.e. setting their probabilities to zero when sampling actions from πθ during training; this
periodic updating policy πψ is inspired by off-policy Q-learning algorithms (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017), providing the policy πθ with an additional constraint that balances between the benefits of
containing more task relevant information than the KL penalty derived from π0 and the risk of reward
hacking. We provide pseudocode in Algorithm 1 (green portions highlight the differences with PPO).

Algorithm 1 NLPO - Natural Languge Policy Optimization
    Input: Dataset D = {(xi , y i )}N
                                    i=1 of size N
    Input: initial policy parameters πθ0
    Input: initial LM π0
    Input: initial value function parameters Vϕ0
    Input: initialize parameterized masked policy πψ0 (·|·, πθ0 ) with parameterized top-p policy πθ0
    Input: policy update frequency µ
    repeat
       Sample mini-batch Dm = {(xm , y m )}M    m=1 from D
       Collect trajectories Tm = {τi } by running policy πψn in for batch Dm in env.            ▷ Eq.6
       Compute Preference and KL penalty rewards R̂t                                           ▷ Eq. 1
       Compute the advantage estimate Ât                                                   ▷ Sec. 3.3
       Update the policy by maximizing the PPO-Clip objective:
                                                   T
                                        1        X X
         πθm+1 = argmaxθ                                     min rt (θ)Aπθm , clip(rt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Aπθm )
                                   |Dm |T
                                                τ ∈Dm τ =0

       where rt (θ) = ππθθ (a(at t|s|st t)) .
                         m
       Update the value function:
                                                                        T                  2
                                                              1       X X
                                 Vϕm+1 = argminϕ                           Vϕ (st ) − R̂t
                                                         |Dm |T
                                                                      τ ∈Dm t=0

       Update the parameterized masked policy every µ iterations:
                                                        πψn+1 (·|·, πθm+1 )

    until convergence and return πθ


5     GRUE (G ENERAL R EINFORCED - LANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING E VAL )
GRUE is a collection of 7 generative NLP tasks. To combat reward hacking for any single metric,
each task is evaluated at test time according to a task-specific mix of metrics, detailed in Table 1.
The metrics span two categories. Task preference metrics capture how well the models produce
generations that satisfy the desiderata of the specific generation task, e.g., for Commongen, if the
generations contain all the required words, or for IMDB, how positive the generated completions
are. Naturalness metrics capture fluency, readability, etc. and provide perspective on factors beyond
semantics. At training time, there are no special restrictions: models are free to use the supervised
data, compute metrics on intermediate generations, etc. Train/val/test splits follow the original works.
All results are averaged over multiple seeds, with exact counts being found in Appendix B.
Experimental Setup. We use RL4LMs to test a large range of algorithms on the GRUE benchmark.
Specifically: We compare 3 algorithms for direct fine-tuning — Supervised, PPO,5 and NLPO. In
    4
      πψ could be trained with alternate sampling techniques like top-k or beam search (or even hard-coded via
rules by domain experts), though we find top-p sampling to be most effective in practice.
    5
      We consider PPO representative of the present state-of-the-art — in particular, we do not consider the
popular REINFORCE (Willianms, 1988; Williams, 1992), as recent works have shown PPO to be strictly superior
to REINFORCE in multiple domains (Schulman et al., 2017)


                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                     Naturalness
   Dataset                 Task                  Input                    Output                    Task Preference Metrics(s)
                                                                                                                                     Metrics(s)

   IMDB                    Text Continua-    Partial Movie      A positive completion of the                                          Perplexity
                                                                                                    Learned Sentiment Classifier
   (Maas et al., 2011)     tion                 Review                 movie review.                                                   (GPT-2)
   CommonGEN               Generative                          A sentence coherently using all    CIDER; ROUGE-2,L; BLEU-3,4;
                                              Concept Set                                                                              SPICE
   (Lin et al., 2020)      Commonsense                                input concepts.                 METEOR; Coverage
   CNN Daily Mail
                                                                                                 SummaCZS; ROUGE-1, 2, L, LSum;
   (Hermann et al., 2015) Summarization      News Article           Summarized article.                                               BertScore
                                                                                                       METEOR; BLEU

   ToTTo                                    Highlighted Wiki       Factually accurate text                                            BLEURT
                           Data to Text                                                                SacreBLEU; PARENT
   (Parikh et al., 2020)                         Table           describing the information.
   WMT-16 (en-de)          Machine Trans-                                                        TER; cHRF; ROUGE-1, 2, L, LSum,      BertScore
                                             Text (English)      Translated text (German).
   (Bojar et al., 2016)    lation                                                                  METEOR; SacreBLEU, BLEU
   NarrativeQA
                            Question An-    Question Context     Abstractive answer to the         ROUGE-1, 2, L, LSum, LMax;
   (Kočiskỳ et al., 2018)                                                                                                           BertScore
                            swering            (a Story)                 question.                 METEOR; BLEU; SacreBLEU

   DailyDialog             Chitchat Dia-
                                            Dialogue History     A conversational response       METEOR; Learned Intent Classifier    BertScore
   (Li et al., 2017)       logue



Table 1: GRUE Benchmark using RL4LMs showing the various tasks, input and output types, and
the metrics used. We note that we test RL algorithms on these tasks for a wider range of possible
rewards than just the task specific ones shown here. Unless specified, datasets are in English.


addition, we consider a hybrid approach of supervised learning and our RL methods by applying
PPO and NLPO on checkpoints that have been fine-tuned in a supervised fashion—we call these
Supervised+PPO, Supervised+NLPO. As an additional baseline, we additionally run zero-shot
evaluations where we design prompts which aim to elicit task-specific generations, but with no
training data or parameter updates.
For each task, to isolate the effect of training method, we select a single pre-trained LM backbone.
For IMDB text continuation we use GPT-2 (117m parameters), and for the rest of the tasks we use
T5-base (220m parameters). For our RL models (PPO, NLPO, Supervised+PPO, Supervised+NLPO),
for a thorough investigation of how reward-hacking might interplay with GRUE, we run a separate set
of experiments optimizing multiple task rewards for each task independently, e.g., for Commongen
which has 6 task rewards (CIDER, ROUGE-2, ROUGE-L, BLEU-3, BLEU-4, METEOR) we run 6
different experiments optimizing each metric independently and report all possible metrics seen in
Table 1 regardless of which individual metric was being optimized for.
Human Participant Study. We gather human judgments for five of the tasks in GRUE. In doing so,
our goals are 1) to validate that the automated metrics we selected for GRUE correlate with human
judgments with respect to relative ranking between models; and 2) to provide additional empirical
comparisons regarding NLPO vs. PPO, ablations to study the effects of the KL naturalness penalty,
etc. We specifically consider IMDB, Commongen, ToTTo, DailyDialog, and CNN Daily Mail. For
each individual sample in a task, we ask 3 unique human raters to provide Likert judgments of 1)
quality, i.e., for the specific task, how correct/appropriate is the generation, given the context, and
2) fluency, i.e., how well-written is the generation. We used Amazon Mechanical Turk, and paid
crowdworkers a minimum of $15/hr. More details, including qualification information, interface
screenshots, instructions, etc. are given in the corresponding Appendicies.

5.1     R ESULTS ON GRUE: W HICH A LGORITHM S HOULD BE U SED TO L EARN P REFERENCES ?

Figures 2(a), 2(b) present the results on GRUE, split into task metrics and naturalness metrics, and
Tables 2, 3 highlight key results via ablation studies. Full results are available in Appendix B. For text
continuation and summarization, with non-trivial zero-shot performance, RL tends to perform better
than supervised training, but for tasks like Commongen and ToTTo, which have very low zero-shot
performance, supervised training performs best—with both approaches outperforming zero-shot.
However, using RL+Supervised learning in conjunction works best; NLPO+supervised and
PPO+supervised usually always outperforms NLPO/PPO (or supervised in isolation) across both task
metrics and naturalness metrics. Supervised warm-starting is particularly effective for Commongen
and ToTTo, which our results suggest are more prone to reward hacking. The one exception to this
trend is DailyDialog where the RL models outperform warm-started Supervised+RL models likely
due to the low performance of the Supervised models. We note that Supervised+NLPO using a


                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              NarrativeQA                                                                                                                    NarrativeQA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Supervised
                                                                                                    IMDB                                                                                                                                     IMDB              PPO
                                                   0.31                                                                                                                                   0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Supervised+PPO
                                                                                           0.61                                                                                                                                     0.98
                                                       0.25                                                                                                                                 0.92                                                               NLPO
        WMT16                                                                      0.59                                                   WMT16                                                                             0.97                               Supervised+NLPO
                                                          0.19                                                                                                                                0.89
                             0.5                                                                                                                            0.89
                                                                          0.57                                                                                                                                       0.96
                                    0.5                                                                                                                               0.89
                                            0.49           0.13                                                                                                                  0.88             0.86
                                                                   0.55                                                                                                                                       0.95
                                                   0.49                                                                                                                                   0.88
                                                                      0.32          0.35          0.39          0.43      Commongen                                                                               0.19       0.22          0.25    0.28      Commongen
                                                   0.3                                                                                                                                    0.04
                                            0.36                   0.31                                                                                                          0.08                         0.85
                                                           0.37                                                                                                                                   0.64
                                    0.42                                                                                                                              0.13
                                                                          0.33                                                                                                                                       0.86
                             0.48                                                                                                                           0.17
                                                          0.38                                                                                                                                0.67
                                                                                   0.34                                                                                                                                     0.86
             ToTTo                                     0.39
                                                                                                                                              ToTTo                                         0.7
                                                                                           0.35                                                                                                                                     0.87

                                                   0.4                                                                                                                                    0.72
                                                                                                    DailyDialog                                                                                                                              DailyDialog
                                            CNN                                                                                                                              CNN
                              (a) Automated Task Metrics                                                                                               (b) Automated Naturalness Metrics

                                                                                     CNN                                                                                                                        CNN

                                                                                 3.96                                                                                                                      4.24
                     IMDB                                                                                                                     IMDB
                                                                             3.9                                                                                                                        4.16
                                     3.7                                                                                                                3.56
                                            3.65                          3.85                                                                                     3.42                            4.08

                                                   3.59                                                                                                                   3.28
                                                                     3.79                                                                                                                        4.0
                                                            3.54                                                                                                                   3.14
                                                                             2.53          2.96          3.38      3.81       Commongen                                                                  2.47        2.95      3.44         3.92          Commongen
                                                            2.99                                                                                                                   2.71
                                                                     3.36                                                                                                                        3.99
                                                   3.39                                                                                                                   3.18
                                            3.79                          3.43                                                                                     3.66                            4.04
                                     4.19                                                                                                               4.13
                                                                             3.49                                                                                                                       4.1
                     ToTTo                                                                                                                    ToTTo
                                                                                 3.56                                                                                                                      4.15



                                                                                     DailyDialog                                                                                                                DailyDialog

                                    (c) Human Study Task Metrics                                                                                   (d) Human Study Naturalness Metrics

Figure 2: Summarized results via automated metrics across all 7 GRUE tasks for each of the 5
algorithms we consider, and human participant studies for the 5 tasks suitable for human studies. Test
results are averaged over all the respective metrics seen in Table 1.

                                                                                                                                                                          Ablation               Sentiment           Perplexity
 Questions                                                                                         Tasks
                                                                                                                                                                          Zero Shot                   0.489             32.171
                                               IMDB              CommonGen                   CNN/DM ToTTO                        WMT16    NarQA       Dialog              Supervised                  0.539             35.472
 Needs Warm Start                                  ✗                  ✓                              ✗                    ✓        ✗           ✓        ✗                 PPO                         0.602             33.816
 Easily reward hackable?                           ✓                  ✓                              ✗                    ✗        ✗           ✗        ✗                 NLPO                        0.611             33.832
 RL > Sup (auto)?                                  ✓                  ✗                              ✗                    ✗        ✗           ✗        ✓                 Warm Starting (Sec. 5.1)
 RL > Sup (human)?                                 ✓                  ✗                              ✗                    ✗        -           -        ✓
 Sup+RL > Sup (auto)?                              ✓                  ✓                              ✓                    ✓        ✓           ✓        ✗                 PPO+Supervised              0.626             35.049
 Sup+RL > Sup (human)?                             ✓                  ✗                              ✓                    ✓        -           -        ✗                 NLPO+Supervised             0.620             34.816
 Sup+NLPO > Sup+PPO (auto)?                        ✓                  ✓                              ✓                    ✓        ✓           ✓        ✓
 Sup+NLPO > Sup+PPO (human)?                       ✓                  ✓                              ✓                    ✓        -           -        ✓                 Data Budget (Reward trained on 10% of data, Sec. 5.3)
                                                                                                                                                                          PPO                         0.598             35.929
                                                                                                                                                                          NLPO                        0.599             33.536
Table 2: Key questions answered using GRUE + RL4LMs:                                                                                                                      Removing NLPO Top-p Constraints (Sec. 5.2)
                                                                                                                                                                          (p = 1 is equivalent to PPO, p = 0.9 is NLPO)
This table summarizes the results found in the ablations and                                                                                                              NLPO p = 0.1                0.579             32.451
Fig. 2 and provides an overview of the questions we ask                                                                                                                   NLPO p = 0.5                0.588             32.447
in Section 5: which tasks require warm starts or are easily                                                                                                               Removing KL Constraints (Sec. 5.2)
                                                                                                                                                                          PPO-no-KL                   0.838             41.897
reward hackable; when to use RL over Supervised, when to                                                                                                                  NLPO-no-KL                  0.858             41.429
use both; and when to use NLPO over PPO. All conclusions                                                                                                                  Discount Ablations (γ = 1) (Sec. 5.4)
                                                                                                                                                                          PPO                         0.651             41.035
drawn are the result of statistical analysis as discussed in the                                                                                                          NLPO                        0.624             43.720
experimental setup.
                                                                                                                                                                                 Table 3: IMDB Ablation Results.


T5-base (220m parameter) LM currently outperforms all the models on the ToTTo leaderboard, many
of which have ≥ 3b parameter supervised models—suggesting that RL is parameter efficient as well.
In these cases, it is critical that the initial policy already contain (some) signal for the task due to it
being used as a KL constraint and masking constraint in NLPO. If the mask contains no initial priors
about task specific language, it will be eliminating the wrong actions—a better initial policy leads to
better RL performance downstream.


                                                                                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Human agreement with automated metrics. As human judgments can be noisy, we run additional
statistical analysis such as measuring inter-annotator agreement, via Krippendorf’s alpha score,
and using a one-way ANOVA followed by a post-hoc Tukey HSD test to measure if differences in
means of average scores between pairs of models are significant. We find that trends in our human
evaluations generally match those seen in the automated metrics for both task and naturalness metrics
(see Figures 2(c), 2(d) which summarize Appendix Tables 10,15,21,26, 35—Supervised+NLPO >
Supervised ≥ Supervised+PPO > NLPO ≥ PPO > Zero-shot—with the exception of Supervised
outperforming Supervised+PPO on 2 out of 5 tasks when automated metrics would indicate that
Supervised+PPO outperforms Supervised on all of the tasks. We draw two conclusions from this:
(1) if the generated text is above a certain threshold of naturalness, the automated metrics usually
correlate with human judgements; (2) usually but not always as seen in the relative performance of
Supervised and Supervised+PPO, potentially indicating reward hacking behaviors undetected by
automated metrics but caught by human preference feedback.

5.2   P REFERENCE R EWARD L EARNING , S ELECTION , AND H ACKING

While the GRUE benchmark’s metric for each task is an average over several measures, the RL
models we trained optimized only a single metric independently. Thus, we can empirically investigate
which metric for which GRUE produces the best results. We observe that many possible single metric
rewards provide task performance gains over supervised methods (results shown in Fig. 3(a), 2(c) are
averaged across these reward functions) with the condition that the text is also coherent and natural.
Which constraints best prevent reward hacking? The reward function in Equation 1 balances a
task-specific reward with a KL constraint — models are penalized from straying too far from a base
LM in their pursuit of high reward (Table 3 and Appendix Table 5) clearly show that if KL constraints
are removed entirely, models reward hack). But which model works best as a base regularizing LM?
When the initial policy (i.e., the raw, pretrained model) has low performance on the task, the KL
penalty pushes the policy towards nonsense, e.g. on Commongen and ToTTo the trained policy learns
to simply repeat portions of the input (as seen in Tables B.4.5, B.6.4). This behavior is mitigated
if the base regularizing LM is the supervised model—the reward encourages the policy to balance
the task-specific reward and a more reasonable regularization term. Deriving KL penalties from
warm-started initial policies is critical for performance on such tasks.
PPO vs. NLPO. Figure 2 shows that NLPO generally outperforms PPO and supervised, especially
when applied after supervised training. We hypothesize that the primary reason for NLPO’s improved
performance and stability is because the masking policy provides an additional constraint for the
current policy. This constraint is not based on the initial untuned policy like the KL penalty but of
the policy from µ iterations ago and likely contains more task-relevant information learned during
RL training. Table 3 (and Appendix Table 8) shows how performance increases up to a point and
then decreases as p in top-p sampling is increased for the masking policy, relaxing the constraint by
eliminating less tokens at each step, implying that there is a balance to be found in how much the
model should be constrained during RL training.
Human Preference Reward Learning. To this point, our experiments have largely focused on
optimizing evaluation metrics that correlate with human judgments, e.g., METEOR. Here: we
additionally test how well preferences can be learned from direct human feedback. For this, we focus
on Commongen — a GRUE dataset well-suited for displaying differences due to human preferences.
First, we randomly select prompts from the Commongen train dataset and sample a single completion
from both the Supervised and Supervised+NLPO models. We then present the prompt and the two
completion candidates to 3 unique crowdworkers and ask them to select which one they prefer with
respect to commonsense/fluency for 417 unique pairs (Krippendorf α = .28). We use this data
to train a reward model, T5-11B Raffel et al. (2020), on the balanced binary classification task of
predicting which of the pair was preferred by a majority of 3 annotators, conditioned on the prompt
and completion. The resulting model achieved 69.5 test ROC AUC suggesting it indeed captures
average human preferences. Additional details on this process are found in Appendix B.4.4. We train
Supervised+RL with a METEOR-only reward as a baseline, and compare it to a reward function
that uses the fine-tuned T5-11B model. Finally, we rerun the same pairwise preference collection
procedure—this time sampling from Commongen test—with human participants to compare the
generations from a preference optimized RL policy to the previously best Supervised+NLPO policy.
Comparing the METEOR-only to the preference model, the generations produced by the human


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


feedback model are preferred in 682 cases, compared to the METEOR-only model which is preferred
in 587 cases (p < 0.01 the models are equally preferred). This implies that this pipeline of collecting
preferences, training a reward, and further tuning the policy improves alignment to human preferences.

5.3   DATA B UDGET: I MPROVE YOUR R EWARD OR G ATHER M ORE D EMONSTRATION ?

Given a fixed data collection budget, is it more efficient to gather feedback to improve a learned
reward function or to gather more expert demonstrations? We use the IMDB text continuation task as
a case study. In the IMDB task, a model is given a partial movie review as a prompt, and is asked to
continue it as positively as possible (even if the prompt was negative). The original dataset consists of
movie reviews and sentiment labels of positive, negative, or neutral. A DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019)
classifier is trained on these labels and used to provide sentiment scores on how positive a given piece
of text is, which serves as the task reward. The trade-off is between gathering more: 1) sentiment
labels (improving the reward); or 2) positive sentiment reviews (improving supervised training).
We train a classifier on varying amounts of training data and evaluate on the held out test dataset—
finding as expected that more training data improves test accuracy and so results in a higher quality
reward. We then use each of these rewards of varying quality during RL training, and evaluate using
the same metric as GRUE (i.e., a classifier trained with the entire training set). As seen in Table 3,
we find that improving the reward quality improves LM performance as well. Further, we trained a
supervised model with at least as many samples used to train each of these reward classifiers. We find
that a learned reward function enables greater performance when used as a signal for an RL
method than a supervised method trained with 5 times more data. This implies that improving
reward models can be more data efficient than collection expert demonstrations for a task—and that’s
not accounting for the fact that assigning sentiment labels is likely a simpler task than writing full
demonstrations. Further details on this ablation are found in Appendix Table 7.

5.4   P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATIONS : W HICH I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS M ATTER M OST ?

Generation as a token-level MDP, not a bandit environment. Most recent works that tune LMs
using RL do so by calculating a reward for all the tokens in the sentence (Wu et al., 2021a; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022). This setting is equivalent to a bandit feedback environment where the
action space is the space of all possible generations for the task (Sutton & Barto, 2018). This type of
environment can be simulated within our RL formulation by setting the discount factor γ = 1. Table 3
(and Appendix Table 6) shows that this causes instability in training with respect to naturalness
in both PPO and NLPO for IMDB. Our standard setting is γ = 0.95 when calculating discounted
rewards-to-go in the token-level MDP formulation, which reduces the magnitude of the reward that is
applied to tokens selected at the beginning. The sentiment scores are approximately the same between
both settings but the naturalness of language in the bandit setting is significantly less—indicating
that discounting rewards with γ < 1 via a token-level MDP formulation is at least sometimes more
effective for language generation.
Dropout and Sampling. We found two other implementation details to be critical for stability of
RL training. The first is dropout, which in its standard form was found to cause instability in policy
gradient methods in continuous control settings by Hausknecht & Wagener (2022). We find a similar
effect when using dropout when RL training LMs as well, with training loss often diverging for
dropout > 0 in training. The second important detail, particularly affecting the machine translation
task, is sampling methods. We find that using the same sampling methods during exploration and
inference is critical to translating training performance to test performance–else the model exhibits
high train rewards but low test metrics.

6     C ONCLUSIONS
We’re hopeful that the GRUE benchmark and the RL4LMs library can push progress in aligning
language models to human preferences via RL methods by providing the community with a standard
means of comparing methods. Furthermore, we’re optimistic that, as the stability and consistency of
training improves, our methods provide a path towards iterative improvement of language technolo-
gies, with deployment, user feedback collection, and re-optimization enabling better user experiences
when interacting with generative models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We’d like to acknowledge the support of DARPA MCS program through NIWC Pacific (N66001-19-
2-4031), Google Cloud Compute, and the ReViz team at the Allen Institute for AI. KB is supported
by NSF under grant No. 2127309 to the Computing Research Association for the CIFellows Project.
Rajkumar is funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany and the state
of North-Rhine Westphalia as part of the Lamarr-Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial
Intelligence.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Nan Jiang, Sham M Kakade, and Wen Sun. Reinforcement learning: Theory and
  algorithms. CS Dept., UW Seattle, Seattle, WA, USA, Tech. Rep, pp. 10–4, 2019.

Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Language Learning in Interactive Environments. PhD thesis, Georgia
  Institute of Technology, 2021.

Prithviraj Ammanabrolu and Matthew Hausknecht. Graph constrained reinforcement learning for
  natural language action spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1x6w0EtwH.

Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Liwei Jiang, Maarten Sap, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Aligning
  to social norms and values in interactive narratives. In NAACL, 2022.

Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. Spice: Semantic propositional
  image caption evaluation. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 382–398. Springer,
  2016.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience
 replay. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
 R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran As-
 sociates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
 453fadbd8a1a3af50a9df4df899537b5-Paper.pdf.

Kushal Arora, Layla El Asri, Hareesh Bahuleyan, and Jackie Cheung. Why exposure bias matters:
 An imitation learning perspective of error accumulation in language generation. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp. 700–710, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.58. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.58.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu, Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau, Aaron
  Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An actor-critic algorithm for sequence prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.07086, 2016.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
  correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic
  evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summarization, pp. 65–72, 2005.

Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled sampling for sequence
  prediction with recurrent neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28,
  2015.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck,
  Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Aurélie
  Névéol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt Post, Raphael Rubino, Carolina Scarton, Lucia Specia,
  Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos Zampieri. Findings of the 2016 conference on machine
  translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task
  Papers, pp. 131–198, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/W16-2301. URL https://aclanthology.org/W16-2301.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

Kai-Wei Chang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, Hal Daumé III, and John Langford. Learning
  to search better than your teacher. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2058–
  2066. PMLR, 2015.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. In NeurIPS, 2021.

Ting-Rui Chiang and Yun-Nung Chen. Relating neural text degeneration to exposure bias. In
  Proceedings of the Fourth BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
  works for NLP, pp. 228–239, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.blackboxnlp-1.16. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.blackboxnlp-1.16.

Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, Zohar Aizenbud, and Omri Abend. On the weaknesses of reinforcement
  learning for neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.

Hal Daumé, John Langford, and Daniel Marcu. Search-based structured prediction. Machine learning,
  75(3):297–325, 2009.

Bhuwan Dhingra, Manaal Faruqui, Ankur Parikh, Ming-Wei Chang, Dipanjan Das, and William W
  Cohen. Handling divergent reference texts when evaluating table-to-text generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.01081, 2019.

Daniel Duckworth, Arvind Neelakantan, Ben Goodrich, Lukasz Kaiser, and Samy Bengio. Parallel
  scheduled sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04331, 2019.

Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Differentiable scheduled sampling for credit
  assignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06970, 2017.

Matthew Hausknecht and Nolan Wagener. Consistent dropout for policy gradient reinforcement
 learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11818, 2022.

Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Xingdi Yuan. Interactive
 fiction games: A colossal adventure. In Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05398.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa
  Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and comprehend. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, Antoine Bosselut, David Golub, and Yejin Choi. Learning
  to write with cooperative discriminators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06087, 2018.

Shengyi Huang and Santiago Ontañón. A closer look at invalid action masking in policy gradient
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14171, 2020.

Ferenc Huszár. How (not) to train your generative model: Scheduled sampling, likelihood, adversary?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05101, 2015.

Natasha Jaques, Judy Hanwen Shen, Asma Ghandeharioun, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza, Noah
  Jones, Shixiang Gu, and Rosalind Picard. Human-centric dialog training via offline reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 3985–4003, Online, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.327.

Wendell Johnson. Studies in language behavior: A program of research. Psychological Monographs,
 56(2):1–15, 1944.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Han-
  naneh Hajishirzi. UNIFIEDQA: Crossing format boundaries with a single QA system. In Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 1896–1907, Online, Novem-
  ber 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.171.

Samuel Kiegeland and Julia Kreutzer. Revisiting the weaknesses of reinforcement learning for neural
  machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1673–1681,
  Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.
  133.

Tomáš Kočiskỳ, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis,
  and Edward Grefenstette. The narrativeqa reading comprehension challenge. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:317–328, 2018.

Julia Kreutzer, Stefan Riezler, and Carolin Lawrence. Offline reinforcement learning from human
  feedback in real-world sequence-to-sequence tasks. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on
  Structured Prediction for NLP (SPNLP 2021), pp. 37–43, Online, August 2021. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.spnlp-1.4. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2021.spnlp-1.4.

Philippe Laban, Tobias Schnabel, Paul N. Bennett, and Marti A. Hearst. SummaC: Re-Visiting NLI-
  based Models for Inconsistency Detection in Summarization. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 10:163–177, 02 2022. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00453.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00453.

Gerasimos Lampouras and Andreas Vlachos. Imitation learning for language generation from
  unaligned data. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computa-
  tional Linguistics: Technical Papers, pp. 1101–1112. The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee,
  2016.

Rémi Leblond, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Anton Osokin, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Searnn: Training
  rnns with global-local losses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04499, 2017.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A diversity-promoting
  objective function for neural conversation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.03055, 2015.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Deep
  reinforcement learning for dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1192–1202, Austin, Texas, Novem-
  ber 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1127. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D16-1127.

Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang Cao, and Shuzi Niu. DailyDialog: A manually
  labelled multi-turn dialogue dataset. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on
  Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 986–995, Taipei, Taiwan, November
  2017. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/I17-1099.

Bill Yuchen Lin, Wangchunshu Zhou, Ming Shen, Pei Zhou, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and
  Xiang Ren. CommonGen: A constrained text generation challenge for generative commonsense
  reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp.
  1823–1840, Online, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  findings-emnlp.165.

Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.

Siqi Liu, Zhenhai Zhu, Ning Ye, Sergio Guadarrama, and Kevin Murphy. Improved image captioning
  via policy gradient optimization of spider. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 873–881, 2017.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.        arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Liwei Jiang, Jack Hessel, Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj Am-
  manabrolu, and Yejin Choi. Quark: Controllable text generation with reinforced unlearning. arXiv
  e-prints, pp. arXiv–2205, 2022.
Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts.
  Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the
  association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 142–150, 2011.
Alice Martin, Guillaume Quispe, Charles Ollion, Sylvain Le Corff, Florian Strub, and Olivier Pietquin.
  Learning natural language generation with truncated reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
  2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 12–37, 2022.
Tsvetomila Mihaylova and André FT Martins. Scheduled sampling for transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.07651, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Karthik Narasimhan, Tejas D. Kulkarni, and Regina Barzilay. Language understanding for text-
  based games using deep reinforcement learning. In EMNLP, pp. 1–11, 2015. URL http:
 //aclweb.org/anthology/D/D15/D15-1001.pdf.
Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neural
  machine translation with simulated human feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1464–1474, Copenhagen, Denmark,
  September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1153. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D17-1153.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang and He He. Text generation by learning from demonstrations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=RovX-uQ1Hua.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Ankur Parikh, Xuezhi Wang, Sebastian Gehrmann, Manaal Faruqui, Bhuwan Dhingra, Diyi Yang, and
  Dipanjan Das. ToTTo: A controlled table-to-text generation dataset. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1173–1186.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.89.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive
  summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304, 2017.
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08771, 2018.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
  Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
  text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.

Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 2021.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. Sequence level training
 with recurrent neural networks. In ICLR, 2016.

Steven J Rennie, Etienne Marcheret, Youssef Mroueh, Jerret Ross, and Vaibhava Goel. Self-critical
  sequence training for image captioning. In CVPR, 2017.

Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
  prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference
  on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
  2011.

Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015a.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438,
  2015b.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur Parikh. BLEURT: Learning robust metrics for text
  generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 7881–7892, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.704. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.
  acl-main.704.

Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical
  journal, 27(3):379–423, 1948.

Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for natural
  language generation with implicit language q learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11871, 2022.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.

Marilyn Strathern. ‘improving ratings’: audit in the british university system. European review, 5(3):
 305–321, 1997.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Andrew Bagnell, and Steven Wu. Of moments and matching:
 A game-theoretic framework for closing the imitation gap. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10022–10032. PMLR, 2021.

Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image
  description evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4566–4575, 2015.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.
RJ Willianms. Toward a theory of reinforcement-learning connectionist systems. Technical Report
  NU-CCS-88-3, Northeastern University, 1988.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in
  natural language processing: system demonstrations, pp. 38–45, 2020.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Christiano.
   Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862, 2021a.
Qingyang Wu, Lei Li, and Zhou Yu. Textgail: Generative adversarial imitation learning for text
  generation. In The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, pp. online.
  AAAI Press, 2021b.
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al. Google’s neural machine translation sys-
  tem: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144,
  2016.
Tom Zahavy, Matan Haroush, Nadav Merlis, Daniel J Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Learn what not
  to learn: Action elimination with deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
  text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
Li Zhou, Kevin Small, Oleg Rokhlenko, and Charles Elkan. End-to-end offline goal-oriented dialog
  policy learning via policy gradient. CoRR, abs/1712.02838, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1712.02838.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                      1

2   Related Work                                                                                      3

3   RL4LMs: A Library for Training LMs with RL                                                        3
    3.1   Environments: Generation as a Token-level MDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           3
    3.2   Reward Functions and Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         4
    3.3   On-policy Actor-critic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       4

4   NLPO: Natural Language Policy Optimization                                                        4

5   GRUE (General Reinforced-language Understanding Eval)                                             5
    5.1   Results on GRUE: Which Algorithm Should be Used to Learn Preferences? . . . .               6
    5.2   Preference Reward Learning, Selection, and Hacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
    5.3   Data Budget: Improve your Reward or Gather More Demonstration? . . . . . . . .              9
    5.4   Practical Considerations: Which Implementation Details Matter Most? . . . . . . .           9

6   Conclusions                                                                                       9

7   Acknowledgements                                                                                 10

A On-policy Algorithm Implementation Details                                                         18
    A.1 PPO Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
    A.2 NLPO Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18

B Experimental Details                                                                               19
    B.1 Crowdworking Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
    B.2 GRUE Experiment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
    B.3 IMDB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
          B.3.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
          B.3.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
          B.3.3    Human Participant Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23
          B.3.4    Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
    B.4 CommonGen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          28
          B.4.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
          B.4.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29
          B.4.3    Human Participant Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     32
          B.4.4    Human Preference Learning Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32
          B.4.5    Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    33
    B.5 CNN Daily Mail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         35


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        B.5.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
        B.5.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    35
        B.5.3    Human Participant Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     39
        B.5.4    Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
   B.6 ToTTo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     43
        B.6.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
        B.6.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43
        B.6.3    Human Participant Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47
        B.6.4    Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    48
   B.7 Narrative QA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      49
        B.7.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
        B.7.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
        B.7.3    Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51
   B.8 Machine Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       53
        B.8.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
        B.8.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    53
        B.8.3    Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
   B.9 Daily Dialog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    57
        B.9.1    Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
        B.9.2    Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    59
        B.9.3    Human Participant Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     59
        B.9.4    Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    60


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     O N - POLICY A LGORITHM I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1   PPO D ETAILS

Given discussion and equations in Section 3.3, we further note that we follow (Ziegler et al., 2019)
and dynamically adapt the KL coefficient β during training where,

                                KL (π(at |st )||π0 (at |st )) − KLtarget
                    et = clip                                            , −0.2, 0.2             (2)
                                               KLtarget
                  βt+1 = βt (1 + Kβ et )                                                         (3)

where KLtarget is user-specified KL divergence between initial model h and current policy π and Kβ
is rate of update which we generally set to 0.2 in our experiments.
To increase stability during training, we further use Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schul-
man et al., 2015b) and define the advantage estimator Â(sn , an ) based on the Temporal Difference
residual as:
                                  δt = r(st , at ) + Vϕ (st+1 ) − Vϕ (st ).                      (4)
                                                       X∞
                                        Â(sn , an ) =     λt δn+t ,                             (5)
                                                  t=0
where λ provides the trade-off between bias and variance.

A.2   NLPO D ETAILS

NLPO learns to mask irrelevant language by maintaining a masking policy πψ : the masking
                                                                                     P    policy is
a copy of the current policy (πθ ), but is updated only every µ steps. Given Z(πθ ) = a∈V πθ0 (a|s)
the normalization value of the sum of probabilities of all action a ∈ A given a particular State
s ∈ S, let the parameterized top-p vocabulary Vπpθ ⊂ V be the subset of the vocab, consisting
of the top-p highest probability vocabulary tokens with respect to πθ . Formally, let Z p be the
normalization value for thePparameterized top-p vocabulary, can be defined as the subset of tokens
that maximizes Z p (πθ ) = a∈Vπk πθ (a|s). Then optimizing a policy according to the parameterized
                                    θ
top-p vocabulary can be defined as:

                                         πθ (·|s)/Z p (πθ ) if a ∈ Vπpθ and Z(πθ )
                     πψ (·|s, πθ ) =                                                            (6)
                                         0                  otherwise.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

B.1     C ROWDWORKING D ETAILS

Qualification round We ran a qualification round using the IMDB task. We opened the qualification
around to users from {AU, CA, NZ, GB, US} with 5K prior approved HITs and a minimum acceptance
rate of 97% on their previous HITs. We gathered judgments over 600 generations from 3 annotators
per generation. One of the authors of this paper also completed 17 random HITs to serve as a proxy
for “ground truth." After gathering these annotations, we selected workers who: 1) didn’t significantly
disagree with other annotators on the same instance more than 20% of the time; 2) who completed at
least 5 HITs; 3) who didn’t disagree with the author annotator on the 17 HITs by more than 1 point;
and 4) (likely) spent a reasonable amount of time reading the instructions/examples provided. In the
end, 56 annotators were qualified. Additional per-task details are provided in the per-task sections of
the Appendix.


Compensation details As per Amazon Mechanical Turk policy, annotators were compensated on
a per-HIT basis. In addition, we used a timing script to estimate hourly wages to ensure our target
of $15/hr was met. In cases where this minimum hourly rate was not met, we manually assigned
bonuses.


B.2     GRUE E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We benchmark 5 training algorithms on 6 tasks (see Table 1) using either an encoder model (eg.
GPT-2) or encoder-decoder model (eg. T5). We train policies using PPO, NLPO with variations of
whether supervised pre-training is applied before RL fine-tuning and compare against supervised
policy. The choice of LM is based on the type of task. For IMDB text continuation, we use GPT-2
and T5 for rest of the tasks. We use two separate LM models as actor and critics networks (i.e. no
shared layers) in which the critic network has an additional linear layer mapping last token’s hidden
representation to a scalar value. We use AdamW optimizer Loshchilov & Hutter (2017) with fixed
learning rate and no scheduling.


                NarrativeQA                                                                                         NarrativeQA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Supervised
                                                                                 IMDB                                                                                                 IMDB          PPO
                                    0.31                                                                                                0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Supervised+PPO
                                                                        0.61                                                                                                 0.98
                                      0.25                                                                                                0.92                                                      NLPO
      WMT16                                                     0.59                                     WMT16                                                       0.97                           Supervised+NLPO
                                          0.19                                                                                              0.89
               0.5                                                                                                 0.89
                                                         0.57                                                                                                 0.96
                      0.5                                                                                                 0.89
                             0.49          0.13                                                                                  0.88           0.86
                                                  0.55                                                                                                 0.95
                                    0.49                                                                                                0.88
                                                     0.32        0.35          0.39   0.43   Commongen                                                    0.19        0.22          0.25   0.28   Commongen
                                    0.3                                                                                                 0.04
                             0.36                 0.31                                                                           0.08                  0.85
                                           0.37                                                                                                 0.64
                      0.42                                                                                                0.13
                                                         0.33                                                                                                 0.86
               0.48                                                                                                0.17
                                          0.38                                                                                              0.67
                                                                0.34                                                                                                 0.86
       ToTTo                          0.39
                                                                                                          ToTTo                           0.7
                                                                        0.35                                                                                                 0.87

                                    0.4                                                                                                 0.72
                                                                                 DailyDialog                                                                                          DailyDialog
                             CNN                                                                                                 CNN
                 (a) Automated Task Metrics                                                                       (b) Automated Naturalness Metrics

Figure 3: Summarized results via automated metrics across all 7 GRUE tasks for each of the 5
algorithms we consider, and human participant studies for the 5 tasks suitable for human studies. We
break up the metrics into task-specific, e.g. average positive sentiment for IMDB task, and naturalness
metrics, such as perplexity and human perceived coherence for the human rated metrics. This plot
differs from Figure 2 as this one averages over over multiple reward functions per each task.


                                                                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Model Params                   value
                             supervised         batch size: 64
                                                epochs: 10
                                                learning rate: 0.00001
                             ppo                steps per update: 1280
                                                total number of steps: 64000
                                                batch size: 64
                                                epochs per update: 5
                                                learning rate: 0.000001
                                                discount factor: 0.99
                                                gae lambda: 0.95
                                                clip ratio: 0.2
                                                value function coeff: 0.5
                             nlpo               steps per update: 1280
                                                total number of steps: 64000
                                                batch size: 64
                                                epochs per update: 5
                                                learning rate: 0.000001
                                                discount factor: 0.99
                                                gae lambda: 0.95
                                                clip ratio: 0.2
                                                top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                target update iterations: 5
                             decoding           sampling: true
                                                top k: 50
                                                min length: 48
                                                max new tokens: 48
                             tokenizer          padding side: left
                                                truncation side: left
                                                max length: 64

   Table 4: IMDB Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings


B.3     IMDB

B.3.1    S ETUP
We consider IMDB dataset for the task of generating text with positive sentiment. The dataset consists
of 25k training, 5k validation and 5k test examples of movie review text with sentiment labels of
positive and negative. The input to the model is a partial movie review text (upto 64 tokens) that
needs to be completed (generating 48 tokens) by the model with a positive sentiment while retaining
fluency. For RL methods, we use a sentiment classifier Sanh et al. (2019) that is trained on pairs of
text and labels as a reward model which provides sentiment scores indicating how positive a given
piece of text is. For supervised Seq2Seq baselines, we consider only the examples with positive labels.
We chose GPT-2 as LM for this task as it is more suited for text continuation than encoder-decoder
LMs (eg. T5). We use top-k sampling with K = 50 as the decoding method and for fair comparison,
we keep this setting for all methods. For PPO and NLPO models, we train for 64k steps in total and
update policy and value networks every 1280 steps with a mini-batch size of 64 and epochs of 5 per
update. We apply adaptive KL controllers with different target KLs of 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, inf with an
initial KL co-efficient of β = 0.1. Table 4 provides an in-depth summary of all hyperparameters and
other implementation details.

B.3.2    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Target KL ablation Fig 4 shows learning curves for PPO and NLPO in terms of episodic training
reward, corpus level sentiment scores and perplexity scores on validation set averaged for 5 random
seeds. It is seen that higher target KL of 0.1 is desired to achieve higher rewards but results in drifting


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          0.85 alg/kl_div/target_kl                                                                      0.90 alg/kl_div/target_kl                                                               44 alg/kl_div/target_kl


                                                                                     semantic/learned_automodel_metric
                          0.80
                                        0.02                                                                                           0.02                                                                                  0.02
                                        0.05                                                                             0.85          0.05                                                                                  0.05


                                                                                                                                                                                    fluency_metrics/perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42
                          0.75          0.1                                                                              0.80          0.1                                                                                   0.1

    rollout_info/ep_rew
                                        None                                                                                           None                                                                      40          None
                          0.70                                                                                           0.75
                          0.65                                                                                           0.70                                                                                    38
                          0.60                                                                                           0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 36
                          0.55                                                                                           0.60
                          0.50                                                                                           0.55                                                                                    34
                          0.45                                                                                           0.50
                                 0      10000    20000      30000    40000   50000                                              0        10          20           30   40      50                                     0         10         20           30    40      50
                                                         steps                                                                                            epoch                                                                                 epoch

                      (a) PPO Episodic total reward                                            (b) PPO Val avg sentiment score                                                                                            (c) PPO Val perplexity

                          0.85                                                                                           0.90                                                                                    44
                               alg/kl_div/target_kl                                                                           alg/kl_div/target_kl                                                                  alg/kl_div/target_kl


                                                                                     semantic/learned_automodel_metric
                          0.80          0.02                                                                             0.85          0.02                                                                                  0.02
                                        0.05                                                                                           0.05                                                                      42          0.05


                                                                                                                                                                                    fluency_metrics/perplexity
                          0.75          0.1                                                                              0.80          0.1                                                                                   0.1
    rollout_info/ep_rew


                                        None                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                       None                                                                      40          None
                          0.70
                          0.65                                                                                           0.70                                                                                    38
                                                                                                                         0.65
                          0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 36
                                                                                                                         0.60
                          0.55
                                                                                                                         0.55                                                                                    34
                          0.50
                                                                                                                         0.50
                                 0      10000    20000      30000    40000   50000                                              0        10          20           30   40      50                                     0         10         20           30    40      50
                                                         steps                                                                                            epoch                                                                                 epoch

            (d) NLPO Episodic total reward (e) NLPO Val avg sentiment score                                                                                                                                           (f) NLPO Val perplexity

Figure 4: Learning Curves: Averaged learning curves over 5 different runs by varying target
KL, shaded regions indicate one standard deviation. (a) shows the rollout episodic total reward
during training (b) shows evolution of sentiment scores on the validation split (c) shows evolution of
perplexity on the validation split. From (a) and (b), it is seen that higher target KL (0.1) is desired to
achieve higher rewards. However, this setting drifts away from the original LM too much and loses
fluency. Therefore a lower target KL (0.02 or 0.05) is required to keep the model closer to original
LM. Similar trends hold for NLPO but when compared to PPO, it retains lower perplexities and is
more stable even with higher KL targets


Target-KL                            Semantic and Fluency Metrics                                                                                                      Diversity Metrics
                                 Sentiment Score ↑           Perplexity ↓       MSTTR                                               Distinct1              Distinct2         H1                                            H2               Unique1            Unique2
Zero-Shot                            0.489 ± 0.006         32.171 ± 0.137    0.682 ± 0.001                                      0.042 ± 0.001         0.294 ± 0.001     8.656 ± 0.004                             13.716 ± 0.003       5063 ± 14.832         47620 ± 238
Supervised                           0.539 ± 0.004         35.472 ± 0.074    0.682 ± 0.001                                      0.047 ± 0.001         0.312 ± 0.002     8.755 ± 0.012                             13.806 ± 0.016         5601 ± 57           51151 ± 345
 PPO
  0.02                               0.546 ± 0.022         33.127 ± 0.092    0.680 ± 0.003                                      0.044 ± 0.001         0.297 ± 0.004     8.665 ± 0.029                             13.685 ± 0.076           5332 ± 184        48380 ± 733
  0.05                               0.594 ± 0.022         33.765 ± 0.367    0.671 ± 0.005                                      0.043 ± 0.001         0.286 ± 0.009     8.588 ± 0.066                             13.519 ± 0.103           5171 ± 190        46336 ± 1872
   0.1                               0.602 ± 0.012         33.816 ± 0.233    0.664 ± 0.007                                      0.042 ± 0.001         0.278 ± 0.005     8.529 ± 0.037                             13.366 ± 0.119           5108 ± 204         45158 ± 961
   inf                               0.838 ± 0.061         41.897 ± 1.806    0.577 ± 0.059                                      0.034 ± 0.003         0.197 ± 0.036     7.737 ± 0.514                             11.866 ± 0.993           4214 ± 260        31181± 5524
 PPO+supervised
   0.1       0.626 ± 0.014                                 35.049 ± 0.347    0.668 ± 0.004                                      0.048 ± 0.002         0.307 ± 0.008     8.704 ± 0.053                             13.656 ± 0.066           5757 ± 324        50522 ± 1514
   inf       0.796 ± 0.004                                 42.916 ± 1.716    0.617 ± 0.017                                      0.038 ± 0.003         0.233 ± 0.017     8.149 ± 0.183                             12.733 ± 0.316           4563 ± 327        37040 ± 2507
 NLPO
  0.02                               0.564 ± 0.043         33.477 ± 0.578    0.679 ± 0.002                                      0.043 ± 0.001         0.294 ± 0.001     8.649 ± 0.007                             13.688 ± 0.04            5232 ± 96         47732 ± 184
  0.05                               0.582 ± 0.037         33.470 ± 0.453    0.675 ± 0.003                                      0.043 ± 0.001         0.293 ± 0.004      8.63 ± 0.033                             13.656 ± 0.085           5200 ± 101        47484 ± 822
   0.1                               0.611 ± 0.023         33.832 ± 0.283    0.670 ± 0.002                                      0.043 ± 0.002         0.286 ± 0.006     8.602 ± 0.049                             13.53 ± 0.076            5179 ± 196        46294 ± 1072
   inf                               0.858 ± 0.029         41.429 ± 1.825    0.575 ± 0.048                                      0.035 ± 0.005         0.201 ± 0.028     7.755 ± 0.379                             11.862 ± 0.808           4389 ± 609        31714 ± 4500
 NLPO+supervised
   0.1      0.620 ± 0.014                                  34.816 ± 0.340    0.672 ± 0.006                                      0.048 ± 0.002         0.31 ± 0.012      8.725 ± 0.09                              13.709 ± 0.174           5589 ± 140        50734 ± 1903
   inf      0.777 ± 0.042                                  41.035 ± 0.601    0.636 ± 0.023                                      0.043 ± 0.005         0.265 ± 0.034     8.373 ± 0.269                             12.947 ± 0.359           5173 ± 589        43342 ± 6828



Table 5: Target KL Ablations: Mean and standard deviations over 5 random seeds is reported for
sentiment scores along with fluency and diversity metrics on validation set. It is seen from perplexity
scores that a lower target KL constraint is desired to keep the model closer to the original model. On
the otherhand, a higher target KL yields higher sentiment scores at the cost of fluency. inf KL penalty
(target KL of inf), model simply learns to generate positive phrases (eg: "I highly recommend this
movie to all!", "worth watching") regardless of the context. NLPO achieves better sentiment and
perplexity scores than PPO.



away from pre-trained LM and loses fluency. Therefore, a lower target KL (0.02 or 0.05) is required
to keep the LM closer to original LM. This is also seen in Table 5 where we presented a comparative
analysis of final performance of all models.


                                                                                                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Training data size ablation We vary the amount of data used to train the reward classifier and the
supervised baseline model to understand whether it is more efficient to gather data to improve reward
model or to gather expert demonstrations for supervised learning. As observed in Table 7, improving
the quality of reward function increases the performance on the overall task better than training with
more data for supervised training, indicating that improving reward models is efficient than collect
expert demonstrations for supervised training from a data efficiency perspective.

Discount factor ablation To understand the effect of discounted vs undiscounted (bandit) envi-
ronments, we report sentiment and perplexity scores for different values of discount factor (0.5,
0.95 and 1.0) in Table 6 and observe that using a bandit environment (discount factor of 1.0) results
in performance loss in the case of NLPO and reward hacking in the case of PPO, indicating that
discounted setting (with 0.95) is desired.


NLPO params                        Table. 8 shows ablation on different hyperparameters in NLPO algorithm.

Gamma            Semantic and Fluency Metrics                                                                 Diversity Metrics
               Sentiment Score ↑      Perplexity ↓         MSTTR            Distinct1           Distinct2            H1                  H2             Unique1          Unique2
Zero-Shot       0.489 ± 0.006       32.371 ± 0.137       0.682 ± 0.001   0.042 ± 0.001      0.294 ± 0.001       8.656 ± 0.004     13.716 ± 0.003      5063 ± 14.832    47620 ± 238
 PPO
   0.5          0.511 ± 0.023        35.945 ± 0.92       0.69 ± 0.001    0.044 ± 0.002      0.304 ± 0.007       8.726 ± 0.041     13.793 ± 0.055       5304 ± 285      49668± 1496
  0.95          0.605 ± 0.023       33.497 ± 0.447       0.666 ± 0.013   0.043 ± 0.002      0.287 ± 0.008       8.575 ± 0.073     13.484 ± 0.244       5230 ± 363      46483 ± 1318
   1.0           0.651 ± 0.05       41.035 ± 2.885       0.691 ± 0.017   0.042 ± 0.004      0.295 ± 0.031       8.697 ± 0.237     13.563 ± 0.396       5127 ± 460      48319 ± 5650
 NLPO
   0.5           0.49 ± 0.01        37.279 ± 5.137        0.688 ± 0.01   0.045 ± 0.002      0.312 ± 0.016       8.746 ± 0.113      13.873 ± 0.25       5395 ± 192      50828 ± 2506
  0.95          0.637 ± 0.013       32.667 ± 0.631       0.677 ± 0.014   0.044 ± 0.002      0.288 ± 0.010       8.588 ± 0.100     13.484 ± 0.236       5205 ± 189      46344 ± 2688
   1.0          0.624 ± 0.039        43.72 ± 2.475       0.662 ± 0.019    0.05 ± 0.007       0.3 ± 0.038        8.624 ± 0.277     13.360 ± 0.537       6337 ± 921      49441 ± 6520


Table 6: Evaluation of GPT2 with different algorithms on IMDB sentiment text continuation
task, discount factor ablations: Mean and standard deviations over 5 random seeds is reported
for sentiment scores along with fluency and diversity metrics. This table measures performance
differences for the discount factor. We note that most NLP approaches using RL follow the style
of Li et al. (2016); Wu et al. (2021a) and use a discount factor of 1. This is equivalent to reducing
the generation MDP to a bandit feedback environment and causes performance loss (in the case of
NLPO) and reward hacking and training instability (in the case of PPO).


Perc Data (size)      Semantic and Fluency Metrics                                                               Diversity Metrics
                    Sentiment Score ↑     Perplexity ↓         MSTTR           Distinct1          Distinct2           H1                  H2             Unique1         Unique2
   Zero-Shot          0.489 ± 0.006     32.371 ± 0.137      0.682 ± 0.001   0.042 ± 0.001       0.294 ± 0.001    8.656 ± 0.004       13.716 ± 0.003    5063 ± 14.832    47620 ± 238
 Supervised
    0.0 (0k)          0.489 ± 0.006     32.371 ± 0.137      0.682 ± 0.001   0.042 ± 0.001       0.294 ± 0.001    8.656 ± 0.004    13.716 ± 0.003         5063 ± 14      47620 ± 238
    0.1 (1k)          0.531 ± 0.005     34.846 ± 0.123      0.685 ± 0.001   0.045 ± 0.001       0.313 ± 0.004    8.775 ± 0.023     13.854 ± 0.032        5215 ± 62      51125 ± 685
    0.5 (5k)          0.536 ± 0.006     35.008 ± 0.229      0.684 ± 0.001   0.047 ± 0.000       0.314 ± 0.002    8.764 ± 0.010    13.837 ± 0.0178        5489 ± 44      51284 ± 576
   1.0 (10k)          0.539 ± 0.004     35.472 ± 0.074      0.682 ± 0.001   0.047 ± 0.001       0.312 ± 0.002    8.755 ± 0.012     13.806 ± 0.016        5601 ± 57      51151 ± 345
 PPO
    0.0 (0k)           0.492 ± 0.01      33.57 ± 0.323       0.69 ± 0.02    0.047 ± 0.001       0.321 ± 0.015    8.816 ± 0.149       13.866 ± 0.36      5629 ± 240     52911 ± 1786
    0.1 (2k)          0.598 ± 0.017     35.929 ± 1.397      0.698 ± 0.009   0.051 ± 0.003       0.339 ± 0.012    8.968 ± 0.083       14.013 ± 0.158     6173 ± 360     55918 ± 2641
   0.5 (10k)          0.593 ± 0.026     35.95 ± 2.177       0.666 ± 0.073   0.049 ± 0.003       0.314 ± 0.046    8.635 ± 0.634       13.432 ± 1.173     5882 ± 356     51403 ± 9297
   1.0 (20k)          0.605 ± 0.023     33.497 ± 0.447      0.666 ± 0.013   0.043 ± 0.002       0.287 ± 0.008    8.575 ± 0.073       13.484 ± 0.244     5230 ± 363     46483 ± 1318
 NLPO
    0.0 (0k)           0.487 ± 0.01     32.572 ± 0.165      0.685 ± 0.003   0.043 ± 0.001       0.299 ± 0.003    8.691 ± 0.023       13.787 ± 0.034     5126 ± 177      48475 ± 491
    0.1 (2k)          0.599 ± 0.007     33.536 ± 0.378       0.67 ± 0.01    0.043 ± 0.001       0.289 ± 0.009    8.608 ± 0.061       13.576 ± 0.192     5125 ± 220     46755 ± 1449
   0.5 (10k)          0.617 ± 0.021     33.409 ± 0.354      0.668 ± 0.005   0.041 ± 0.001       0.281 ± 0.006    8.552 ± 0.044       13.533 ± 0.091     4926 ± 183     45256 ± 1022
   1.0 (20k)          0.637 ± 0.013     32.667 ± 0.631      0.677 ± 0.014   0.044 ± 0.002       0.288 ± 0.010    8.588 ± 0.100       13.484 ± 0.236     5205 ± 189     46344 ± 2688


Table 7: Evaluation of GPT2 with different algorithms on IMDB sentiment text continuation
task, data budget ablations: Mean and standard deviations over 5 random seeds is reported
for sentiment scores along with fluency and diversity metrics. This table measures performance
differences as a function of the fraction of the dataset that has been used. In the case of the RL
approaches, this measures how much data is used to train the reward classifier, and for the supervised
method it directly measures fraction of positive reviews used for training. We note that using even a
small fraction of data to train a reward classifier proves to be effective in terms of downstream task
performance while this is not true for supervised approaches. This lends evidence to the hypothesis
that adding expending data budget on a reward classifier is more effective than adding more gold
label expert demonstrations.



                                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hyperparams       Semantic and Fluency Metrics                                                       Diversity Metrics
                Sentiment Score ↑    Perplexity ↓      MSTTR           Distinct1       Distinct2            H1                H2           Unique1       Unique2
 Target Update Iterations µ
      1            0.594 ± 0.018    32.671 ± 0.201   0.669 ± 0.008   0.042 ± 0.002   0.284 ± 0.007     8.575 ± 0.064     13.503 ± 0.181   4986 ± 265   45916± 1168
     10            0.622 ± 0.014    32.729 ± 0.567   0.659 ± 0.019   0.042 ± 0.002   0.274 ± 0.007     8.489 ± 0.106      13.31 ± 0.272   5138 ± 385   43989 ± 1120
     20            0.637 ± 0.013    32.667 ± 0.631   0.677 ± 0.014   0.044 ± 0.002   0.288 ± 0.010     8.588 ± 0.100     13.484 ± 0.236   5205 ± 189   46344 ± 2688
     50            0.603 ± 0.015    33.397 ± 0.325    0.67 ± 0.006   0.043 ± 0.001   0.287 ± 0.004     8.605 ± 0.041     13.54 ± 0.116    5228 ± 113    46418 ± 685
 Top-p mask
     0.1           0.579 ± 0.021    32.451 ± 0.243   0.67 ± 0.008    0.042 ± 0.001   0.283 ± 0.01      8.569 ± 0.084     13.515 ± 0.195   5018 ± 47    45760 ± 1579
     0.3           0.588 ± 0.019    32.451 ± 0.303   0.666 ± 0.007   0.043 ± 0.001   0.285 ± 0.004     8.568 ± 0.032     13.482 ± 0.172   5201 ± 247    46357± 539
     0.5            0.588 ± 0.01    32.447 ± 0.393   0.669 ± 0.001   0.044 ± 0.003   0.291 ± 0.008     8.614 ± 0.053      13.535 ± 0.06   5305± 384    47251 ± 1226
     0.7           0.619 ± 0.013    32.373 ± 0.329   0.663 ± 0.008   0.043 ± 0.001    0.28 ± 0.006     8.533 ± 0.043     13.366 ± 0.129   5186 ± 216   45149 ± 1452
     0.9           0.637 ± 0.013    32.667 ± 0.631   0.677 ± 0.014   0.044 ± 0.002   0.288 ± 0.010     8.588 ± 0.100     13.484 ± 0.236   5205 ± 189   46344 ± 2688


Table 8: Evaluation of GPT2 with different algorithms on IMDB sentiment text continuation
task, NLPO hyperparameter ablations: Mean and standard deviations over 5 random seeds is
reported for sentiment scores along with fluency and diversity metrics. This table shows results of
NLPO’s stability to the unique hyperparameters introduced in the algorithm - all other parameters
held constant from the best PPO model. The number of iterations after which the masking model
syncs with the policy and the top-p nucleus percentage for the mask model itself. We see that in
general, the higher the top-p mask percentage, the better the performance. For target update iterations,
performance is low if the mask model is not updated often enough or if it updated too often.

                                                                              Coherence                                      Sentiment
                    Algorithm                   Unique N
                                                                     Value      Alpha Skew                       Value         Alpha Skew
              NLPO with KL                                 27         3.49       0.196 3.497                      3.61            0.2 3.601
              NLPO without KL                              29         3.16        0.21 3.158                      4.41          0.158 4.403
              PPO without KL                               27         3.16        0.17 3.163                      4.36          0.196 4.363
              PPO with KL                                  29         3.46       0.124 3.462                      3.58          0.116 3.575
              Zero Shot                                    28          3.6       0.162 3.591                       3.1           0.13 3.097
              Supervised                                   29         3.51       0.192 3.512                      3.43            0.2 3.428
              Human                                        27         4.13       0.159 4.128                      3.01           0.31 3.017
              Supervised+PPO                               22         3.45       0.211 3.147                      3.64           0.21 3.161
              Supervised+NLPO                              22         3.48       0.181 3.226                      3.73           0.22 3.047

Table 9: Results of the human subject study showing the number of participants N, average Likert
scale value for coherence and sentiment, Krippendorf’s alpha showing inter-annotator agreement,
and Skew. For each model a total of 100 samples were drawn randomly from the test set and rated by
3 annotators each, resulting in 300 data points per algorithm.


B.3.3        H UMAN PARTICIPANT S TUDY
Figure 5 shows the IMDB instructions, example, and interface used both for the qualification round,
and then later, for the human evaluation experiments. Tables 9, 10 show averaged results, annotator
agreement, and the results of statistical significance tests to determine which models output better
generations when rated by humans.


                                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Figure 5: Instructions, example, and interface for the IMDB sentiment completion task.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    Coherence                 Sentiment
         Group 1             Group 2
                                             Diff (G2-G1) p-values     Diff (G2-G1) p-values
    PPO with KL         PPO without KL                -0.3    0.035            0.783     0.001
    PPO with KL         NLPO with KL                  0.03      0.9            0.027        0.9
    PPO with KL         NLPO without KL               -0.3    0.035            0.827     0.001
    PPO with KL         Supervised                    0.05      0.9            -0.15     0.591
    PPO with KL         Human                       0.667     0.001           -0.567     0.001
    PPO with KL         Zero Shot                   0.137     0.776           -0.483     0.001
    PPO without KL      NLPO with KL                  0.33    0.013           -0.757     0.001
    PPO without KL      NLPO without KL             0.001       0.9            0.043        0.9
    PPO without KL      Supervised                    0.35    0.006           -0.933     0.001
    PPO without KL      Human                       0.967     0.009            -1.35     0.001
    PPO without KL      Zero Shot                   0.437     0.001           -1.267     0.001
    NLPO with KL        NLPO without KL              -0.33    0.013               0.8    0.001
    NLPO with KL        Supervised                    0.02      0.9           -0.177     0.404
    NLPO with KL        Human                       0.637     0.001           -0.593     0.001
    NLPO with KL        Zero Shot                   0.107       0.9            -0.51     0.001
    NLPO without KL     Supervised                    0.35    0.006           -0.977     0.001
    NLPO without KL     Human                       0.967     0.001           -1.393     0.001
    NLPO without KL     Zero Shot                   0.437     0.001            -1.31     0.001
    Supervised          Human                       0.617     0.001           -0.417     0.001
    Supervised          Zero Shot                   0.087       0.9           -0.333    0.0027
    Human               Zero Shot                    -0.53    0.001            0.083        0.9
    Supervised+PPO      Supervised+NLPO               0.03      0.9             0.09     0.035
    Supervised+PPO      NLPO with KL                  0.04      0.9            -0.03        0.9
    Supervised+PPO      NLPO without KL              -0.29    0.001             0.77     0.001
    Supervised+PPO      PPO without KL               -0.29    0.006             0.72     0.001
    Supervised+PPO      PPO with KL                   0.01      0.9            -0.06     0.001
    Supervised+PPO      Zero Shot                     0.15    0.035            -0.54     0.001
    Supervised+PPO      Supervised                    0.06    0.001            -0.21     0.001
    Supervised+PPO      Human                         0.68    0.001            -0.63     0.001
    Supervised+NLPO     NLPO with KL                  0.01      0.9            -0.12     0.001
    Supervised+NLPO     NLPO without KL              -0.32    0.001             0.68     0.001
    Supervised+NLPO     PPO without KL               -0.32    0.035             0.63     0.001
    Supervised+NLPO     PPO with KL                  -0.02      0.9            -0.15     0.006
    Supervised+NLPO     Zero Shot                    -0.12    0.001            -0.63     0.001
    Supervised+NLPO     Supervised                    0.03      0.9              -0.3    0.001
    Supervised+NLPO     Human                         0.65    0.001            -0.72     0.006

Table 10: Results of an post-hoc Tukey HSD Test for difference in means between pairs of algorithms
(Group 2 - Group 1) and corresponding p-values. Individually statistically significant results are
bolded and are used to discuss results in the analysis. Overall p-values showing that there is a
significant difference in means between the models via a one-way ANOVA test are significant with
p ≪ 0.05 for both coherence and sentiment.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.3.4   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
We show sample generations from each of the algorithms for three randomly picked prompts below.
Sample 1
Prompt: A man and his wife are not getting along because of the wife’s jealousy and drinking
     problems. When the wife disappears, her sister begins a vigorous search involving the
Zero-Shot: husband’s sister, which leads several men to a remote cabin and then a boat. The
     wife and her husband then start to see the same things. Finally, a strange woman is
     driving out to her cabin and discovers the husband’s disappearance but
References: local police, state government, and a television crime show. What she finds out
     stuns the entire community. Good drama with lots of fine performances; based on a true
     story
PPO: police and the local public. At the end, the woman is killed and the wife is found naked
     and with a red head tattooed on her back. This is part of a special feature called"On the
      Road, Hidden" which was
PPO-no-KL: police and other local governments. Written by G. Scott Fitzgerald, who also stars
     in this production, "A Very Merry Christmas" is a wonderful family movie with a wonderful
      soundtrack and wonderful characters. It brings home the true beauty of small-
NLPO: mother while the brother goes under. After all, his sister, who was apparently kidnapped
      but who turns out to be a man, is no longer in her place. If a film that was made in the
      1950s
NLPO-no-KL: friends of the wife, and also the friend of the wife of the woman that is missing,
      and eventually he begins to find that she has gone to Germany and he has made a very
     good friend. There is a good scene between John and
Supervised: amily tree. The widower, now widowed, returns, the daughter, daughter is not
     pleased when his wife is mistaken for one of her sons, and the patriarch, then a wealthy
     man, falls victim to a jealous husband. The


Sample 2
Prompt: A very credible and unsettling movie portraying the effects of war on the general
     public, Shame gives us a chilling understanding oh Ingmar Bergman’s beliefs. The absence
     of color and sound (as in a soundtrack) helps to give the film a more realistic feeling.
     There is no soft or hard lighting or a variety of camera angles to give the story a
     charming or dramatic effect. Everything is very simply portrayed as it would be in
     reality. At times the storyline was confusing, but perhaps in order to give a sense of
     the characters’ frame of mind how they too do now know what is happening or why. The
     simplicity of the
Zero-Shot: camera work is at once apparent and fascinating in the manner in which it affects
     the way things are portrayed. In other films these two have been referred to from time to
      time in a form and manner more suited to the screen. The film shows
References: film made it somewhat boring, but I could understand how the director is trying
     not to glamorize the story and points. He depicted the harsh and unsettling events and
     effects of war. In the beginning the characters were introduced and shown as content with
      the lighter settings
PPO: characters relationships is so engrossing and the great and unique story presented by
     each pair of brothers and sisters creates a truly gripping and enjoyable experience. To
     put it simply, I strongly recommend to everyone who plays the role to buy this DVD!!!
PPO-no-KL: movie helps it to flow along in a believable way. Rating 4 out of 5 Great Movie! I
     highly recommend these movies! I highly recommend these movies! Rating 5 out of 5 Great
     Movie! I highly recommend these movies! Rating 10 of"
NLPO: novel makes it one of the first books I have read by a British actor. It is a fun way
     for someone who likes their books, like me, to sit through a novel. If you like to read
     novels, check it out.
NLPO-no-KL: setting makes the final product very enjoyable to watch. Highly recommended!! ~
     Michael Bowerman, SPSA Film Festival Host, SPSA, WA (December 17, 2006), 8/17/2006 Great
     photography, good acting,
Supervised: "Dakota Clan" and his sister, the two become friends with Ted Masters who soon
     finds the chance to fly back to their home land and go back to save his brother’s life
     and his family. The


Sample 3
Prompt: Shakespearean language is wild and rambling, saturated in multiple meanings, word play
      and metaphor. To be understood it must be wrangled and tamed by an actor with the
     strength and knowledge to do so. When an actor fails, the words pour forth in a torrent
     of incomprehensible words, but when he succeeds, the English language springs to life
     with an immediacy and vibrancy that takes your breath away. Al Pacino is one such actor,
     and here displays an incredible level of clarity and control that, were there any justice,

Zero-Shot: might still be seen in the world today. This movie, like "Vacation", is an effort
     at telling the tale of two families from different races. One is African but never grew
     up the other. One of them, a man
References: would sweep every award in the offering. He meets the challenge of presenting
     Shylock head on, and delivers an extraordinarily subtle and nuanced performance. It would
      be a crime if we never got the opportunity to see what he does with King Lear.<br /><br
     />The supporting cast
PPO: would have made him an instant-classic. This movie captures the spirit of childhood and
     has everyone in the world watching it. It’s a love story and it’s really heartbreaking.
     And at the same time, it’s a classic. It



                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


PPO-no-KL: will bring victory to the fight against hatred and extremism. Al Pacino is a very
     beautiful, well executed actor who brings an absolute intensity and sensibility to his
     portrayal of love and loyalty. A must see! Recommended! Also, an Excellent
NLPO: I would watch and enjoy. 7/10, Oscar Wilde is always a pleasure to see. A must see.
     Highly recommend. Highly recommend! One of my top ten films of all time. A must see!!
NLPO-no-KL: the whole film would have fallen to the same fate, just as it did just a couple
     hundred years ago. Don’t miss it. It’s a real classic. Highly Recommended. * outta five
     stars for it!
Supervised: his performance (so far) would seem mere shadow. He is truly in the middle of a
     movie, and this film is one of those films where he can be convincing in it (and his
     trademark acting, as you can see in the


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.4     C OMMON G EN

B.4.1    S ETUP

CommonGen (Lin et al., 2020) deals with task of generating coherent sentences describing an
input set of concepts (eg. "a man is throwing a frisbee"). For training RL methods, we consider
3 traditional lexical rewards namely Rouge-1, Rouge-avg (which is an average of Rouge-1, 2 and
L) and meteor. Additionally, we also train with task-specific rewards such as CIDEr (Vedantam
et al., 2015), SPICE (Anderson et al., 2016) and SPiDer (Liu et al., 2017) which is a just a linear
combination of both with equal weights. We chose T5-base as the base LM since it is well-suited
for structure to text tasks. We additionally note that concept set inputs are prefixed with "generate a
sentence with:" to encourage exploration.
During our initial experiments when fine-tuning directly on LM, we observed that policy learns to
repeat the prompted concepts in order to maximize rewards resulting in a well-known problem of
reward hacking. To mitigate this, we add a penalty score of −1 to final task reward if the n-grams
of prompt text overlaps with generated text. In contrast, when initialized with a supervised policy,
this problem is not seen and hence penalty score is not applied. We use beam search as the decoding
method during evaluation whereas for rollouts, we use top k sampling to favor exploration over
exploitation. Table 11 provides an in-depth summary of setting of hyperparameter values along with
other implementation details.


                           Model Params                            value
                           supervised                  batch size: 8
                                                       epochs: 4
                                                       learning rate: 0.00001
                                                       learning rate scheduler: cosine
                                                       weight decay: 0.01
                           ppo/ nlpo                   steps per update: 1280
                                                       total number of steps: 256000
                                                       batch size: 64
                                                       epochs per update: 5
                                                       learning rate: 0.000002
                                                       entropy coefficient: 0.01
                                                       initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                       target kl: 2.0
                                                       discount factor: 0.99
                                                       gae lambda: 0.95
                                                       clip ratio: 0.2
                                                       value function coeff: 0.5
                                                       top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                       target update iterations: 20
                           supervised+ ppo (or nlpo)   steps per update: 1280
                                                       total number of steps: 128000
                                                       batch size: 64
                                                       epochs per update: 5
                                                       learning rate: 0.000002
                                                       entropy coefficient: 0.01
                                                       initial kl coeff: 0.01
                                                       target kl: 1.0
                                                       discount factor: 0.99
                                                       gae lambda: 0.95
                                                       clip ratio: 0.2
                                                       value function coeff: 0.5
                                                       top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                       target update iterations: 20
                           decoding                    num beams: 5
                                                       min length: 5
                                                       max new tokens: 20
                           tokenizer                   padding side: left
                                                       max length: 20

Table 11: CommonGen Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings



                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.4.2       R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Tables 13, 12 presents our benchmarking results with 6 reward functions along with supervised
baseline performances on dev and test sets respectively. Our main finding is that warm-started initial
policies are crucial for learning to generate coherent sentences with common sense. Without warm-
start, policies suffer from reward hacking despite application of repetition penalty and task-specific
metrics such as CIDer etc. Further, we find that RL fine-tuned models obtain very high concept
coverage which is also seen in Table B.4.5. Supervised models often tend to miss few concepts in its
generation compared to RL methods.
  Tasks                         _                                                      Lexical and Semantic Metrics
                  Alg           LM   Reward function     Rouge-2         Rouge-L        Bleu (n=3)     Bleu (n=4)         Meteor           CIDEr           SPICE           Coverage

                Zero-Shot       T5                        0.016           0.264           0.029           0.006           0.203            6.200           0.115            91.070
                  PPO           T5      Rouge-1        0.085 ± 0.008   0.354 ± 0.004   0.161 ± 0.011   0.087 ± 0.009   0.235 ± 0.002   8.673 ± 0.234    0.157 ± 0.001   88.544 ± 2.36
                                T5     Rouge-Avg       0.093 ± 0.005   0.351 ± 0.001   0.169 ± 0.032   0.097 ± 0.017   0.224 ± 0.012   8.212 ± 1.329    0.159 ± 0.011   82.584 ± 2.569
                                T5      Meteor         0.091 ± 0.008   0.308 ± 0.007   0.166 ± 0.016   0.088 ± 0.013   0.220 ± 0.006   7.251 ± 0.453    0.161 ± 0.007   79.718 ± 2.267
                                T5       SPice         0.065 ± 0.003   0.302 ± 0.002   0.115 ± 0.063   0.067 ± 0.041   0.193 ± 0.014   6.571 ± 1.312    0.175 ± 0.011   69.340 ± 3.617
                                T5       CiDer         0.066 ± 0.003   0.304 ± 0.002   0.132 ± 0.057   0.074 ± 0.036   0.211 ± 0.009   6.877 ± 1.218    0.143 ± 0.017   80.114 ± 4.852
                                T5       SPider        0.117 ± 0.005   0.352 ± 0.007   0.224 ± 0.014   0.137 ± 0.011    0.226 ± 0.01   9.162 ± 0.539    0.186 ± 0.006   73.374 ± 6.073
                 NLPO           T5      Rouge-1        0.087 ± 0.002   0.339 ± 0.009   0.127 ± 0.048   0.069 ± 0.035   0.213 ± 0.002   6.962 ± 0.883    0.145 ± 0.022    80.89 ± 9.544
                                T5     Rouge-Avg       0.095 ± 0.001   0.338 ± 0.002    0.159 ± 0.02   0.093 ± 0.013   0.216 ± 0.009    7.55 ± 0.688    0.153 ± 0.008   77.944 ± 2.770
                                T5      Meteor         0.110 ± 0.005   0.332 ± 0.003   0.214 ± 0.007   0.124 ± 0.007   0.235 ± 0.004   8.669 ± 0.164    0.173 ± 0.002   82.007 ± 1.012
CommonGen                       T5       SPice         0.014 ± 0.006   0.242 ± 0.001   0.037 ± 0.011   0.018 ± 0.007   0.156 ± 0.007   4.685 ± 0.283    0.168 ± 0.008   56.998 ± 3.548
                                T5       CiDer         0.046 ± 0.001   0.241 ± 0.003   0.078 ± 0.028   0.043 ± 0.016   0.143 ± 0.018   3.964 ± 0.792    0.103 ± 0.012   49.606 ± 7.971
                                T5       SPider        0.060 ± 0.006   0.258 ± 0.001   0.090 ± 0.008   0.056 ± 0.005   0.151 ± 0.022   4.411 ± 0.837    0.123 ± 0.022   49.230 ± 10.468
               Supervised       T5                     0.215 ± 0.001   0.438 ± 0.001   0.444 ± 0.001   0.329 ± 0.001   0.321 ± 0.001   16.385 ± 0.046   0.299 ± 0.001   94.476 ± 0.172
            Supervised + PPO    T5      Rouge-1        0.232 ± 0.002   0.453 ± 0.002   0.454 ± 0.006   0.338 ± 0.006   0.320 ± 0.002   16.233 ± 0.159   0.288 ± 0.004   96.412 ± 0.424
                                T5     Rouge-Avg       0.230 ± 0.001   0.450 ± 0.001   0.448 ± 0.005   0.334 ± 0.005   0.319 ± 0.001   16.069 ± 0.167   0.287 ± 0.003   96.116 ± 0.679
                                T5      Meteor         0.234 ± 0.002   0.450 ± 0.003   0.462 ± 0.007   0.342 ± 0.007   0.327 ± 0.001   16.797 ± 0.152   0.295 ± 0.001   97.690 ± 0.371
                                T5       SPice         0.227 ± 0.004   0.447 ± 0.003   0.450 ± 0.007   0.336 ± 0.008   0.319 ± 0.002   16.208 ± 0.249   0.288 ± 0.003    96.492 ± 0.29
                                T5       CiDer         0.224 ± 0.003   0.446 ± 0.003   0.427 ± 0.012    0.309 ± 0.01   0.316 ± 0.004   15.497 ± 0.428   0.283 ± 0.004   96.344 ± 0.547
                                T5       SPider        0.226 ± 0.003   0.448 ± 0.002   0.436 ± 0.005   0.319 ± 0.004   0.317 ± 0.003   15.678 ± 0.192   0.281 ± 0.003   96.154 ± 0.426
            Supervised + NLPO   T5      Rouge-1        0.229 ± 0.002   0.450 ± 0.001   0.454 ± 0.005   0.338 ± 0.004   0.320 ± 0.003   16.206 ± 0.175   0.289 ± 0.002   96.342 ± 0.572
                                T5     Rouge-Avg       0.232 ± 0.003   0.451 ± 0.002    0.458 ± 0.01   0.342 ± 0.009   0.321 ± 0.003   16.351 ± 0.335   0.290 ± 0.005   95.998 ± 0.496
                                T5      Meteor         0.231 ± 0.003   0.449 ± 0.002   0.454 ± 0.007   0.334 ± 0.008   0.326 ± 0.002   16.574 ± 0.269   0.292 ± 0.003   97.374 ± 0.457
                                T5       SPice         0.223 ± 0.002   0.442 ± 0.001   0.435 ± 0.011   0.321 ± 0.010   0.315 ± 0.004   15.747 ± 0.401   0.283 ± 0.005    96.25 ± 0.313
                                T5       CiDer         0.226 ± 0.002   0.447 ± 0.004   0.433 ± 0.007   0.315 ± 0.008   0.318 ± 0.003   15.741 ± 0.170   0.285 ± 0.001   96.354 ± 0.971
                                T5       SPider        0.226 ± 0.004   0.447 ± 0.003   0.434 ± 0.006   0.316 ± 0.006   0.319 ± 0.002   15.739 ± 0.311   0.284 ± 0.003   96.333 ± 0.644



Table 12: CommonGen test evaluation Table shows official scores obtained from CommonGen
hold-out evaluation. The most important result is that RL fine-tuning on a supervised model yields
better performance across most metrics especially Coverage which indicates the ratio of concepts
covered in generated texts


                                                                                       29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
             Tasks                            _                                                                                  Lexical and Semantic Metrics                                                                                                                           Diversity Metrics
                             Alg           Reward Function   Top k   LM      Rouge-1         Rouge-2         Rouge-L       Rouge-LSum        Meteor         BLEU             BertScore         Cider           Spice         MSTTR           Distinct1        Distinct2          H1                H2            Unique1            Unique2         Mean Output Length

                           Zero-Shot                                 T5       0.415           0.016           0.270           0.270           0.179             0.0           0.854           0.640           0.231           0.430            0.090           0.335            5.998            7.957             345                1964                8.797
                             PPO              Rouge-1         50     T5   0.537 ± 0.004    0.093 ± 0.012   0.380 ± 0.006   0.380 ± 0.006   0.235 ± 0.005   0.016 ± 0.002   0.896 ± 0.001   0.950 ± 0.015   0.318 ± 0.016   0.526 ± 0.020   0.128 ± 0.005    0.518 ± 0.036   6.679 ± 0.132    10.572 ± 0.234   437.4 ± 42.017    2418.8 ± 167.947      7.214 ± 0.374
                                             Rouge-Avg        50     T5   0.519 ± 0.0185   0.102 ± 0.007   0.377 ± 0.013   0.376 ± 0.014   0.225 ± 0.024   0.020 ± 0.002   0.897 ± 0.005   0.921 ± 0.102   0.328 ± 0.009   0.536 ± 0.069   0.141 ± 0.022    0.510 ± 0.056   6.777 ± 0.539    10.348 ± 0.134   458.6 ± 19.734    2244.4 ± 162.855      6.887 ± 1.006
                                               Meteor         50     T5   0.411 ± 0.009    0.090 ± 0.008   0.304 ± 0.006   0.304 ± 0.006   0.210 ± 0.005   0.029 ± 0.004   0.875 ± 0.007   0.638 ± 0.048   0.259 ± 0.017   0.547 ± 0.012   0.147 ± 0.003    0.529 ± 0.014    7.62 ± 0.127    11.464 ± 0.151   1039.4 ± 63.276   5197.2 ± 280.004      13.660 ± 0.324
                                                SPice         50     T5   0.439 ± 0.035    0.079 ± 0.045   0.323 ± 0.036   0.323 ± 0.036   0.183 ± 0.022   0.012 ± 0.009   0.891 ± 0.005   0.777 ± 0.140   0.400 ± 0.012   0.546 ± 0.054   0.149 ± 0.019    0.545 ± 0.072   6.721 ± 0.441    10.492 ± 0.330   409.2 ± 41.605    1878.4 ± 167.492      5.706 ± 0.678
                                               CiDer          50     T5   0.453 ± 0.038    0.081 ± 0.037   0.326 ± 0.033   0.326 ± 0.033   0.203 ± 0.022   0.017 ± 0.009   0.885 ± 0.008   0.770 ± 0.134   0.291 ± 0.036   0.597 ± 0.081   0.195 ± 0.040    0.639 ± 0.106   7.732 ± 0.682    11.131 ± 0.502   777.0 ± 144.676   3350.8 ± 503.419      7.393 ± 0.572
                                               SPider         50     T5   0.512 ± 0.008    0.141 ± 0.007   0.388 ± 0.002   0.388 ± 0.003   0.242 ± 0.007   0.032 ± 0.003   0.902 ± 0.001   1.045 ± 0.034   0.380 ± 0.006   0.482 ± 0.015   0.133 ± 0.003    0.472 ± 0.021   6.372 ± 0.221    10.303 ± 0.228   502.6 ± 33.422    2281.4 ± 252.471      7.489 ± 0.358
                            NLPO              Rouge-1         50     T5   0.499 ± 0.012    0.089 ± 0.003   0.328 ± 0.007   0.328 ± 0.007   0.198 ± 0.002   0.021 ± 0.001   0.872 ± 0.005   0.815 ± 0.009   0.305 ± 0.008   0.559 ± 0.01    0.148 ± 0.003    0.555 ± 0.012   7.059 ± 0.067    10.657 ± 0.105   457.9 ± 11.108     2349.6 ± 60.345      6.586 ± 0.094
                                             Rouge-Avg        50     T5    0.47 ± 0.01     0.096 ± 0.004   0.312 ± 0.006   0.312 ± 0.006   0.202 ± 0.008   0.025 ± 0.002   0.843 ± 0.013   0.816 ± 0.026   0.299 ± 0.007   0.512 ± 0.019   0.146 ± 0.011    0.513 ± 0.012    6.781 ± 0.15    10.424 ± 0.156   484.18 ± 17.303   2357.54 ± 152.113     7.131 ± 0.487
                                               Meteor         50     T5   0.389 ± 0.013     0.1 ± 0.004    0.293 ± 0.008   0.293 ± 0.008   0.226 ± 0.024   0.035 ± 0.004   0.832 ± 0.018   0.691 ± 0.04    0.266 ± 0.016   0.503 ± 0.003   0.132 ± 0.005    0.471 ± 0.008   7.146 ± 0.192    10.727 ± 0.313   648.05 ± 33.963   3536.0 ± 444.638      11.062 ± 1.301
                                                SPice         50     T5   0.329 ± 0.015    0.036 ± 0.008   0.247 ± 0.013   0.247 ± 0.013   0.137 ± 0.009   0.006 ± 0.002   0.817 ± 0.024   0.515 ± 0.033   0.323 ± 0.021   0.543 ± 0.023   0.174 ± 0.004    0.568 ± 0.026   7.176 ± 0.212    10.551 ± 0.216   479.45 ± 19.77    2065.8 ± 288.843      5.785 ± 0.431
           CommonGen
                                               CiDer          50     T5   0.515 ± 0.006    0.143 ± 0.008   0.387 ± 0.006   0.308 ± 0.006   0.19 ± 0.001    0.019 ± 0.001   0.865 ± 0.015   0.726 ± 0.018   0.282 ± 0.009    0.55 ± 0.02    0.179 ± 0.005    0.576 ± 0.014   7.286 ± 0.125    10.812 ± 0.089   661.46 ± 21.776   2726.32 ± 71.253       7.13 ± 0.223
                                               SPider         50     T5   0.393 ± 0.008    0.086 ± 0.012   0.297 ± 0.007   0.297 ± 0.007   0.183 ± 0.007   0.02 ± 0.003    0.842 ± 0.019   0.717 ± 0.026   0.297 ± 0.019   0.525 ± 0.024   0.167 ± 0.009    0.537 ± 0.025   6.986 ± 0.262    10.451 ± 0.171   530.14 ± 16.805   2263.4 ± 166.221      6.687 ± 0.372

                          Supervised                                 T5   0.503 ± 0.001    0.175 ± 0.001   0.411 ± 0.001   0.411 ± 0.001   0.309 ± 0.001   0.069 ± 0.001   0.929 ± 0.000   1.381 ± 0.011   0.443 ± 0.001   0.509 ± 0.001   0.101 ± 0.001    0.339 ± 0.001   6.531 ± 0.006    10.079 ± 0.016   503.600 ± 6.530    2158.8 ± 24.514      10.934 ± 0.020

                       Supervised + PPO       Rouge-1         50     T5   0.537 ± 0.004    0.198 ± 0.005   0.433 ± 0.002   0.433 ± 0.002   0.314 ± 0.003   0.070 ± 0.002   0.930 ± 0.001   1.426 ± 0.018   0.449 ± 0.001   0.527 ± 0.007   0.112 ± 0.001    0.393 ± 0.004   6.680 ± 0.044    10.289 ± 0.040    498.2 ± 8.931     2317.0 ± 22.609      9.667 ± 0.105
                                             Rouge-Avg        50     T5   0.536 ± 0.001    0.198 ± 0.002   0.433 ± 0.002   0.433 ± 0.002   0.311 ± 0.002   0.070 ± 0.002   0.929 ± 0.001   1.421 ± 0.028   0.446 ± 0.004   0.526 ± 0.004   0.114 ± 0.002    0.395 ± 0.005   6.682 ± 0.0297   10.274 ± 0.042    506.4 ± 6.829     2326.4 ± 41.778      9.614 ± 0.102
                                               Meteor         50     T5   0.540 ± 0.005    0.204 ± 0.005   0.436 ± 0.004   0.436 ± 0.004   0.329 ± 0.003   0.076 ± 0.003   0.930 ± 0.001   1.474 ± 0.022   0.447 ± 0.004   0.514 ± 0.004   0.105 ± 0.002    0.378 ± 0.008   6.631 ± 0.053    10.270 ± 0.064   507.0 ± 17.146     2424.6 ± 72.550      10.551 ± 0.271
                                                SPice         50     T5   0.532 ± 0.006    0.194 ± 0.007   0.430 ± 0.005   0.430 ± 0.005   0.311 ± 0.004   0.068 ± 0.003   0.929 ± 0.001   1.415 ± 0.029   0.458 ± 0.001   0.532 ± 0.008   0.113 ± 0.0038   0.392 ± 0.009   6.736 ± 0.058    10.338 ± 0.057   507.4 ± 14.319     2313.8 ± 27.694      9.742 ± 0.208
                                               CiDer          50     T5   0.530 ± 0.004    0.191 ± 0.003   0.427 ± 0.004   0.427 ± 0.004   0.309 ± 0.008   0.063 ± 0.002   0.928 ± 0.001   1.337 ± 0.040   0.444 ± 0.002   0.518 ± 0.009   0.110 ± 0.003    0.382 ± 0.006   6.614 ± 0.082    10.166 ± 0.053    490.4 ± 9.457     2295.4 ± 51.554      9.838 ± 0.265
                                               SpiDer         50     T5   0.536 ± 0.002    0.197 ± 0.002   0.430 ± 0.002   0.430 ± 0.002   0.313 ± 0.002   0.064 ± 0.002   0.928 ± 0.001   1.374 ± 0.018   0.445 ± 0.003   0.524 ± 0.007   0.112 ± 0.001    0.394 ± 0.004   6.673 ± 0.066    10.247 ± 0.066    504.8 ± 7.440     2361.8 ± 20.856      9.761 ± 0.121
                       Supervised + NLPO      Rouge-1         50     T5   0.545 ± 0.002    0.197 ± 0.002   0.432 ± 0.001   0.432 ± 0.001   0.31 ± 0.002    0.068 ± 0.001    0.929 ± 0.0    1.41 ± 0.012    0.449 ± 0.001   0.529 ± 0.002   0.114 ± 0.002    0.399 ± 0.005   6.705 ± 0.018    10.301 ± 0.03    498.86 ± 8.594    2311.46 ± 33.451      9.463 ± 0.111
                                             Rouge-Avg        50     T5   0.541 ± 0.003     0.2 ± 0.003    0.435 ± 0.002   0.435 ± 0.002   0.313 ± 0.002   0.07 ± 0.002    0.93 ± 0.001    1.424 ± 0.023   0.447 ± 0.003   0.53 ± 0.006    0.113 ± 0.002    0.396 ± 0.008    6.708 ± 0.05    10.318 ± 0.074   493.64 ± 10.068   2319.42 ± 55.738      9.596 ± 0.123
                                               Meteor         50     T5   0.537 ± 0.003    0.201 ± 0.004   0.431 ± 0.002   0.431 ± 0.002   0.326 ± 0.002   0.074 ± 0.003    0.93 ± 0.0     1.464 ± 0.025   0.448 ± 0.002   0.516 ± 0.006   0.106 ± 0.002    0.377 ± 0.008   6.634 ± 0.044    10.26 ± 0.077    506.04 ± 3.502    2401.32 ± 38.569      10.453 ± 0.194
                                                SPice         50     T5   0.535 ± 0.007    0.193 ± 0.008   0.429 ± 0.005   0.429 ± 0.005    0.3 ± 0.003    0.064 ± 0.002   0.927 ± 0.001   1.333 ± 0.017   0.459 ± 0.003   0.553 ± 0.013    0.12 ± 0.004    0.415 ± 0.014   6.908 ± 0.118    10.445 ± 0.057   508.075 ± 4.669    2343.3 ± 53.274      9.249 ± 0.225
                                               CiDer          50     T5   0.533 ± 0.003    0.197 ± 0.004   0.43 ± 0.003    0.43 ± 0.004    0.316 ± 0.004   0.066 ± 0.001   0.929 ± 0.001   1.381 ± 0.014   0.446 ± 0.004   0.516 ± 0.009   0.108 ± 0.003    0.379 ± 0.01    6.583 ± 0.077    10.165 ± 0.084   490.78 ± 9.734    2304.52 ± 62.068      9.923 ± 0.213
                                               SPider         50     T5   0.532 ± 0.006    0.196 ± 0.006   0.431 ± 0.004   0.431 ± 0.004   0.314 ± 0.004   0.066 ± 0.002    0.929 ± 0.0    1.371 ± 0.011   0.448 ± 0.002   0.521 ± 0.005   0.109 ± 0.002    0.385 ± 0.005   6.623 ± 0.034    10.223 ± 0.049   485.325 ± 5.683   2297.575 ± 21.271     9.798 ± 0.179


     Table 13: CommonGen dev evaluation: Table shows lexical, semantic and diversity metrics for best performing models found in each algorithm-reward function
30


     combinations along with best performing supervised baseline models. Generated text from these models are submitted to official CommonGen test evaluation to
     obtain test scores presented in Table 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Coherence             Commonsense
            Algorithm        Unique N
                                         Value     Alpha Skew      Value Alpha Skew
         PPO+Supervised             25    4.14      0.073 4.137     4.03  0.137 4.023
         NLPO+Supervised            26    4.25      0.036 4.253     4.16  0.002 4.163
         Zero Shot                  24    2.15      0.391 2.154     2.29  0.342 2.291
         PPO                        24    2.84       0.16 2.849     3.03  0.081 3.027
         Supervised                 23    4.39      0.159 4.387     4.21  0.225 4.209
         NLPO                       24       2      0.335 2.003     2.13  0.265 2.124

Table 14: Results of the human subject study showing the number of participants N, average Likert
scale value for coherence and sentiment, Krippendorf’s alpha showing inter-annotator agreement,
and Skew. For each model a total of 100 samples were drawn randomly from the test set and rated by
3 annotators each, resulting in 300 data points per algorithm.


                                                    Coherence               Commonsense
         Group 1             Group 2
                                             Diff (G2-G1) p-values     Diff (G2-G1) p-values
    NLPO                PPO                          0.847    0.001            0.897   0.001
    NLPO                Supervised                   2.397    0.001            2.083   0.001
    NLPO                NLPO+Supervised              2.257    0.001            2.033   0.001
    NLPO                PPO+Supervised               2.143    0.001            1.897   0.001
    NLPO                Zero Shot                    0.153    0.515            0.157   0.624
    PPO                 Supervised                   1.550    0.001            1.187   0.001
    PPO                 NLPO+Supervised              1.410    0.001            1.137   0.001
    PPO                 PPO+Supervised               1.297    0.001            1.000   0.001
    PPO                 Zero Shot                   -0.693    0.001           -0.740   0.001
    Supervised          NLPO+Supervised             -0.140    0.601           -0.050   0.900
    Supervised          PPO+Supervised              -0.253    0.050           -0.187   0.045
    Supervised          Zero Shot                   -2.243    0.001           -1.927   0.001
    NLPO+Supervised     PPO+Supervised              -0.113    0.008           -0.137   0.007
    NLPO+Supervised     Zero Shot                   -2.103    0.001           -1.877   0.001
    PPO+Supervised      Zero Shot                   -1.990    0.001           -1.740   0.001

Table 15: Results of an post-hoc Tukey HSD Test for difference in means between pairs of algorithms
(Group 2 - Group 1) and corresponding p-values. Individually statistically significant results are
bolded and are used to discuss results in the analysis. Overall p-values showing that there is a
significant difference in means between the models via a one-way ANOVA test are significant with
p ≪ 0.05 for both coherence and sentiment.


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Figure 6: Instructions, examples, and interface for the Commongen task.


B.4.3   H UMAN PARTICIPANT S TUDY

Figure 6 shows the commongen instructions, examples, and interface used for the human evaluation
experiments. Different from the other human evaluations, we didn’t provide any prompt because
knowing the set of words to be used isn’t required for rating either of the axes. Tables 14, 15 show
averaged results, annotator agreement, and the results of statistical significance tests to determine
which models output better generations when rated by humans.

B.4.4   H UMAN P REFERENCE L EARNING E XPERIMENTS

First, we randomly select prompts from the Commongen train dataset and sample a single completion
from both the Supervised and Supervised+NLPO models. Next, we filter to prompts where both
models at least attempted to use all input concepts. This filtration step was conducted because if
a model fails to use all concepts, it may generate a more natural/fluent sentence, but, a priori, it
shouldn’t be preferred by crowdworkers; instead of training crowdworkers to prefer sentences with
all concepts, we perform this filter. Figure 7 shows the task presented to the crowdworkers. We then
present the prompt and the two completion candidates to 3 unique crowdworkers and ask them to


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Figure 7: Instructions and interface for the pairwise Commongen HIT.


select which one they prefer with respect to commonsense/fluency; We gathered 3 annotations on
417 pairs (Krippendorf α = .28), and split into 60/20/20 train/val/test split. We then trained a reward
model, T5-11B Raffel et al. (2020), on the balanced binary classification task of predicting which
of the pair was preferred by a majority of 3 annotators, conditioned on the prompt and completion.
The resulting model achieved 69.5 test ROC AUC suggesting it indeed captures average human
preferences. The model is then used as a reward function. We train Supervised+RL with a METEOR-
only reward as a baseline, and compare it to a reward function that uses the fine-tuned T5-11B model.
We design the reward function based on the preference model as r = meteor + pref /(1 + |miss|)
where miss is a set of concepts not covered in the generated text, in an attempt to mimic the data
collection process that humans are instructed to follow. This reward function accounts for both
the task of using all concepts and also human’s preferences for how a sentence should look within
the constraints stipulated by the task. Finally, we rerun the same pairwise preference collection
procedure—this time sampling from Commongen test—with human participants to compare the
generations from a preference optimized RL policy to the previously best Supervised+NLPO policy.
Comparing the METEOR-only to the preference model head-to-head, the generations produced by
the human feedback model are preferred in 682 cases, compared to the METEOR-only model which
is preferred in 587 cases (p < 0.01 the models are equally preferred).

B.4.5      Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
This section shows sample generations from different algorithms for three randomly picked prompts.
Sample 1
Prompt: generate a sentence with: apron cut hat kitchen sausage
Zero-Shot: generate a sentence with: apron cut hat kitchen sausage.
PPO: sausage in the kitchen on an apron.
NLPO: sausage cut hat cut hat cut hat cut apron cut hat
Supervised: A man is cutting sausage on an apron in a kitchen.
Supervised + PPO: A man cutting sausage from a hat on an apron in the kitchen.
Supervised + NLPO: A man cuts sausage in a hat on an apron in the kitchen.

Sample 2



                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Prompt: generate a sentence with: backhand competition player reach shuttlecock
Zero-Shot: backhand competition player reach shuttlecock.
PPO: the ball in the backhand and the competition player in the shuttlecock.
NLPO: backhanded competition player reaches shuttlecock.
Supervised: tennis player reaches for a shuttlecock during a competition.
Supervised + PPO: football player reaches for a shuttlecock in backhand during the competition.

Supervised + NLPO: football player reaches for a shuttlecock after hitting a backhand during
     the competition.

Sample 3
Prompt: generate a sentence with: bowl combine cucumber onion pasta
Zero-Shot: cucumber onion pasta.
PPO: the cucumber onion pasta in a small bowl.
NLPO: the in a bowl Combine cucumber onion pasta in a large bowl. Toss pasta
Supervised: A bowl containing pasta, tomatoes, cucumbers, and onions.
Supervised + PPO: A bowl containing pasta topped with cucumbers, onions, and peppers.
Supervised + NLPO: A bowl containing a mixture of pasta, cucumber, and onion.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.5     CNN DAILY M AIL

B.5.1    S ETUP
As a representative of the summarization task, we consider CNN/DM dataset consisting of long
news articles and their highlights written by news authors. The dataset consists of 287k training,
13k validation and 11k test examples. We trained RL methods using 3 different automated metrics,
namely Rouge-1, Rouge-avg and Meteor. We chose T5 as our base LM as it is pre-trained in a
unified text-to-text framework and relishes Zero-Shot capabilities. For decoding, we use multinomial
sampling with a temperature of 0.7 for all the models.

                           Model Params                                value
                           supervised             batch size: 16
                                                  epochs: 2
                                                  learning rate: 0.0001
                                                  learning rate scheduler: cosine
                                                  weight decay: 0.1
                           ppo/ nlpo              steps per update: 5120
                                                  total number of steps: 512000
                                                  batch size: 64
                                                  epochs per update: 5
                                                  learning rate: 0.000002
                                                  entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                  initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                  target kl: 0.2
                                                  discount factor: 0.99
                                                  gae lambda: 0.95
                                                  clip ratio: 0.2
                                                  value function coeff: 0.5
                                                  rollouts top k: sweep of (50,100)
                                                  top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                  target update iterations: sweep of (10, 20, 30)
                           supervised+ppo/ nlpo   steps per update: 5120
                                                  total number of steps: 256000
                                                  batch size: 64
                                                  epochs per update: 5
                                                  learning rate: 0.000002
                                                  entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                  initial kl coeff: 0.01
                                                  target kl: 0.2
                                                  discount factor: 0.99
                                                  gae lambda: 0.95
                                                  clip ratio: 0.2
                                                  value function coeff: 0.5
                                                  rollouts top k: sweep of (50,100)
                                                  top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                  target update iterations: sweep of (10, 20, 30)
                           decoding               sampling: True
                                                  temperature: 0.7
                                                  min length: 50
                                                  max new tokens: 100
                           tokenizer              padding side: left
                                                  truncation side: right
                                                  max length: 512


 Table 16: CNN/DM Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings


B.5.2    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Table 17 presents benchmarking results on test set reporting a wide range of metrics: lexical, semantic,
factual correctness and diversity metrics. As baselines, we report lead-3 which selects first three
sentences as the summary, Zero-Shot and a supervised model. PPO and NLPO models are on par with
supervised performance on several metrics including Rouge-2, Rouge-L, and Bleu. On fine-tuning
on top of supervised model, performance improves consistently on all metrics indicating that RL
fine-tuning is beneficial. Another interesting finding is that, RL fine-tuned models are factually
consistent as measured by SummaCZS metric. For ablations on PPO params, NLPO params, we refer
to Tables 18,19.


                                                          35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
             Tasks                       _                                           Lexical and Semantic Metrics                       Factual Consistency                                         Diversity Metrics
                           Alg           Reward Function   LM   Rouge-1   Rouge-2   Rouge-L Rouge-LSum Meteor       BLEU    BertScore       SummaCZS          MSTTR   Distinct1   Distinct2    H1         H2     Unique1   Unique2   Mean Output Length

                          Lead-3                                 0.401     0.175     0.250      0.363      0.333    0.099    0.874            0.993           0.750    0.0482      0.386      10.481    16.631   21465     273153           84
                         Zero-Shot                         T5    0.372     0.145     0.247      0.311      0.256    0.077    0.864            0.654           0.725    0.061       0.414      10.285    16.183   19113     193999           55
                           PPO              Rouge-1        T5    0.410     0.182     0.283      0.349      0.276    0.095    0.876            0.622           0.760    0.068       0.464      10.661    16.437   18189     191383           47

                                           Rouge-Avg       T5    0.396     0.176     0.273      0.338      0.270    0.095    0.874            0.622           0.773    0.071       0.490      10.830    16.664   19478     209140           48
                                             Meteor        T5    0.408     0.178     0.276      0.342      0.301    0.109    0.873            0.527           0.765    0.060       0.447      10.699    16.688   20528     234386           61
                          NLPO              Rouge-1        T5    0.404     0.180     0.278      0.344      0.275    0.096    0.875            0.636           0.771    0.069       0.480      10.789    16.618   18677     201971           48
                                           Rouge-Avg       T5    0.404     0.177     0.279      0.344      0.274    0.094    0.874            0.586           0.765    0.066       0.476      10.744    16.620   18179     206368           50
                                             Meteor        T5    0.405     0.180     0.277      0.343      0.292    0.108    0.872            0.578           0.772    0.064       0.471      10.802    16.766   20212     231038           56
                        Supervised                         T5    0.411     0.177     0.276      0.343      0.309    0.108    0.876            0.654           0.727    0.057       0.401      10.459    16.410   21096     230343           68
36


                     Supervised + PPO       Rouge-1        T5    0.417     0.189     0.294      0.358      0.278    0.101    0.882            0.722           0.750    0.070       0.459      10.595    16.389   18184     184220           46
            CNN/DM                         Rouge-Avg       T5    0.425     0.194     0.297      0.363      0.296    0.114    0.882            0.728           0.747    0.066       0.445      10.589    16.458   18939     200617           52
                                             Meteor        T5    0.426     0.194     0.293      0.361      0.316    0.125    0.880            0.726           0.741    0.059       0.420      10.532    16.491   20395     224432           63
                     Supervised + NLPO      Rouge-1        T5    0.421     0.193     0.297      0.361      0.287    0.108    0.882            0.740           0.748    0.067       0.446      10.528    16.313   18204     185561           48
                                           Rouge-Avg       T5    0.424     0.193     0.296      0.363      0.295    0.115    0.882            0.743           0.744    0.065       0.443      10.570    16.444   18747     201705           53
                                             Meteor        T5    0.429     0.194     0.293      0.361      0.319    0.124    0.880            0.743           0.745    0.059       0.422      10.574    16.516   20358     226801           63


     Table 17: CNN/Daily Mail test evaluation: Table presents a wide range of metrics: lexical, semantic, factual correctness and diversity metrics on test set. As
     baselines, we report lead-3 which selects first three sentences as the summary, Zero-Shot and a supervised model. PPO and NLPO models are on par with supervised
     performance on several metrics including Rouge-2, Rouge-L, and Bleu. On fine-tuning on top of supervised model, performance improves consistently on all metrics
     indicating that RL fine-tuning is beneficial. Another interesting finding is that, RL fine-tuned models are factually consistent as measured by SummaCZS metric.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              _                                                        Lexical and Semantic Metrics
                              Alg           Reward Function        Top k    Rouge-1      Rouge-2       Rouge-L Rouge-LSum Meteor            BLEU     BertScore

                                                 Rouge-1            50       0.404         0.181         0.280         0.346        0.273    0.095     0.874
                                                                    100      0.412         0.186         0.286         0.354        0.276    0.094     0.876
                              PPO              Rouge-Avg            50       0.401         0.177         0.276         0.342        0.271    0.092     0.873
                                                                    100      0.399         0.179         0.275         0.342        0.270    0.094     0.874
                                                  Meteor            50       0.413         0.182         0.279         0.348        0.301    0.110     0.873
                                                                    100      0.409         0.179         0.276         0.345        0.296    0.108     0.871
                                                 Rouge-1            50       0.414         0.190         0.293         0.358        0.272    0.097     0.881
                                                                    100      0.420         0.193         0.295         0.362        0.277    0.100     0.881
                         Supervised+PPO        Rouge-Avg            50       0.426         0.196         0.298         0.366        0.294    0.114     0.881
                                                                    100      0.427         0.196         0.298         0.366        0.294    0.113     0.881
                                                  Meteor            50       0.429         0.197         0.297         0.367        0.306    0.122     0.881
                                                                    100      0.432         0.199         0.297         0.367        0.317    0.131     0.879



Table 18: PPO Ablation/Model Selection: Evaluation of PPO models on validation set with different
reward functions and top k values for rollouts. For each alg-reward combo, best model (top k ) is
chosen.

                                                     _                                                                           Lexical and Semantic Metrics
           Alg            Reward Function   Top k (rollout)   Top p (Action mask)    target update ni ters   Rouge-1   Rouge-2   Rouge-L Rouge-LSum Meteor       BLEU    BertScore

                             Rouge-1              50                  0.9                     10              0.400     0.178     0.275      0.343     0.269     0.094    0.872
                                                                                              20              0.396     0.173     0.274      0.340     0.257     0.082    0.873
                                                                                              30              0.396     0.174     0.273      0.339     0.265     0.091    0.872
                                                 100                  0.9                     10              0.407     0.177     0.279      0.347     0.265     0.085    0.875
                                                                                              20              0.406     0.182     0.281      0.347     0.273     0.094    0.874
                                                                                              30              0.405     0.180     0.279      0.347     0.269     0.091    0.875
                            Rouge-Avg             50                  0.9                     10              0.400     0.180     0.276      0.343     0.271     0.096    0.873
                                                                                              20              0.349     0.147     0.241      0.298     0.237     0.078    0.858
          NLPO                                                                                30              0.393     0.173     0.272      0.336     0.267     0.092    0.870
                                                 100                  0.9                     10              0.396     0.174     0.274      0.339     0.265     0.088    0.872
                                                                                              20              0.406     0.179     0.280      0.347     0.272     0.092    0.874
                                                                                              30              0.400     0.178     0.279      0.344     0.266     0.087    0.874
                              Meteor              50                  0.9                     10              0.404     0.177     0.274      0.343     0.286     0.102    0.872
                                                                                              20              0.406     0.180     0.276      0.343     0.292     0.107    0.871
                                                                                              30              0.401     0.172     0.271      0.337     0.288     0.099    0.870
                                                 100                  0.9                     10              0.405     0.178     0.276      0.343     0.294     0.107    0.870
                                                                                              20              0.406     0.176     0.276      0.343     0.291     0.106    0.872
                                                                                              30              0.409     0.184     0.280      0.348     0.291     0.108    0.873
                             Rouge-1              50                  0.9                     10              0.425     0.196     0.299      0.366     0.285     0.106    0.882
                                                                                              20              0.417     0.191     0.295      0.360     0.276     0.100    0.881
                                                                                              30              0.418     0.192     0.296      0.361     0.278     0.101    0.881
                                                 100                  0.9                     10              0.424     0.196     0.299      0.366     0.286     0.106    0.882
                                                                                              20              0.423     0.196     0.299      0.365     0.289     0.110    0.881
                                                                                              30              0.420     0.193     0.296      0.362     0.279     0.102    0.881
                            Rouge-Avg             50                  0.9                     10              0.426     0.197     0.298      0.367     0.294     0.115    0.881
                                                                                              20              0.425     0.196     0.298      0.366     0.292     0.112    0.881
     Supervised + NLPO                                                                        30              0.424     0.194     0.297      0.365     0.287     0.107    0.881
                                                 100                  0.9                     10              0.424     0.196     0.298      0.365     0.291     0.113    0.881
                                                                                              20              0.428     0.198     0.300      0.368     0.296     0.115    0.882
                                                                                              30              0.429     0.199     0.300      0.369     0.296     0.116    0.882
                              Meteor              50                  0.9                     10              0.430     0.197     0.294      0.364     0.320     0.130    0.879
                                                                                              20              0.432     0.198     0.297      0.367     0.318     0.130    0.880
                                                                                              30              0.423     0.191     0.293      0.361     0.297     0.116    0.879
                                                 100                  0.9                     10              0.435     0.200     0.298      0.369     0.320     0.131    0.881
                                                                                              20              0.433     0.198     0.297      0.368     0.319     0.130    0.879
                                                                                              30              0.434     0.200     0.297      0.369     0.324     0.132    0.879



Table 19: NLPO Ablation/Model Selection: Evaluation of NLPO models on validation set with
different reward functions, top k values for rollouts and target update iterations. For each alg-reward
combo, best model is chosen


                                                                                            37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Coherence                 Quality
            Algorithm        Unique N
                                         Value     Alpha Skew      Value   Alpha     Skew
         PPO+Supervised             22    4.21      0.198 4.224     3.97    0.256     3.98
         NLPO+Supervised            19     4.3       0.26 4.308     3.98    0.089        4
         Zero Shot                  17    3.73         0.1 3.757    3.69     0.25    3.722
         Supervised                 19    4.25      0.116 4.241     3.99      0.2    3.986
         NLPO                       17    4.03       0.13 4.042     3.83    0.191    3.832
         PPO                        21    3.94      0.111 3.945     3.76    0.129    3.767
         Human                      19    3.89      0.277 3.902     3.77    0.029    3.769

Table 20: Results of the human subject study showing the number of participants N, average Likert
scale value for coherence and sentiment, Krippendorf’s alpha showing inter-annotator agreement,
and Skew. For each model a total of 50 samples were drawn randomly from the test set and rated by
3 annotators each, each resulting in 150 data points per algorithm.


                                                    Coherence                   Quality
        Group 1              Group 2         Diff (G2-G1) p-values     Diff (G2-G1) p-values
    Human               NLPO                         0.147    0.755            0.060    0.900
    Human               NLPO+Supervised              0.413    0.001            0.213    0.047
    Human               PPO                          0.053    0.900           -0.007    0.900
    Human               PPO+Supervised               0.327    0.024            0.200    0.544
    Human               Supervised                   0.360    0.008            0.220    0.043
    Human               Zero Shot                   -0.160    0.679           -0.080    0.900
    NLPO                NLPO+Supervised              0.267    0.012            0.153    0.008
    NLPO                PPO                         -0.093    0.900           -0.067    0.900
    NLPO                PPO+Supervised               0.180    0.564            0.140    0.860
    NLPO                Supervised                   0.213    0.361            0.160    0.754
    NLPO                Zero Shot                   -0.307    0.044           -0.140    0.860
    NLPO+Supervised     PPO                         -0.360    0.008           -0.220    0.043
    NLPO+Supervised     PPO+Supervised              -0.087    0.009           -0.013    0.009
    NLPO+Supervised     Supervised                  -0.053    0.009            0.007    0.900
    NLPO+Supervised     Zero Shot                   -0.573    0.001           -0.293    0.012
    PPO                 PPO+Supervised               0.273    0.106            0.207    0.508
    PPO                 Supervised                   0.307    0.044            0.227    0.394
    PPO                 Zero Shot                   -0.213    0.361           -0.073    0.900
    PPO+Supervised      Supervised                   0.033    0.900            0.020    0.900
    PPO+Supervised      Zero Shot                   -0.487    0.001           -0.280    0.155
    Supervised          Zero Shot                   -0.520    0.001           -0.300    0.101

Table 21: Results of an post-hoc Tukey HSD Test for difference in means between pairs of algorithms
(Group 2 - Group 1) and corresponding p-values. Individually statistically significant results are
bolded and are used to discuss results in the analysis. Overall p-values showing that there is a
significant difference in means between the models via a one-way ANOVA test are significant with
p ≪ 0.05 for both coherence and sentiment.


                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Figure 8: Instructions and interface for the summarization task.


B.5.3    H UMAN PARTICIPANT S TUDY
Figure 8 shows the summarization instructions and interface used for the human evaluation exper-
iments. Participants weren’t required to read the entire article, but to encourage some reading, a
minimum time on the window of 15s was enforced via hiding the sliders. Tables 20, 21 show averaged
results, annotator agreement, and the results of statistical significance tests to determine which models
output better generations when rated by humans.

B.5.4    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
We show sample generations from each of the algorithms for three randomly picked prompts below.
Sample 1
Prompt: Manchester City are confident UEFAâĂŹs punishment for breaching financial fairplay
     regulations will be lifted this summer which would allow them to bid for stellar names
     like Raheem Sterling, Gareth Bale, Kevin de Bruyne and Ross Barkley. City boss Manuel
     Pellegrini has been hampered over the past year by UEFA restricting them to a net
     transfer spend of 49million in each window and keeping the clubâĂŹs overall wage bill to
     its current level of 205million-a-year. UEFAâĂŹs settlement with City published in May
     stated those penalties would remain in place until the end of the 2015/16 season but the
     clubâĂŹs latest financial figures showed drastically-reduced losses of 23million which
     they feel proves they are now compliant with FPP regulations. Manuel Pellegrini is hoping
      that the financial restrictions imposed by UEFA for a breach of FFP rules will be lifted
      at the end of this season . Manchester City have been limited to a net spend of 49
     million in the last two transfer windows - they spent 25m bringing Wilfried Bony in from
     Swansea in January . Ahead of Monday nightâĂŹs trip to Crystal Palace, Pellegrini was
     certainly talking like a man excited at the prospect of signing ’crack’ players this
     summer. âĂŸI think that next season we donâĂŹt have any restrictions so we will be in the
      same position that all the other English clubs have,âĂŹ said Pellegrini. âĂŸItâĂŹs
     important. You have so many strong teams here in England and in Champions League, you can
      not allow them to keep the advantage every year; having less players to put in your
     squad or spending less money. We spend money, of course we always spend money, but they
     spent more.âĂŹ Manchester United, Barcelona, Liverpool and Arsenal have all paid more in
     transfer fees in the past 12 months than City who were traditionally EuropeâĂŹs biggest



                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     spenders after the club was taken over by Abu Dhabi owners in 2008. Uefa also ordered
     City to play with a reduced squad from 25 players to 21 in the Champions League this
     season and while that restriction has now ended, any time reduction in the penalties on
     spending and wages is more controversial. Arsenal have paid more in transfer fees than
     City in the last 12 months, including 30m on Alexis Sanchez . The document published last
      May by UEFAâĂŹs Club Financial Control Body investigative chamber explicitly said
     CityâĂŹs financial penalties would run for two seasons at least and there has been no
     official deviation from that decision.
The published statement said at the time: âĂŸManchester City agrees to significantly limit
     spending in the transfer market for the seasons 2014/15 and 2015/16. It means City will
     have to argue their case with Uefa that as they have been financially compliant over the
     past year, they deserve to be free of restrictions moving forward. They have successfully
      argued their case with UEFA before. Last summer they persuaded the governing body to
     allow them to bypass the normal quota of eight homegrown players as their Champions
     League squad had been reduced. Eliaquim Mangala joined the champions from Porto for 32m
     last summer . The reigning Premier League champions have only paid money for Fernando,
     Willie Caballero, Eliaquim Mangala and Wilfried Bony in the last two transfer windows and
      that was part-paid by the sales of Javi Garcia and Jack Rodwell. Pellegrini admitted
     they werenâĂŹt in a position to compete with neighbours United for established world
     stars like Angel di Maria because of the FFP penalties. It has cost City on the pitch.
     Even if they win their remaining eight Premier League fixtures their points tally will be
      lower than last season and they crashed out once again at the last-16 stage of the
     Champions League. Pellegrini and director of football Txiki Begiristain both accept the
     squad needs replenishing and they want to be in the market for the top available players.
      Manchester City have been heavily linked with a move for former Chelsea midfielder Kevin
      de Bruyne . The club also want to be involved in any race for Liverpool contract rebel
     Raheem Sterling . They have been strongly linked with former Chelsea winger Kevin de
     Bruyne who has been one of the best players in the Bundesliga with Wolfsburg. And if
     Liverpool do allow Sterling to leave, City want to be involved in the chase for one of
     EnglandâĂŹs most outstanding talents to help fit in with quotas for homegrown players.
     âĂŸIf you are the manager or a player of a big tem, you are always open to criticism
     because everyone expects a high level of performance,âĂŹ he said. âĂŸThe major issue with
      our team always seems to be the money but this season I think we were the team that
     spent less than any other team. That is the weird thing. âĂŸFor this club trying to be a
     big team in so few years, maybe we are paying the cost for that.âĂŹ Since the transfer
     penalties were introduced, City have spent 91million on players in the last two windows (
     Net spend 68million). That compares to Manchester United 145.5million, Liverpool 113
     million, Arsenal 92.5million and Chelsea 82.6million. Over the same time period Barcelona
      spent 118.3million on players and Real Madrid 81.2million though they also broke the
     world transfer record for Gareth Bale the previous summer.
Zero-Shot: manuel Pellegrini hoping UEFAâĂŹs punishment for breaching financial fairplay
     regulations will be lifted this summer. city have been restricted to a net transfer spend
      of 49million in each window. a total of 23million has been lost in the last year.
References: Manchester City have been restricted to a net transfer spend of 49m .Club’s also
     had to keep overall wage bill to its current level of 205m .Punishments imposed by UEFA
     for breaching Financial Fair Play rules .The spending restrictions were set for this
     season and the next one .But City are confident they will be lifted early after their
     compliance .
PPO: Manuel Pellegrini is hoping UEFAâĂŹs punishment for breaching financial fairplay rules
     will be lifted this summer. Manchester City have been limited to a net spend of 49million
      in each transfer window. the club also keep the club’s overall wage bill to its current
     level of 205million-a-year.
NLPO: Manchester City are confident UEFAâĂŹs punishment for breaching financial fairplay
     regulations will be lifted this summer. that would allow them to bid for stellar names
     like Raheem Sterling, Kevin de Bruyne and Ross Barkley.
Supervised: Manchester City have been limited to a net transfer spend of 49million in each
     window. City’s overall wage bill is 205m-a-year due to a breach of UEFA rules. City are
     confident the financial restrictions will be lifted at the end of the current season in
     order to bid for stars such as Raheem Sterling. Manuel Pellegrini is hoping that the
     financial restrictions will be lifted at the end of the 2015/16 season
Supervised + PPO: Manchester City have been restricted to a net spend of 49million in each
     window and kept their overall wage bill at 205m. Manuel Pellegrini believes these
     restrictions will be lifted at the end of the season. Arsenal have spent more in transfer
      fees than City in the last 12 months, including 30m on Alexis Sanchez.
Supervised + NLPO: Manchester City are confident UEFAâĂŹs punishment for a breach of financial
      fairplay regulations will be lifted this summer. The club have been restricted to a net
     transfer spend of 49million over the past two window. They aim to bid for stars like
     Raheem Sterling, Gareth Bale and Kevin de Bruyne. City lost 23m on transfers in the last
     12 months due to financial restrictions imposed by UEFA for breach

Sample 2
Prompt: (CNN)Larry Johnson remembers the fear and feeling of helplessness from being on the
     SkyWest Airlines flight that made an emergency landing in Buffalo, New York. "I thought
     we were done," he said Thursday, one day later. "There was no doubt in my mind that we
     weren’t going to land." Johnson was flying with his brother, his girlfriend and his 8-
     month-old son when he says a flight attendant came over the speaker asking for someone
     who was medically trained to help with a sick passenger. Minutes later, Johnson says, the
      attendant announced there was a pressurization problem and told passengers to prepare
     for the emergency landing. "You’re going to feel dizzy and woozy and lightheaded, and you’


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     re not going to be able to breathe," Johnson recalled the flight attendant saying. The
     Federal Aviation Administration on Wednesday initially reported a pressurization problem
     with SkyWest Flight 5622, and said it would investigate. It later issued a statement that
      did not reference any pressurization issues. "It was like being trapped and you couldn’t
      do anything. You have no control over it. Your body just felt pressured," Johnson said.
     Johnson said his girlfriend was seeing spots and that "when I was blinking, it was really
      bright. I could barely see." According to Marissa Snow, spokeswoman for SkyWest, three
     passengers reported a loss of consciousness while on the flight. Fifteen passengers were
     examined by medical personnel at the Buffalo airport, but no one was transported to the
     hospital, she said. The spokeswoman said that maintenance personnel found no indication
     of a pressurization problem with the aircraft, an Embraer E170, and that the airline
     continues to investigate the cause. An official with the National Transportation Safety
     Board told CNN that the agency is in communication with the FAA and SkyWest to gather
     information on the incident to better understand what took place.
Mary Cunningham was the nurse on board who attended to the first sick passenger. "There was a
     woman, very lethargic, very nauseous, turning gray, just not looking good," Cunningham
     said. After administering oxygen to the woman, Cunningham, a nurse at Yale-New Haven
     Hospital in Connecticut, returned to her seat. Soon after, Cunningham said, she was
     called up again by the flight attendant after another women near the first started to
     lose consciousness. "It was something that was affecting oxygen in that area," which was
     near the middle of the plane, she said. Cunningham said she had to return to her seat
     after feeling lightheaded. There were 84 passengers on board the plane, including nine
     crew members. Flight 5622 was originally scheduled to fly from Chicago to Hartford,
     Connecticut. The plane descended 28,000 feet in three minutes. "It would feel like a
     roller coaster -- when you’re coming over the top and you’re going down," CNN aviation
     analyst Mary Schiavo said, describing how such a descent would feel. "You know that these
      pilots knew they were in a very grave and very serious situation." Johnson, flying to
     visit his parents with their only grandchild, was glad that roller coaster ride ended
     safely. "It was a shaky ride. It wasn’t anything I would like to experience again," he
     said. CNN’s Jean Casarez, Josh Gaynor, Dana Ford and Stephanie Gallman contributed to
     this report.
Zero-Shot: "you’re going to feel dizzy and woozy and lightheaded," Johnson says. "it was like
     being trapped and you couldn’t do anything," Johnson says. "the plane was trying to get
     back on the ground," passenger says of fear.
References: Three passengers report a loss of consciousness on SkyWest flight .But officials
     say there is no evidence of a pressurization problem .
PPO: SkyWest flight 5312 made emergency landing in Buffalo, new york. passengers were told
     they were not going to be able to breathe, passenger recalls attendant. the faa initially
      reported a pressurization problem with the flight 5622.
NLPO: SkyWest flight 5622 made emergency landing in buffalo, new york.Larry Johnson says
     flight attendant announced there was a pressurization problem. three passengers reported
     loss of consciousness while on flight; no one transported to hospital.
Supervised: The FAA says it is investigating the cause of the emergency landing. SkyWest
     Flight 5622 made an emergency landing in Buffalo, New York. The flight was carrying a
     family of three people. The flight attendant told the passengers to prepare for the
     landing.
Supervised + PPO: "I thought we were done," the father of one passenger says. The flight
     attendant announced there was a pressurization problem. The flight made an emergency
     landing in Buffalo, New York. Three passengers reported a loss of consciousness while on
     the flight.
Supervised + NLPO: SkyWest Airlines flight made an emergency landing in Buffalo, New York, on
     Thursday. "There was no doubt in my mind that we weren’t going to land," passenger says.
     "You’re going to feel dizzy and woozy and lightheaded...you’re not going to be able to
     breathe," he says."

Sample 3
Prompt: For Inverness the latest chapter in their remarkable story featured not one, but two,
     plot-changing twists. One featured penalty Celtic didn’t get for 2-0 in which Josh
     Meekings handball should have also led to a sending off. The other the spot kick they did,
      followed by a red card for Craig Gordon. ’I’ve not seen it yet, but going by the
     reaction of the Celtic players we got away with a penalty and a sending off and that was
     probably the turning point in the game,’ acknowledged Caley manager John Hughes after.
     Inverness’s Josh Meekings appears to get away with a handball on the line in their win
     over Celtic . Caley boss John Hughes says the break, which could have meant a penalty and
      red card, was a turning point . ’I’ve not spoken to Josh. I haven’t seen it - but going
     by the media it was definitely a hand ball. We look at the referee behind the line and
     all that and I know Ronny will feel aggrieved - because I certainly would. ’But it’s part
      and parcel of football and you need a wee bit of luck to beat Celtic. ’This was their
     biggest game of the season because they will go on and win the league and if they had
     beaten us today there was a good chance they would have gone on and won the Scottish Cup.
      ’But when Marley Watkins was clipped by Craig Gordon and they were down to 10 men that
     was advantage Inverness. ’We weren’t going to give Celtic the ball back, they had to come
      and get it and we had to be patient. ’When big Edward put us into the lead we thought it
      was going to be our day on the back of things that had happened. ’Celtic equalised with
     another free kick but it’s typical of Inverness that we don’t do anything easy. ’We do it
      the hard way and we came up with the winner through David Raven.’ Hughes hauled Raven,
     his Scouse defender, from his backside as extra-time beckoned. Offended by the sight of
     one of his players resting he had a message to impart. Caley players celebrate after
     upsetting Celtic in a Scottish Cup semi-final 3-2 thriller . Celtic, depleted by games
     and absentees, were virtually on their knees after a relentless programme of midweek
     games. In last season’s League Cup Final Inverness had been passive and unambitious prior



                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      to losing on penalties. This was no time to repeat the mistake. ’I tried to emphasise to
      the players they would never have a better time to go on and beat Celtic, down to 10 men
      in the semi final of a cup. We needed to go for it,’ Hughes said. ’Before Raven scored
     at the back post I was looking to change it.
I was going to bring on another winger, Aaron Doran, and put him in the full-back position
     over on the right, but more advanced so he could take their left back on. Thankfully I
     didn’t do that and David Raven came up with the goal. Virgil Van Dijk (centre) fired
     Celtic into an early lead with a superb free-kick in the 18th minute . ’I didn’t realise
     this is the first time the club have been in the final of the Scottish Cup and that’s a
     remarkable achievement given it was only formed 20 years ago. ’It is a great story isn’t
     it? It’s an absolutely fantastic story. It is 20 odd years since the amalgamation. We are
      a small provincial club up there in the Highlands. ’We have lost a real inspirational
     skipper in Richie Foran right from the start of the season. He has never played. We have
     had to adjust to that. ’We had to sell Billy McKay, our top goalscorer, at Christmas. We
     have had to go again and adjust. I am a very humble guy and I am grateful and thankful
     that injuries have never caught up with us.’ There is remarkable irony in the fact
     Falkirk will be the opponents for the final. A former Bairns captain, he was manager of
     the club in 2009 when they lost to Rangers at Hampden. Former Falkirk captain and manager
      John Hughes will take on his former club in the final . ’I had a lot of great times at
     Falkirk. So much so that it is possibly my favourite time in my playing career. I am
     still friendly with an awful lot of the characters who were in that dressing room. Neil
     Oliver is a good friend of mine from my Falkirk days. He comes along and sits on the
     bench and gives me a wee hand out. ’That is the spirit that we had at that club. I have
     met some great guys. Brian Rice, my ex-coach, Davie Weir, Ian McCall, the list is endless.
      I was just talking the other day about that day at Falkirk. There are times even now
     when I see. ’I have a real special, special feel for the place. I am not kidded Falkirk
     is a right good side, trust me on that. No side goes to Tynecastle and beats Hearts
     without being a good side. No side beats Hibs the way they were playing without being a
     good side. You might say we are favourites I say it is even stevens and I am just looking
      forward to when the days comes.’ David Raven (second right) celebrates with his
     Inverness team-mates following his extra-time winner . An Inverness and Falkirk final
     would not have been the choice of sponsors William Hill, you suspect. Vast swathes of
     Hampden’s west stand were empty, a 12.15 kick-off for the benefit of broadcasters proving
      unhelpful . There will be no ticket rows this time. Not over a final unlikely to raise a
      crowd much higher than 35,000 in a stadium of 52,000. The contract with Hampden plc is
     signed, with no question of moving it. If the bitter amalgamation of 21 years ago
     produced a fine football club it also disenfranchised many of those who followed the old
     ones. ’I hope this encourages the next generation to follow Inverness,’ added Hughes. ’In
      the peer groups it is still Celtic and Rangers they follow but I hope the next ones will
      want to support their local club. ’If we can add another few hundred or thousand to the
     support then we are playing our part.
Zero-Shot: inverness beat Celtic 2-0 in their opening game of the season. Josh Meekings was
     the subject of a handball after the break. the break could have meant a penalty and a red
      card for Craig Gordon.
References: Josh Meekings handball should have been a penalty and a red card .If the penalty
     was awarded and converted Celtic would have gone to 2-0 .Caley manager John Hughes
     admitted his side were fortunate in win .Virgil van Dijk scored Celtic’s opener with a
     superb free-kick .Celtic keeper Craig Gordon was sent off early in the second half .Greg
     Tansey, Edward Ofere and finally Daven Raven scored for Caley .
PPO: Josh Meekings handball could have meant sending off for Celtic in extra-time win. John
     Hughes says the break could have meant an penalty and red card. Caley boss also admits he
      would feel aggrieved had Celtic won the championship.
NLPO: Caley beat Celtic 2-0 in their Scottish Cup clash. Josh Meekings handball could have led
      to a penalty and red card. John Hughes says the break was probably the turning point in
     the game. defender does not believe defensive striker can get away with being shown the
     yellow card - despite playing in same half we never scored.
Supervised: Inverness beat Celtic 2-0 in their Scottish Cup clash. Josh Meekings appeared to
     get away with a handball on the line. Another player was sent off for a spot kick which
     ended in a red card. Caley manager John Hughes says the break could have meant a penalty.
      Hughes says he ’would feel aggrieved’ after the break.
Supervised + PPO: Caley beat Celtic 1-0 in their Scottish Cup encounter at the Etihad. Josh
     Meekings’ handball on the line should have also seen a sending off. But Craig Gordon got
     away with a spot kick and sending off. John Hughes said it was a turning point in the
     game for Inverness.
Supervised + NLPO: Josh Meekings appears to get away with a handball after Inverness’s win.
     Inverness were down to 10 men when Craig Gordon was sent off. John Hughes says the break
     could have meant a penalty and red card. Hughes says Celtic will go on and win the
     Scottish Cup with win


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.6     T OTT O

B.6.1    S ETUP
ToTTo (Parikh et al., 2020) is a controlled table-to-text generation task in which the goal is to
produce one-sentence description of highlighted table cells. For training RL methods, we consider 5
different reward functions: BLEU, SacreBLEU, METEOR, PARENT and a combination of Meteor
and PARENT. We chose T5 as our base LM here too, as they are more suitable for structure to text
tasks. For decoding, we use beam search during inference and for generating rollouts, we use top k
sampling. Other implementation details are captured in Table 22.

                          Model Params                                     value
                          supervised                  batch size: 8
                                                      epochs: 4
                                                      learning rate: 0.0001
                                                      learning rate scheduler: constant with warm up
                                                      weight decay: 0.1
                          ppo/nlpo                    steps per update: 2560
                                                      total number of steps: 256000
                                                      batch size: 64
                                                      epochs per update: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.000002
                                                      entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                      initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                      target kl: 2.0
                                                      discount factor: 0.99
                                                      gae lambda: 0.95
                                                      clip ratio: 0.2
                                                      rollouts top k : 0
                                                      value function coeff: 0.5
                                                      top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                      target update iterations: 20
                          supervised+ ppo (or nlpo)   steps per update:2560
                                                      total number of steps: 256000
                                                      batch size: 64
                                                      epochs per update: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.0000005
                                                      entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                      initial kl coeff: 0.01
                                                      target kl: 0.2
                                                      discount factor: 0.99
                                                      gae lambda: 0.95
                                                      clip ratio: 0.2
                                                      rollouts top k : 50
                                                      value function coeff: 0.5
                                                      top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                      target update iterations: 20
                          decoding                    num beams: 5
                                                      min length: 10
                                                      max new tokens: 50
                          tokenizer                   padding side: left
                                                      truncation side: right
                                                      max length: 512


  Table 22: ToTTO Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings


B.6.2    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Tables 24, 23 presents our benchmarking results with 5 reward functions along with supervised
baseline performances on dev and test sets respectively. Similar to other tasks, our main finding is
that warm-started initial policies are crucial for learning to generate descriptions from highlighted
cells. Without warm-start, policies suffer from reward hacking and resulting in sub-optimal solutions
despite application of task-specific metrics such as PARENT etc. We find that Supervised+NLPO
method outperforms all models on ToTTo leaderboard in terms of PARENT metric.


                                                             43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tasks                       _                                        Lexical and Semantic Metrics                           Factual Consistency
              Alg           LM   Reward function              SacreBleu                        BLEURT                            PARENT

                                                   Overall   Overlap   Non-Overlap   Overall   Overlap   Non-Overlap   Overall   Overlap   Non-Overlap
            Zero-Shot       T5                     0.036      0.040       0.032      -1.392    -1.387      -1.397      0.116      0.119       0.112
              PPO           T5        bleu         0.065      0.067       0.063      -1.074    -1.045      -1.098      0.246      0.246       0.244
                            T5     sacrebleu       0.086      0.090       0.083      -0.979    -0.955      -1.003      0.293      0.292       0.294
                            T5       meteor        0.144      0.155       0.132      -0.769    -0.713      -0.826      0.356      0.361       0.351
                            T5       parent        0.146      0.153       0.128      -0.721    -0.688      -0.753      0.336      0.335       0.339
                            T5   meteor + parent   0.161      0.169       0.152      -0.891    -0.861      -0.922      0.345      0.342       0.348
             NLPO           T5        bleu         0.062      0.065       0.059      -1.077    -1.057      -1.097      0.235      0.236       0.233
                            T5     sacrebleu       0.085      0.088       0.083      -0.945    -0.917      -0.972      0.314      0.315       0.313
                            T5       meteor        0.102      0.108       0.097      -1.044    -1.009      -1.079      0.329      0.328       0.330
                            T5       parent        0.159      0.166       0.152      -0.710    -0.675      -0.745      0.357      0.351       0.363
ToTTo                       T5   meteor + parent   0.166      0.175       0.158      -0.704    -0.668      -0.740      0.365      0.362       0.368
           Supervised       T5                     0.457      0.535       0.377      0.204      0.327       0.081      0.583      0.631       0.534
        Supervised + PPO    T5        bleu         0.473      0.548       0.395      0.200      0.323       0.078      0.590      0.638       0.542
                            T5     sacrebleu       0.474      0.557       0.389      0.209      0.340       0.077      0.573      0.620       0.525
                            T5       meteor        0.468      0.541       0.392      0.203      0.325       0.082      0.590      0.638       0.542
                            T5       parent        0.469      0.547       0.388      0.175      0.300       0.050      0.595      0.641       0.549
                            T5   meteor + parent   0.473      0.547       0.392      0.192      0.314       0.069      0.595      0.642       0.549
        Supervised + NLPO   T5        bleu         0.475      0.548       0.399      0.208      0.330       0.085      0.593      0.639       0.546
                            T5     sacrebleu       0.475      0.557       0.392      0.208      0.335       0.081      0.577      0.625       0.529
                            T5       meteor        0.468      0.541       0.392      0.201      0.322       0.079      0.594      0.641       0.546
                            T5       parent        0.474      0.550       0.392      0.192      0.315       0.068      0.596      0.643       0.550
                            T5   meteor + parent   0.471      0.546       0.393      0.204      0.326       0.081      0.592      0.640       0.544



Table 23: ToTTo test evaluation: Table shows lexical, semantic and factual correctness metric scores
of algorithms with different reward functions on hold-out test set. Without supervised pre-training,
both PPO and NLPO results in sub-optimal solutions, with NLPO better than PPO. With supervised
pre-training, PPO and NLPO achieve better scores across all metrics showing RL fine-tuning is
beneficial. Most importantly, RL fine-tuned models produce more factually consistent text as seen in
higher PARENT scores. Another observation, fine-tuning with a task-specific metric PARENT is
better than training on task-agnostic lexical rewards


                                                                        44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
            Tasks                       _                                                       Lexical and Semantic Metrics                                             Factual Consistency                                           Diversity Metrics
                          Alg           LM   Reward function   Rouge-1   Rouge-2   Rouge-L   Rouge-LSum Meteor BertScore                  SacreBleu                           PARENT

                                                                                                                               Overall   Overlap   Non-Overlap   Overall    Overlap   Non-Overlap   MSTTR   Distinct1   Distinct2    H1       H2      Unique1   Unique2   Mean Output Length
                        Zero-Shot       T5                      0.131     0.055     0.127       0.127      0.057     0.805     0.038      0.042       0.034      0.118       0.119       0.116      0.428    0.084       0.238      6.703    9.933     8387     26490           19.964
                       Supervised       T5                      0.410     0.279     0.388       0.388      0.223     0.953     0.458      0.533       0.387      0.586       0.633       0.540      0.715    0.162       0.511      9.995    14.468   15168     54706           17.791
                          PPO           T5        bleu          0.274     0.138     0.249       0.249      0.139     0.844     0.068      0.071       0.066      0.251       0.250       0.251      0.403    0.091       0.308      10.659   14.511    7536     34232           28.545
                                        T5     sacrebleu        0.341     0.166     0.300       0.300      0.165     0.858      0.09      0.094       0.086      0.300       0.299       0.300      0.469    0.121       0.407      11.071   14.880   10138     48195           26.612
                                        T5       meteor         0.322     0.157     0.286       0.286      0.173     0.888     0.147      0.163       0.133      0.358       0.367       0.350      0.625    0.136       0.482      10.189   14.910   12346     54925           21.484
                                        T5       parent         0.268     0.125     0.251       0.251      0.119     0.890     0.150      0.158       0.143      0.337       0.332       0.342      0.764    0.202       0.646      11.068   14.988   13068     50313           13.035
                                        T5   meteor + parent    0.266     0.128     0.251       0.251      0.130     0.886     0.165      0.175       0.155      0.348       0.346       0.350      0.702    0.181       0.594      10.096   14.432   14422     55770           15.354
                         NLPO           T5        bleu          0.267     0.134     0.24        0.24       0.137     0.84      0.068      0.071       0.065      0.238       0.239       0.237      0.448     0.1        0.359      11.259   14.623   9029      47209           28.472
                                        T5     sacrebleu        0.341     0.168     0.297       0.297      0.183     0.863     0.089      0.093       0.085       0.32       0.324       0.317      0.494    0.111       0.373      11.007   15.032   9455      43379           27.977
            ToTTo                       T5       meteor         0.322     0.157     0.286       0.286      0.173     0.888     0.147      0.163       0.133      0.358       0.367       0.350      0.625    0.136       0.482      10.189   14.910   12346     54925           21.484
                                        T5       parent         0.283     0.132     0.264       0.264      0.133     0.894     0.163      0.174       0.153       0.36       0.357       0.364      0.824    0.223       0.691      11.493   15.127   14344     55542           14.204
                                        T5   meteor + parent    0.299      0.14     0.276       0.276      0.142     0.896     0.171      0.181       0.161      0.369       0.365       0.372      0.779    0.214       0.674      11.072   15.275   14939     58737           15.141
                    Supervised + PPO    T5        bleu          0.408     0.283     0.388       0.388      0.222     0.954     0.477      0.549       0.405      0.596       0.644       0.550      0.722    0.167       0.525      10.080   14.524    15203    54724           17.296
                                        T5     sacrebleu        0.395     0.275     0.378       0.378      0.211     0.955     0.477      0.554       0.401      0.577       0.621       0.535      0.728    0.174       0.539      10.086   14.518    14846    52327           16.063
                                        T5       meteor         0.410     0.282     0.389       0.389      0.223     0.954     0.469      0.540       0.398      0.593       0.642       0.547      0.718    0.165       0.516      10.037   14.467   15182.0   54446           17.542
                                        T5       parent         0.401     0.277     0.382       0.382      0.215     0.953     0.470      0.543       0.394      0.598       0.647       0.550      0.732    0.174       0.545      10.209   14.660   15379.0   55421           16.826
                                        T5   meteor + parent    0.406     0.281     0.386       0.387      0.220     0.954     0.473      0.544       0.399      0.600       0.648       0.553      0.727    0.170       0.532      10.143   14.586    15330    55211           17.185
                    Supervised + NLPO   T5        bleu          0.410     0.283     0.388       0.388      0.222     0.954     0.476      0.548       0.404      0.597       0.644       0.552      0.721    0.167       0.524      10.077   14.532   15213     54948           17.408
                                        T5     sacrebleu        0.397     0.276      0.38        0.38      0.214     0.955     0.477      0.555       0.401      0.581       0.628       0.535      0.729    0.174        0.54      10.124   14.544   14940     52986           16.334
                                        T5       meteor         0.411     0.283     0.389        0.39      0.224     0.954     0.474      0.547       0.403       0.6        0.649       0.554      0.727    0.171       0.536      10.156   14.612   15341     55292           17.637
                                        T5       parent         0.405      0.28     0.386       0.386      0.219     0.954     0.469      0.541       0.398      0.598       0.645       0.552      0.716    0.165       0.519      10.019    14.5    15218     54793           17.095
                                        T5   meteor + parent    0.405      0.28     0.386       0.386      0.219     0.954     0.474      0.547       0.398      0.598       0.646       0.552      0.727    0.171       0.536      10.156   14.612   15341     55292           17.095



     Table 24: ToTTo dev evaluation: Table shows lexical, semantic and factual correctness metric scores of algorithms with different reward functions on dev set.
     Without supervised pre-training, both PPO and NLPO results in sub-optimal solutions, with NLPO better than PPO. With supervised pre-training, PPO and NLPO
     achieve better scores across all metrics showing RL fine-tuning is beneficial. Most importantly, RL fine-tuned models produce more factually correct text as seen in
45


     higher PARENT scores. Another observation, fine-tuning with a task-specific metric PARENT is better than training just on task-agnostic lexical metrics
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Coherence                 Correctness
            Algorithm        Unique N
                                         Value     Alpha Skew      Value     Alpha Skew
         Zero Shot                  25    1.63      0.718 1.642     1.93      0.503 1.946
         PPO+Supervised             24    4.57      0.221 4.579     4.48      0.098 4.483
         PPO                        26    2.75      0.427 2.753     3.23      0.214 3.227
         NLPO                       28    2.25      0.401 2.247     2.61      0.419 2.613
         Supervised                 24    4.59      0.173 4.592     4.54      0.189 4.537
         NLPO+Supervised            26    4.58      0.244 4.601     4.57      0.144 4.581

Table 25: Results of the human subject study showing the number of participants N, average Likert
scale value for coherence and sentiment, Krippendorf’s alpha showing inter-annotator agreement,
and Skew. For each model a total of 50 samples were drawn randomly from the test set and rated by
3 annotators each, resulting in 150 data points per algorithm.


                                                    Coherence                Correctness
         Group 1             Group 2
                                             Diff (G2-G1) p-values     Diff (G2-G1) p-values
    PPO                 NLPO                        -0.507    0.001           -0.613     0.001
    PPO                 NLPO+Supervised              1.827    0.001            1.340     0.001
    PPO                 Supervised                   1.833    0.001            1.313     0.001
    PPO                 PPO+Supervised               1.813    0.001            1.253     0.001
    PPO                 Zero Shot                   -1.120    0.001           -1.293     0.001
    NLPO                NLPO+Supervised              2.333    0.001            1.953     0.001
    NLPO                Supervised                   2.340    0.001            1.927     0.001
    NLPO                PPO+Supervised               2.320    0.001            1.867     0.001
    NLPO                Zero Shot                   -0.613    0.001           -0.680     0.001
    NLPO+Supervised     Supervised                   0.007      0.9           -0.027     0.009
    NLPO+Supervised     PPO+Supervised              -0.013    0.009           -0.087     0.009
    NLPO+Supervised     Zero Shot                   -2.947    0.001           -2.633     0.001
    Supervised          PPO+Supervised              -0.020    0.009           -0.060     0.009
    Supervised          Zero Shot                   -2.953    0.001           -2.607     0.001
    PPO+Supervised      Zero Shot                   -2.933    0.001           -2.547     0.001

Table 26: Results of an post-hoc Tukey HSD Test for difference in means between pairs of algorithms
(Group 2 - Group 1) and corresponding p-values. Individually statistically significant results are
bolded and are used to discuss results in the analysis. Overall p-values showing that there is a
significant difference in means between the models via a one-way ANOVA test are significant with
p ≪ 0.05 for both coherence and sentiment.


                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Figure 9: Instructions, two examples, and interface for the ToTTo table description task.


B.6.3   H UMAN PARTICIPANT S TUDY
Figure 9 shows the ToTTo instructions, example, and interface used for the human evaluation
experiments. We made small modifications to the original code release’s HTML renderer to make the
tables display in our HITs. Tables 25, 26 show averaged results, annotator agreement, and the results
of statistical significance tests to determine which models output better generations when rated by
humans.


                                                 47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.6.4   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
We show sample generations from each of the algorithms for three randomly picked prompts below.
Sample 1
Prompt: <table> <cell> August 1, 1992 <col_header> Date </col_header> <col_header> North
     America </col_header> <col_header> Australasia </col_header> <col_header> Asia </
     col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> </cell> <cell> Allentown <col_header>
      City </col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> <col_header> Australasia </
     col_header> <col_header> Asia </col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> </
     cell> <cell> Allentown Fairgrounds Grandstand <col_header> Country </col_header> <
     col_header> North America </col_header> <col_header> Australasia </col_header> <
     col_header> Asia </col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> </cell> </table><
     page_title> Under My Spell Tour </page_title> <section_title> Tour dates </section_title>
      <table> <cell> August 1, 1992 <col_header> Date </col_header> <col_header> North America
      </col_header> <col_header> Australasia </col_header> <col_header> Asia </col_header> <
     col_header> North America </col_header> </cell> <cell> Allentown <col_header> City </
     col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> <col_header> Australasia </
     col_header> <col_header> Asia </col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> </
     cell> <cell> Allentown Fairgrounds Grandstand <col_header> Country </col_header> <
     col_header> North America </col_header> <col_header> Australasia </col_header> <
     col_header> Asia </col_header> <col_header> North America </col_header> </cell> </table>
Zero-Shot: table> cell> Under My Spell Tour /section_title> Tour dates /cell> cell> August 1,
     1992 col_header> Date /col_header>
PPO: Under My Spell Tour, August 1, 1992. August 1, 1992.
NLPO: Under My Spell Tour dates Under My Spell Tour dates Allentown Fairgrounds Grandstand
     August 1, 1992. Under My Spell Tour dates Under My Spell Tour dates Allentown Fairgrounds
      Grandstand August 1, 1992 table>
Supervised: The Under My Spell Tour began on August 1, 1992 at the Allentown Fairgrounds
     Grandstand in Allentown.
Supervised + PPO: On August 1, 1992, Under My Spell Tour was held at the Allentown Fairgrounds
      Grandstand in Allentown.
Supervised + NLPO: On August 1, 1992, Under My Spell Tour was held at the Allentown
     Fairgrounds Grandstand in Allentown.

Sample 2
Prompt: <table> <cell> Philip IV the Fair, the Iron King (Philippe) <col_header> Name </
     col_header> </cell> <cell> 5 October 1285 <col_header> King from </col_header> </cell> <
     cell> King of France and of Navarre (Roi de France et de Navarre) <col_header> Title </
     col_header> </cell> </table><page_title> List of French monarchs </page_title> <
     section_title> House of Capet (987âĂŞ1328) </section_title> <table> <cell> Philip IV the
     Fair, the Iron King (Philippe) <col_header> Name </col_header> </cell> <cell> 5 October
     1285 <col_header> King from </col_header> </cell> <cell> King of France and of Navarre (
     Roi de France et de Navarre) <col_header> Title </col_header> </cell> </table>
Zero-Shot: > </table><page_title> List of French monarchs <
PPO: Philip IV the Fair, the Iron King (Philippe) 5 October 1285. Title: King of France and of
      Navarre (Roi de France et de Navarre
NLPO: King (Philippe) Philip IV the Fair, the Iron King (Philippe) 5 October 1285
Supervised: Philip IV the Fair, the Iron King (Philippe) was King of France and Navarre from
     1285.
Supervised + PPO: Philip IV the Fair, the Iron King was King of France and Navarre from 1285.
Supervised + NLPO: Philip IV the Fair, the Iron King (Philippe) was King of France and Navarre
      (Roi de France et de Navarre) in 1285.

Sample 3
Prompt: <table> <cell> Benjamin A. Smith II (D) <col_header> Vacator </col_header> </cell> <
     cell> Successor elected November 6, 1962. <col_header> Reason for change </col_header> </
     cell> <cell> Ted Kennedy (D) <col_header> Successor </col_header> </cell> <cell> November
      7, 1962 <col_header> Date of successor’s formal installation </col_header> </cell> </
     table><page_title> 87th United States Congress </page_title> <section_title> Senate </
     section_title> <table> <cell> Benjamin A. Smith II (D) <col_header> Vacator </col_header>
      </cell> <cell> Successor elected November 6, 1962. <col_header> Reason for change </
     col_header> </cell> <cell> Ted Kennedy (D) <col_header> Successor </col_header> </cell> <
     cell> November 7, 1962 <col_header> Date of successor’s formal installation </col_header>
      </cell> </table>
Zero-Shot: cell> Ted Kennedy (D) col_header> Vacator /col_header> /cell> cell> November 7,
     1962 col_header> Reason for change
PPO: Ted Kennedy (D) succeeding November 6, 1962 as Vacator of the 87th United States Congress.

NLPO: Ted Kennedy (D) Successor elected November 6, 1962. table> cell Benjamin A. Smith II (D)
      col_header Reason for change: Date of successor’s formal installation November 7, 1962.
Supervised: Benjamin A. Smith II (D) served as senate until November 6, 1962 which was later
     served by Ted Kennedy (D) from November 7, 1962.
Supervised + PPO: Benjamin A. Smith II (D) served until November 6, 1962 and Ted Kennedy (D)
     succeeded him from November 7, 1962.
Supervised + NLPO: Benjamin A. Smith II (D) served until November 6, 1962 and Ted Kennedy (D)
     succeeded him from November 7, 1962.


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.7     NARRATIVE QA

B.7.1    S ETUP
NarrativeQA (Kočiskỳ et al., 2018) deals with task of generating answers to questions about a given
story. For training RL methods, we consider 2 traditional lexical rewards namely Rouge Combined
and Rouge-L-Max. We chose T5-base as the base LM since it has been shown to do well at question
answering in prior work (Khashabi et al., 2020). We note that the supervised models we use are
trained on the UnifiedQA dataset, which contains other QA datasets, and is shown by Khashabi et al.
(2020) to outperform supervised fine-tuning only on NarrativeQA. Hyperparams for our models can
be found in Table 27.

                          Model Params                            value
                          ppo/nlpo                    steps per update: 5120
                                                      total number of steps: 512000
                                                      batch size: 64
                                                      epochs per update: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.000002
                                                      entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                      initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                      target kl: 1.0
                                                      discount factor: 0.99
                                                      gae lambda: 0.95
                                                      clip ratio: 0.2
                                                      rollouts top k : 50
                                                      value function coeff: 0.5
                                                      top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                      target update iterations: 20
                          supervised+ ppo (or nlpo)   steps per update:2560
                                                      total number of steps: 512000
                                                      batch size: 64
                                                      epochs per update: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.0000005
                                                      entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                      initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                      target kl: 0.2
                                                      discount factor: 0.99
                                                      gae lambda: 0.95
                                                      clip ratio: 0.2
                                                      rollouts top k : 50
                                                      value function coeff: 0.5
                                                      top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                      target update iterations: 20
                          decoding                    num beams: 4
                                                      max new tokens: 50
                          tokenizer                   padding side: left
                                                      truncation side: right
                                                      max length: 512

  Table 27: NarQA Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings


                                                      49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
     Tasks                                                                            Lexical and Semantic Metrics                                                                  Diversity Metrics
                   Alg           Reward Function   LM   Rouge-1   Rouge-2   Rouge-L    Rouge-LSum Rouge-LMax         Meteor   BLEU    BertScore   MSTTR   Distinct1   Distinct2    H1      H2     Unique1   Unique2   Mean Output Length



                 Zero Shot                         T5    0.095     0.022     0.084         0.084         0.117       0.095    0.009    0.835      0.415    0.026       0.097      9.641    13.468   1880    11495           31.688
                   PPO           Rouge Combined    T5    0.101     0.025     0.088         0.088         0.122       0.099    0.01     0.837      0.462     0.03       0.125      9.759    13.789   2522    17806           32.352
                                  Rouge-L Max      T5    0.099     0.025     0.087         0.087         0.122       0.099    0.01     0.835      0.439    0.029       0.119      9.653    13.618   2292    15816           31.479
     NarQA
                  NLPO           Rouge Combined    T5    0.097     0.023     0.085         0.085         0.118       0.098    0.009    0.836      0.418    0.025       0.096      9.652    13.528   1816    10980           32.117
                                  Rouge-L Max      T5    0.102     0.026     0.089         0.089         0.124        0.1      0.01    0.837      0.445    0.029       0.118      9.776     13.75   2181    14569           31.555
                Supervised                         T5    0.378     0.190     0.367         0.367         0.581       0.099    0.209    0.931      0.609    0.156       0.534      9.807    13.657   3250    14995           4.923
             Supervised + PPO    Rouge Combined    T5     0.38     0.177     0.371         0.371         0.585        0.09    0.229    0.931       0.64    0.174       0.559      10.132   13.547   3326    13785           4.353
                                  Rouge-L Max      T5    0.368     0.18      0.36          0.36          0.585       0.083    0.239    0.931      0.641    0.187       0.576      10.201   13.452   3287    12436           3.913
             Supervised + NLPO   Rouge Combined    T5    0.398      0.21     0.393         0.373         0.589       0.096    0.24     0.971      0.679    0.185       0.595      10.304   13.694   3371    15067           4.728
                                  Rouge-L Max      T5    0.381     0.194     0.383         0.383         0.588       0.093    0.243    0.932      0.645    0.187        0.59       10.2    13.397   3287    12171           3.889


                             Table 28: Evaluation of NarrativeQA: Reference Metrics, supervised is based on UnifiedQA (Khashabi et al., 2020).
50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.7.2   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Table 28 presents our benchmarking results with 2 reward functions along with supervised baseline
performances on the NarrativeQA test set. Similar to other methods, our main finding is that warm-
started initial policies are crucial for learning to generate answers that successfully use the input
context.

B.7.3   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
We show sample generations from each of the algorithms for three randomly picked prompts below.
Sample 1
Prompt: who is mark hunter? mark hunter (slater), a high school student in a sleepy suburb of
     phoenix, arizona, starts an fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the basement of
     his parents’ house. mark is a loner, an outsider, whose only outlet for his teenage angst
      and aggression is his unauthorized radio station. his pirate station’s theme song is "
     everybody knows" by leonard cohen and there are glimpses of cassettes by such alternative
      musicians as the jesus and mary chain, camper van beethoven, primal scream, soundgarden,
      ice-t, bad brains, concrete blonde, henry rollins, and the pixies. by day, mark is seen
     as a loner, hardly talking to anyone around him; by night, he expresses his outsider
     views about what is wrong with american society. when he speaks his mind about what is
     going on at his school and in the community, more and more of his fellow students tune in
      to hear his show.nobody knows the true identity of "hard harry" or "happy harry hard-on
     ," as mark refers to himself, until nora diniro (mathis), a fellow student, tracks him
     down and confronts him the day after a student named malcolm commits suicide after harry
     attempts to reason with him. the radio show becomes increasingly popular and influential
     after harry confronts the suicide head-on, exhorting his listeners to do something about
     their problems instead of surrendering to them through suicideÃćÂĂÂŤat the crescendo of
     his yelled speech, an overachieving student named paige woodward (who has been a constant
      listener) jams her various medals and accolades into a microwave and turns it on. she
     then sits, watching the awards cook until the microwave explodes, injuring her. while
     this is happening, other students act out in cathartic release.eventually, the radio show
      causes so much trouble in the community that the fcc is called in to investigate. during
      the fracas, it is revealed that the school’s principal (annie ross) has been expelling "
     problem students," namely, students with below-average standardized test scores, in an
     effort to boost the district’s test scores while still keeping their names on the rolls (
     a criminal offense) in order to retain government funding.realizing he has started
     something huge, mark decides it is up to him to end it. he dismantles his radio station
     and attaches it to his mother’s old jeep, creating a mobile transmitter so his position
     can’t be triangulated. pursued by the police and the fcc, nora drives the jeep around
     while mark broadcasts. the harmonizer he uses to disguise his voice breaks, and with no
     time left to fix it, mark decides to broadcast his final message as himself. they finally
      drive up to the crowd of protesting students, and mark tells them that the world belongs
      to them and that they should make their own future. the police step in and arrest mark
     and nora. as they are taken away, mark reminds the students to "talk hard." as the film
     ends, the voices of other students (and even one of the teachers) speak as intros for
     their own independent stations, which can be heard broadcasting across the country.
Zero-Shot: hunter (slater) is a high school student in a sleepy suburb of phoenix, arizona. he
      starts an fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the basement of his
References: he is a high school student in phoenix 2) loner and outsider student with a radio
     station
PPO: hunter (slater), a high school student in a sleepy suburb of phoenix, arizona, starts an
     fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the basement of his parents’ house
NLPO: hunter (slater), a high school student in a sleepy suburb of phoenix, arizona, starts an
      fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the basement of his parents’ house
Supervised: a high school student
Supervised + PPO: a high school student
Supervised + NLPO: a high school student

Sample 2
Prompt: what was the principle doing with the problem students? mark hunter (slater), a high
     school student in a sleepy suburb of phoenix, arizona, starts an fm pirate radio station
     that broadcasts from the basement of his parents’ house. mark is a loner, an outsider,
     whose only outlet for his teenage angst and aggression is his unauthorized radio station.
      his pirate station’s theme song is "everybody knows" by leonard cohen and there are
     glimpses of cassettes by such alternative musicians as the jesus and mary chain, camper
     van beethoven, primal scream, soundgarden, ice-t, bad brains, concrete blonde, henry
     rollins, and the pixies. by day, mark is seen as a loner, hardly talking to anyone around
      him; by night, he expresses his outsider views about what is wrong with american society.
      when he speaks his mind about what is going on at his school and in the community, more
     and more of his fellow students tune in to hear his show.nobody knows the true identity
     of "hard harry" or "happy harry hard-on," as mark refers to himself, until nora diniro (
     mathis), a fellow student, tracks him down and confronts him the day after a student
     named malcolm commits suicide after harry attempts to reason with him. the radio show
     becomes increasingly popular and influential after harry confronts the suicide head-on,
     exhorting his listeners to do something about their problems instead of surrendering to
     them through suicideÂĂÂŤat the crescendo of his yelled speech, an overachieving student
     named paige woodward (who has been a constant listener) jams her various medals and



                                                 51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     accolades into a microwave and turns it on. she then sits, watching the awards cook until
      the microwave explodes, injuring her. while this is happening, other students act out in
      cathartic release.eventually, the radio show causes so much trouble in the community
     that the fcc is called in to investigate. during the fracas, it is revealed that the
     school’s principal (annie ross) has been expelling "problem students," namely, students
     with below-average standardized test scores, in an effort to boost the district’s test
     scores while still keeping their names on the rolls (a criminal offense) in order to
     retain government funding.realizing he has started something huge, mark decides it is up
     to him to end it. he dismantles his radio station and attaches it to his mother’s old
     jeep, creating a mobile transmitter so his position can’t be triangulated. pursued by the
      police and the fcc, nora drives the jeep around while mark broadcasts. the harmonizer he
      uses to disguise his voice breaks, and with no time left to fix it, mark decides to
     broadcast his final message as himself. they finally drive up to the crowd of protesting
     students, and mark tells them that the world belongs to them and that they should make
     their own future. the police step in and arrest mark and nora. as they are taken away,
     mark reminds the students to "talk hard." as the film ends, the voices of other students
     (and even one of the teachers) speak as intros for their own independent stations, which
     can be heard broadcasting across the country.
Zero-Shot: mark hunter (slater) starts an fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the
     basement of his parents’ house. by day, mark is seen as a loner, an outsider, whose only
     outlet
References: 1) expelling them. 2) expelling the students
PPO: mark hunter (slater) starts an fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the basement
     of his parents’ house. mark is a loner, an outsider, whose only outlet for his teenage
     ang
NLPO: mark hunter (slater) starts an fm pirate radio station that broadcasts from the basement
      of his parents’ house. mark is a loner, an outsider, whose only outlet for his teenage
     ang
Supervised: he was taking them to a psychiatric hospital.
Supervised + PPO: addressing them
Supervised + NLPO: he was expelling them

Sample 3
Prompt: what happens to the people maskull meets in his travels to various lands? maskull, a
     man longing for adventures, accepts an invitation from krag, an acquaintance of his
     friend nightspore, to travel to tormance after a seance. the three set off in a crystal
     ship from an abandoned observatory in scotland but maskull awakens to find himself alone
     on tormance. in every land he passes through he usually meets only one or two persons;
     these meetings often (though not always) end in the death of those he meets, either at
     his own hand or by that of another. he learns of his own impending death, meets krag
     again, and dies shortly after learning that he is in fact nightspore himself. the book
     concludes with a final revelation from krag (who claims to be known on earth as "pain")
     to nightspore about the origin of the universe. the author turns out to support a
     variation of the doctrine of the demiurge, somewhat similar to that propounded by some
     gnostics.all of the characters and lands are types used to convey the author’s critique
     of several philosophical systems. on tormance, most such viewpoints or ways of life are
     accompanied by corresponding new bodily sense organs or modifications of the same, thus
     each distinct weltanschauung landscape has its corresponding sensorium.
Zero-Shot: what happens to the people maskull meets in his travels to various lands? n maskull,
      a man longing for adventures, accepts an invitation from krag to travel to tormance
     after
References: 1) they usually die by his hand or anothers. 2) they die
PPO: what happens to the people maskull meets in his travels to various lands? n maskull, a
     man longing for adventures, accepts an invitation from krag to travel to tormance after
NLPO: maskull meets krag, an acquaintance of nightspore, to travel to tormance after a seance.
      maskull awakens to find himself alone on tormance. in every land
Supervised: they die either from his own hand or from another person’s death.
Supervised + PPO: they end up dying either at his own hand or by another’s.
Supervised + NLPO: they end up dying either at his own hand or by another’s


                                               52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.8     M ACHINE T RANSLATION

B.8.1    S ETUP
WMT-16 We pick two languages, English and German, and frame this task similarly to other machine
translation tasks—requiring the models to translate from English to German. We train models on 4
rewards: SacreBLEU, chRF, TER, and BertScore.

                          Model Params                              value
                          supervised                  batch size: 64
                                                      epochs: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.00001
                                                      learning rate scheduler: constant
                                                      weight decay: 0.1
                          ppo/nlpo                    steps per update: 5120
                                                      total number of steps: 256000
                                                      batch size: 64
                                                      epochs per update: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.0.000001
                                                      entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                      initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                      target kl: 0.2
                                                      discount factor: 0.99
                                                      gae lambda: 0.95
                                                      clip ratio: 0.2
                                                      rollouts top k : 10
                                                      value function coeff: 0.5
                                                      top mask ratio: 0.5
                                                      target update iterations: 20
                          supervised+ ppo (or nlpo)   steps per update:2560
                                                      total number of steps: 256000
                                                      batch size: 64
                                                      epochs per update: 5
                                                      learning rate: 0.0000005
                                                      entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                      initial kl coeff: 0.001
                                                      target kl: 0.2
                                                      discount factor: 0.99
                                                      gae lambda: 0.95
                                                      clip ratio: 0.2
                                                      rollouts top k : 10
                                                      value function coeff: 0.5
                                                      top mask ratio: 0.5
                                                      target update iterations: 20
                          decoding                    num beams: 4
                                                      length penalty: 0.6
                                                      max new tokens: 128
                          tokenizer                   padding side: left
                                                      truncation side: right
                                                      max length: 128

   Table 29: NMT Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings


B.8.2    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Tables 30, 31 presents our benchmarking results with 4 reward functions along with supervised
baseline performances on test set. Our main finding is that NLPO + Supervised performs better than
PPO and supervised models.


                                                      53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Datasets                                                                                Lexical and Semantic Metrics
                  Alg           LM   Reward Function   Rouge-1   Rouge-2   Rouge-L   Rouge-LSum Meteor BLEU SacreBLEU   chRf    TER     BertScore

                Zero-Shot       T5                      0.635     0.414     0.591      0.591    0.483   0.294   0.348   0.613   0.543    0.882
                  PPO           T5     SacreBLEU        0.636     0.415     0.591      0.591    0.482   0.294   0.348   0.614   0.539    0.882
                                T5        chRF          0.635     0.414     0.591      0.591    0.481   0.291   0.346   0.612   0.540    0.882
                                T5        TER           0.638     0.416     0.595      0.594    0.484   0.294   0.350   0.616   0.534    0.883
                                T5      BertScore       0.637     0.417     0.593      0.593    0.479   0.294   0.347   0.613   0.534    0.882
                 NLPO           T5     SacreBLEU        0.635     0.415     0.592      0.592    0.484   0.297   0.352   0.615   0.542    0.882
                                T5        chRF          0.634     0.413      0.59       0.59    0.481   0.291   0.345   0.612   0.540    0.882
                                T5        TER           0.633     0.412      0.59       0.59    0.477   0.286   0.341   0.608   0.540    0.881
 WMT16                          T5      BertScore       0.622     0.397      0.58      0.581    0.458   0.269   0.323   0.591   0.546    0.876
               Supervised       T5                      0.635     0.411     0.590      0.590    0.482   0.294   0.350   0.617   0.540    0.882
            Supervised + PPO    T5     SacreBLEU        0.640     0.416     0.595      0.595    0.487   0.298   0.355   0.620   0.533    0.883
                                T5        chRF          0.640     0.416     0.596      0.596    0.486   0.298   0.354   0.621   0.532    0.883
                                T5        TER           0.637     0.414     0.594      0.594    0.483   0.295   0.352   0.618   0.533    0.882
                                T5      BertScore       0.637     0.413     0.593      0.594    0.482   0.294   0.350   0.616   0.533    0.882
            Supervised + NLPO   T5     SacreBLEU        0.642     0.419     0.596      0.596    0.497   0.297   0.355   0.621   0.533    0.888
                                T5        chRF          0.636     0.412     0.592      0.592    0.492   0.293   0.349   0.617   0.534    0.886
                                T5        TER           0.637     0.414     0.594      0.594    0.491   0.292   0.349   0.615   0.531    0.886
                                T5      BertScore        0.64     0.417     0.598      0.598    0.499   0.287   0.349   0.62    0.538    0.887


                Zero-Shot       T5                      0.619     0.386     0.588      0.587    0.445   0.254   0.308   0.577   0.573    0.870
                  PPO           T5     SacreBLEU        0.621     0.383     0.587      0.587    0.448   0.243   0.296   0.575   0.583    0.869
                                T5        chRF          0.622     0.385     0.590      0.590    0.448   0.248   0.301   0.578   0.575    0.870
                                T5        TER           0.623     0.384     0.591      0.591    0.443   0.246   0.303   0.572   0.568    0.869
                                T5      BertScore       0.533     0.326     0.507      0.507    0.321   0.143   0.174   0.406   0.573    0.839
                 NLPO           T5     SacreBLEU        0.624     0.385     0.59        0.59    0.45    0.245   0.299   0.578   0.578    0.87
                                T5        chRF          0.624     0.386     0.59        0.59    0.451   0.248   0.302   0.581   0.576    0.87
                                T5        TER           0.622     0.384     0.59        0.59    0.443   0.246   0.303   0.573    0.57    0.869
IWSLT2017                       T5      BertScore       0.611     0.377     0.58        0.58    0.425   0.239   0.291   0.555   0.573    0.866
               Supervised       T5                      0.638     0.400     0.610      0.609    0.461   0.280   0.337   0.593   0.538    0.878
            Supervised + PPO    T5     SacreBLEU        0.640     0.407     0.610      0.610    0.465   0.277   0.332   0.596   0.542    0.877
                                T5        chRF          0.639     0.406     0.609      0.609    0.464   0.277   0.331   0.596   0.543    0.877
                                T5        TER           0.637     0.406     0.609      0.609    0.457   0.274   0.331   0.589   0.535    0.876
                                T5      BertScore       0.612     0.381     0.585      0.585    0.418   0.240   0.291   0.548   0.559    0.867
            Supervised + NLPO   T5     SacreBLEU        0.641     0.418     0.614      0.614    0.474   0.289   0.343   0.597   0.535    0.877
                                T5        chRF          0.643     0.418     0.621      0.621    0.464   0.291   0.345   0.596   0.539    0.877
                                T5        TER           0.639     0.419     0.621      0.621    0.471   0.289   0.346   0.593   0.535    0.877
                                T5      BertScore       0.633     0.401     0.606      0.606    0.448   0.267   0.323   0.580   0.537    0.875


Table 30: WMT-16 and IWSLT test evaluation - lexical and semantic: Table shows lexical,
semantic metrics for RL algorithms with different reward functions bench-marked against supervised
baseline models


                                                                           54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Tasks                                                                                          Diversity Metrics
                  Alg           Reward Function      LM        MSTTR   Distinct1   Distinct2    H1      H2     Unique1   Unique2   Mean Output Length

                Zero-Shot             T5                       0.732    0.193       0.675      10.100   14.561   7290    33691           20.533
                  PPO                 T5          SacreBLEU    0.738    0.198       0.687      10.166   14.613   7503    34140           20.375
                                      T5             chRF      0.738    0.196       0.687      10.175   14.611   7376    34116           20.337
                                      T5             TER       0.736    0.196       0.683      10.132   14.588   7447    33977           20.356
                                      T5           BertScore   0.736    0.195       0.685      10.129   14.574   7272    33477           20.035
                 NLPO                 T5          SacreBLEU    0.735    0.193       0.68       10.125   14.592   7395    34276           20.672
                                      T5             chRF      0.738    0.196       0.686      10.164   14.606   7399    34056           20.351
                                      T5             TER        0.74     0.2        0.694      10.204    14.63   7522    34234           20.151
 WMT16                                T5           BertScore   0.739     0.2        0.698      10.194   14.608   7203    33169           19.482
               Supervised             T5                       0.729    0.190       0.669      10.048   14.530   7205    33430           20.622
            Supervised + PPO          T5          SacreBLEU    0.732    0.191       0.674      10.080   14.552   7222    33723           20.605
                                      T5             chRF      0.735    0.192       0.677      10.093   14.569   7319    33923           20.586
                                      T5             TER       0.732    0.192       0.676      10.079   14.553   7265    33635           20.441
                                      T5           BertScore   0.732    0.192       0.677      10.082   14.550   7187    33385           20.305
            Supervised + NLPO         T5          SacreBLEU    0.734    0.191       0.675      10.089   14.568   7308    33941           20.686
                                      T5             chRF      0.735    0.194       0.681      10.112   14.571   7372    33814           20.348
                                      T5             TER       0.737    0.194       0.682      10.105   14.566   7243    33482           20.159
                                      T5           BertScore   0.737    0.227       0.742      10.042   14.179   5438    22574            12.63


                Zero-Shot             T5                       0.662    0.097       0.4700     9.276    14.526   8312    52947           18.739
                  PPO                 T5          SacreBLEU    0.657    0.095       0.464      9.230    14.498   8285    53000           19.069
                                      T5             chRF      0.660    0.096       0.468      9.253    14.526   8243    53142           18.912
                                      T5             TER       0.659    0.097       0.474      9.244    14.536   8129    51914           18.268
                                      T5           BertScore   0.673    0.120       0.541      9.288    14.388   6642    37267           11.602
                 NLPO                 T5          SacreBLEU    0.656    0.094       0.463      9.207    14.483   8240    52822           19.043
                                      T5             chRF      0.658    0.095       0.464      9.233    14.502   8230    53167           19.073
                                      T5             TER       0.661    0.098       0.476      9.271    14.552   8223    52438           18.344
IWSLT2017                             T5           BertScore   0.667    0.102       0.491       9.31    14.576   8134    50740           17.162
               Supervised             T5                       0.655    0.095       0.467      9.210    14.492   7970    51430           18.440
            Supervised + PPO          T5          SacreBLEU    0.654    0.094       0.461      9.176    14.467   8061    51840           18.803
                                      T5             chRF      0.656    0.094       0.464      9.202    14.497   8054    52198           18.794
                                      T5             TER       0.658    0.097       0.475      9.239    14.529   7969    51255           18.048
                                      T5           BertScore   0.665    0.102       0.495      9.270    14.524   7495    47629           16.051
            Supervised + NLPO         T5          SacreBLEU    0.655    0.094       0.461      9.182    14.469   8073    51797           18.777
                                      T5             chRF      0.657    0.095       0.466      9.212    14.503   8074    52056           18.642
                                      T5             TER       0.658    0.096       0.473      9.231    14.521   8025    51389           18.133
                                      T5           BertScore   0.661    0.098       0.482       9.26    14.547   7852    50672           17.496


Table 31: WMT-16 and IWSLT test evaluation - diversity metrics Table shows diversity metrics
for RL algorithms with different reward functions bench-marked against supervised baseline models


                                                                       55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.8.3   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
We show sample generations from each of the algorithms for three randomly picked prompts from
IWSLT below.
Sample 1
Prompt: translate English to German: Several years ago here at TED, Peter Skillman introduced
     a design challenge called the marshmallow challenge.
Zero-Shot: Vor einigen Jahren hat Peter Skillman hier bei TED eine Design-Herausforderung
     namens Marshmallow Challenge vorgestellt.
PPO: Vor einigen Jahren, hier bei TED, stellte Peter Skillman einen Design-Wettbewerb namens "
     Die Marshmallow-Herausforderung" vor
NLPO: Vor einigen Jahren hier bei TED fÃijhrte Peter Skillman eine Design-Herausforderung
     namens Marshmallow Challenge ein.
Supervised: Vor einigen Jahren hier bei TED fÃijfchrte Peter Skillman eine Design-
     Herausforderung namens Marshmallow Challenge ein.
Supervised + PPO: Vor einigen Jahren hier bei TED, fÃijhrte Peter Skillman eine Design-
     Herausforderung namens Marshmallow-Herausforderung ein.
Supervised + NLPO: Vor einigen Jahren hier bei TED fÃijchrte Peter Skillman eine Design-
     Herausforderung ein, die Marshmallow-Herausforderung.

Sample 2
Prompt: translate English to German: They spend the majority of their time assembling the
     sticks into ever-growing structures.
Zero-Shot: Sie verbringen den grÃűÃ§ten Teil ihrer Zeit damit, die StÃűcke in immer wachsende
     Strukturen zu montieren.
References: Sie investieren einen GroÃ§teil ihrer Zeit in den Zusammenbau stÃd’ndig wachsender
      Strukturen
PPO: Sie verbringen den GroÃ§teil ihrer Zeit damit, die StÃűcke in immer grÃűÃ§er werdende
     Strukturen zu montieren.
NLPO: Sie verbringen den GroÃ§teil ihrer Zeit, die StÃűcke in immer wachsende Strukturen zu
     montieren.
Supervised: Sie verbringen den GroÃ§teil ihrer Zeit damit, die StÃűcke in immer wachsende
     Strukturen zu montieren.
Supervised + PPO: Sie verbringen den GroÃ§teil ihrer Zeit damit, die StÃűcke in immer
     wachsende Strukturen zu montieren.
Supervised + NLPO: Sie verbringen den GroÃ§teil ihrer Zeit damit, die StÃűcke in immer
     wachsende Strukturen zu montieren.

Sample 3
Prompt: translate English to German: And of course there are teams that have a lot more "ta-da
     " structures, and among the best are recent graduates of kindergarten.
Zero-Shot: Und natÃijrlich gibt es Teams, die viel mehr "ta-da" Strukturen haben, und zu den
     besten gehÃűren jÃijngste Absolventen des Kindergartens.
References: Und natÃijrlich gibt es auch Teams die viel mehr "ta-da"-Gebilde haben und unter
     den Besten sind frische Absolventen des Kindergartens.
PPO: Und natÃijrlich gibt es Teams, die viel mehr "ta-da" Strukturen, und unter den besten
     sind jÃijngste Absolventen des Kindergartens.
NLPO: Und natÃijrlich gibt es Teams, die viel mehr "t
a-da" Strukturen haben, und unter den besten sind jÃijngste Absolventen des Kindergartens
Supervised: Und natÃijrlich gibt es Teams, die viel mehr "ta-da"-Strukturen haben, und unter
     den besten sind jÃijngste Absolventen des Kindergartens.
Supervised + PPO: Und natÃijrlich gibt es Teams, die viel mehr "ta-da"-Strukturen haben, und
     unter den besten sind jÃijngste Absolventen des Kindergartens.
Supervised + NLPO: Und natÃijlich gibt es Teams, die viel mehr "ta-da"-Strukturen haben, und
     unter den besten sind jÃijngste Absolventen des Kindergartens.


                                               56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.9     DAILY D IALOG

B.9.1    S ETUP
We consider DailyDialog (Li et al., 2017) as the test bed for the dialogue generation task. The dataset
includes conversations written by human on various topics. In addition, each utterance contains labels
of intent and emotional information. For simplicity, we focus only on generating the next utterance,
given the dialogue context. We chose a context window of size 5, which results in 35k training, 3k
and 3k utterances. The input to the model is dialogue history in which utterances are concatenated
using a <EOU> token. We picked GPT-2 as the LM as they are more suited for text continuation than
encoder-decoder LMs. For a fair comparison, we use top-k sampling with k = 20 as the decoding
method for all methods. For RL methods, we use a linear combination of meteor score and intent
match score (whether the generated text’s intent matches with the reference’s intent) as the reward
function. The coefficients for meteor and intent are chosen based on both lexical scores and intent
accuracy on the validation set. For this purpose, we trained an intent classifier (fine-tuned RoBERTa
(Liu et al., 2019)) that classifies given text into intent categories such as inform, question, directive
and commisive, etc. Table 32 provides a summary of hyperparameters and implementation details.

                            Model Params                            value
                            ppo/nlpo                    steps per update: 1280
                                                        total number of steps: 128000
                                                        batch size: 64
                                                        epochs per update: 5
                                                        learning rate: 0.000001
                                                        entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                        initial kl coeff: 0.2
                                                        target kl: 0.5
                                                        discount factor: 0.99
                                                        gae lambda: 0.95
                                                        clip ratio: 0.2
                                                        rollouts top k : 20
                                                        value function coeff: 0.5
                                                        meteor coeff: 0.25
                                                        intent coeff: 0.75
                                                        top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                        target update iterations: 20
                            supervised+ ppo (or nlpo)   steps per update:1280
                                                        total number of steps: 64000
                                                        batch size: 64
                                                        epochs per update: 5
                                                        learning rate: 0.000001
                                                        entropy coefficient: 0.0
                                                        initial kl coeff: 0.2
                                                        target kl: 0.5
                                                        discount factor: 0.99
                                                        gae lambda: 0.95
                                                        clip ratio: 0.2
                                                        rollouts top k : 20
                                                        value function coeff: 0.5
                                                        meteor coeff: 0.5 0.25
                                                        intent coeff: 0.5 0.75
                                                        top mask ratio: 0.9
                                                        target update iterations: 20
                            decoding                    top k: 20
                                                        min length: 2
                                                        max new tokens: 50
                            tokenizer                   padding side: left
                                                        truncation side: right
                                                        max length: 128

Table 32: DailyDialog Hyperparams: Table shows a list of all hyper-parameters and their settings


                                                        57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
     Tasks                                                                                 Lexical and Semantic Metrics                                                                   Diversity Metrics
                    Alg           Reward Function    LM     Rouge-1   Rouge-2   Rouge-L   Rouge-LSum Meteor SacreBLEU     BertScore   Intent Accuracy   MSTTR   Distinct1   Distinct2    H1     H2     Unique1   Unique2   Mean Output Length


                  Zero Shot                         GPT-2    0.157     0.012     0.131      0.131     0.191     0.066      0.854          0.427         0.608    0.055       0.316      7.787   11.831   1574    12327           18.685
     Dialog      Supervised                         GPT-2    0.162     0.020     0.138      0.138     0.186     0.064      0.855          0.437         0.635    0.065       0.342      8.051   12.119   1925    13952           18.919
58


                    PPO           Meteor + Intent   GPT-2    0.168     0.012     0.142      0.142     0.221     0.085      0.861          0.474         0.581    0.058       0.310      7.653   11.437   1719    12156           18.538
                   NLPO           Meteor + Intent   GPT-2    0.169     0.013     0.142      0.142     0.221     0.087      0.860          0.490         0.568    0.059       0.309      7.630   11.351   1718    11946           18.397
              Supervised + PPO    Meteor + Intent   GPT-2    0.169     0.021     0.144      0.144     0.198     0.071      0.857          0.455         0.626    0.068       0.348      8.056   12.015   1983    14170           18.829
              Supervised + NLPO   Meteor + Intent   GPT-2    0.171     0.020     0.146      0.146     0.205     0.074      0.858          0.454         0.624    0.070       0.349      8.044   11.990   2051    14213           18.763


      Table 33: Evaluation of Daily Dialog: Table shows lexical, semantic metrics for RL algorithms bench-marked against supervised baseline models
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Coherence                 Quality
            Algorithm        Unique N
                                         Value     Alpha Skew      Value   Alpha     Skew
         Zeroshot                   31    3.84      0.225 4.181      3.2    0.125    3.352
         NLPO                       30    4.18      0.114  4.17     3.35    0.159    3.318
         PPO                        32    4.18      0.112 4.032     3.32    0.163    3.478
         Supervised+PPO             31    3.99      0.148 4.133     3.48    0.166     3.58
         Supervised+NLPO            31    4.13      0.186 3.953     3.58    0.178    3.597
         Supervised                 31    3.96      0.249 3.834     3.59    0.236    3.196

Table 34: Results of the human subject study showing the number of participants N, average Likert
scale value for coherence and sentiment, Krippendorf’s alpha showing inter-annotator agreement,
and Skew. For each model a total of 100 samples were drawn randomly from the test set and rated by
3 annotators each, each resulting in 300 data points per algorithm.


B.9.2   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Table 33 presents our benchmarking results of RL methods along with supervised baseline perfor-
mances on test sets. Our main finding is that RL methods generally achieve better intent accuracy
and automatic metric scores, in particular NLPO variants perform better than all other methods.

B.9.3   H UMAN PARTICIPANT S TUDY
Figure 10 shows the Daily Dialogue instructions and interface used for the human evaluation ex-
periments. Tables 34, 35 show averaged results, annotator agreement, and the results of statistical
significance tests to determine which models output better generations when rated by humans.

                                                    Coherence                   Quality
         Group 1             Group 2
                                             Diff (G2-G1) p-values     Diff (G2-G1) p-values
    NLPO                PPO                         -0.003    0.900           -0.030    0.900
    NLPO                Supervised                  -0.227    0.043            0.238    0.020
    NLPO                Supervised+NLPO             -0.050    0.900            0.234    0.022
    NLPO                Supervised+PPO              -0.194    0.013            0.127    0.803
    NLPO                Zero Shot                   -0.345    0.001           -0.154    0.655
    PPO                 Supervised                  -0.224    0.049            0.268    0.010
    PPO                 Supervised+NLPO             -0.047    0.900            0.264    0.011
    PPO                 Supervised+PPO              -0.191    0.144            0.157    0.636
    PPO                 Zero Shot                   -0.341    0.001           -0.124    0.822
    Supervised          Supervised+NLPO              0.177    0.021           -0.003    0.900
    Supervised          Supervised+PPO               0.033    0.900           -0.110    0.896
    Supervised          Zero Shot                   -0.117    0.645           -0.391    0.002
    Supervised+NLPO     Supervised+PPO              -0.144    0.444           -0.107    0.009
    Supervised+NLPO     Zero Shot                   -0.294    0.002           -0.388    0.003
    Supervised+PPO      Zero Shot                   -0.151    0.390           -0.281    0.008

Table 35: Results of an post-hoc Tukey HSD Test for difference in means between pairs of algorithms
(Group 2 - Group 1) and corresponding p-values. Individually statistically significant results are
bolded and are used to discuss results in the analysis. Overall p-values showing that there is a
significant difference in means between the models via a one-way ANOVA test are significant with
p ≪ 0.05 for both coherence and sentiment.


                                                 59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Figure 10: Instructions and interface for the Daily Dialogue task.


B.9.4      Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
We show sample generations from each of the algorithms for three randomly picked prompts below.
Sample 1
Prompt: Right . And China is the homeland of tea . <EOU> Yes , Chinese people love drinking
     tea so much . Some even claim they can’t live without tea . <EOU> Do you know there are
     several catagories of Chinese tea ? <EOU> Yes , I believe there are green teas , black
     teas and scented teas . Any Others ? <EOU> Well , have you ever heard of Oulong tea and
     compressed tea ? <EOU>
References: Oh , yeah . Oulong tea is good for one’s health . isn’t it ?
Zero-Shot: I know that Oulong tea can be enjoyed with very few meals, and there are very few
PPO: I have, but it’s not as strong as Oulong tea.
NLPO: I haven’t. I don’t have tea.
Supervised: Yes. I hear they do good. And I heard this Taijiquan Tea is very good
Supervised + PPO: Actually, I have had Oulong tea, but I haven’t had any for awhile now.
Supervised + NLPO: No, I’ve never heard of that.

Sample 2



                                                 60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Prompt: I think I might have a dahl . <EOU> what’s in a dahl ? <EOU> it’s got chickpeas and
     vegetables in a spicy curry sauce with rice . <EOU> that sounds nice . Do you want to
     share some kebabs as well ? <EOU> ok . How about some lamb kebabs ? <EOU>
References: that’s my favourite . Do you want to have some wine or beer ?
Zero-Shot: they’re very salty
PPO: well you might want to take a peek.
NLPO: well I like that.
Supervised: ok, here they are. I’m so thirsty. I can’t wait until the next bus to
Supervised + PPO: I’ve tried that a few times, but they’re too dry and I don’t want any of
Supervised + NLPO: oh, ok. That’s a good choice. I’ll take it.

Sample 3
Prompt: Really ? Have you had an auto-reverse break before ? <EOU> Yes , twice now . I think
     it’s too high-tech , and so it’s the first part that breaks . <EOU> Hmm . You know , the
     problem might be dust . Did you clean the unit often ? <EOU> Well . No , I didn’t clean
     it.But still , I only had the last one two months , and it broke . I don’t trust auto-
     reverse . <EOU> Alright . Well . We have many units without auto-reverse.Here is a good
     unit . Very reliable.It has an AM / FM band , built-in microphone , recording capability ,
      and no auto-reverse . <EOU>
References: How much is it ?
Zero-Shot: Oh. So you don’t have the AM / FM band?
PPO: You said AM / FM. Are you sure about that?
NLPO: Well. Well. I had no idea when it was, and didn’t care.
Supervised: Good.Well, what else I need?
Supervised + PPO: But I think it lacks the CD player or its CD player accessories.
Supervised + NLPO: Cool! So what’s the trouble with it?


                                               61
