Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R ELIABILITY OF CKA AS A S IMILARITY
M EASURE IN D EEP L EARNING
                    MohammadReza Davari 1,3 ∗ Stefan Horoi 2,3 ∗ Amine Natik 2,3
                                                     2,3 †
                       Guillaume Lajoie 2,3
                                            Guy Wolf       Eugene Belilovsky 1,3 †
              1                           2                              3
                  Concordia University        Université de Montréal         Mila – Quebec AI Institute
                {mohammadreza.davari, eugene.belilovsky}@concordia.ca
         {stefan.horoi, amine.natik, guillaume.lajoie, guy.wolf}@umontreal.ca

                                                A BSTRACT
             Comparing learned neural representations in neural networks is a challenging but
             important problem, which has been approached in different ways. The Centered
             Kernel Alignment (CKA) similarity metric, particularly its linear variant, has
             recently become a popular approach and has been widely used to compare represen-
             tations of a network’s different layers, of architecturally similar networks trained
             differently, or of models with different architectures trained on the same data. A
             wide variety of conclusions about similarity and dissimilarity of these various
             representations have been made using CKA. In this work we present analysis that
             formally characterizes CKA sensitivity to a large class of simple transformations,
             which can naturally occur in the context of modern machine learning. This provides
             a concrete explanation of CKA sensitivity to outliers, which has been observed
             in past works, and to transformations that preserve the linear separability of the
             data, an important generalization attribute. We empirically investigate several
             sensitivities of the CKA similarity metric, demonstrating situations in which it
             gives unexpected or counter-intuitive results. Finally we study approaches for
             modifying representations to maintain functional behaviour while changing the
             CKA value. Our results illustrate that, in many cases, the CKA value can be easily
             manipulated without substantial changes to the functional behaviour of the models,
             and call for caution when leveraging activation alignment metrics.
1       I NTRODUCTION
In the last decade, increasingly complex deep learning models have dominated machine learning and
have helped us solve, with remarkable accuracy, a multitude of tasks across a wide array of domains.
Due to the size and flexibility of these models it has been challenging to study and understand exactly
how they solve the tasks we use them on. A helpful framework for thinking about these models is that
of representation learning, where we view artificial neural networks (ANNs) as learning increasingly
complex internal representations as we go deeper through their layers. In practice, it is often of
interest to analyze and compare the representations of multiple ANNs. However, the typical high
dimensionality of ANN internal representation spaces makes this a fundamentally difficult task.
To address this problem, the machine learning community has tried finding meaningful ways to
compare ANN internal representations and various representation (dis)similarity measures have been
proposed (Li et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2018; Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018). Recently,
Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019) was proposed and shown to be able to
reliably identify correspondences between representations in architecturally similar networks trained
on the same dataset but from different initializations, unlike past methods such as linear regression
or CCA based methods (Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018). While CKA can capture different
notions of similarity between points in representation space by using different kernel functions, it was
empirically shown in the original work that there are no real benefits to using CKA with a nonlinear
kernel over its linear counterpart. As a result, linear CKA has been the preferred representation
similarity measure of the machine learning community in recent years and other similarity measures
(including nonlinear CKA) are seldomly used. CKA has been utilized in a number of works to make
conclusions regarding the similarity between different models and their behaviours such as wide
versus deep ANNs (Nguyen et al., 2021) and transformer versus CNN based ANNs (Raghu et al.,
2021). They have also been used to draw conclusions about transfer learning (Neyshabur et al., 2020)
and catastrophic forgetting (Ramasesh et al., 2021). Due to this widespread use, it is important to
    ∗
        Equal contribution, name order randomized.† Equal senior-author contribution


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


understand how reliable the CKA similarity measure is and in what cases it fails to provide meaningful
results. In this paper, we study CKA sensitivity to a class of simple transformations and show how
CKA similarity values can be directly manipulated without noticeable changes in the model final
output behaviour. In particular our contributions are as follows:
In Sec. 3 and with Thm. 1 we characterize CKA sensitivity to a large class of simple transformations,
which can naturally occur in ANNs. With Cor. 3 and 4 we extend our theoretical results to cover CKA
sensitivity to outliers, which has been empirically observed in previous work (Nguyen et al., 2021;
Ding et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022), and to transformations preserving linear separability of data,
an important characteristic for generalization. Concretely, our theoretical contributions show how
the CKA value between two copies of the same set of representations can be significantly decreased
through simple, functionality preserving transformations of one of the two copies. In Sec. 4 we
empirically analyze CKA’s reliability, illustrating our theoretical results and subsequently presenting
a general optimization procedure that allows the CKA value to be heavily manipulated to be either
high or low without significant changes to the functional behaviour of the underlying ANNs. We use
this to revisit previous findings (Nguyen et al., 2021; Kornblith et al., 2019).

2    BACKGROUND ON CKA AND R ELATED W ORK
Comparing representations Let X ∈ Rn×d1 denote a set of ANN internal representations, i.e.,
the neural activations of a specific layer with d1 neurons in a network, in response to n ∈ N input
examples. Let Y ∈ Rn×d2 be another set of such representations generated by the same input
examples but possibly at a different layer of the same, or different, deep learning model. It is standard
practice to center these representations column-wise (feature or “neuron” wise) before analyzing
them. We are interested in representation similarity measures, which try to capture a certain notion of
similarity between X and Y .
Quantifying similarity Li et al. (2015) have considered one-to-one, many-to-one and many-to-
many mappings between neurons from different neural networks, found through activation correlation
maximization. Wang et al. (2018) extended that work by providing a rigorous theory of neuron
activation subspace match and algorithms to compute such matches between neurons. Alternatively,
Raghu et al. (2017) introduced SVCCA where singular value decomposition is used to identify the
most important directions in activation space. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) is then applied
to find maximally correlated singular vectors from the two sets of representations and the mean of the
correlation coefficients is used as a similarity measure. In order to give less importance to directions
corresponding to noise, Morcos et al. (2018) introduced projection weighted CCA (PWCCA). The
PWCCA similarity measure corresponds to the weighted sum of the correlation coefficients, assigning
more importance to directions in representation space contributing more to the output of the layer.
Many other representation similarity measures have been proposed based on linear classifying probes
(Alain & Bengio, 2016; Davari et al., 2022), fixed points topology of internal dynamics in recurrent
neural networks (Sussillo & Barak, 2013; Maheswaranathan et al., 2019), solving the orthogonal
Procrustes problem between sets of representations (Ding et al., 2021; Williams et al., 2021) and
many more (Laakso & Cottrell, 2000; Lenc & Vedaldi, 2018; Arora et al., 2017). We also note that a
large body of neuroscience research has focused on comparing neural activation patterns in biological
neural networks (Edelman, 1998; Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; Williams et al., 2021; Low et al., 2021).
CKA Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019) is another such similarity measure
based on the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005) that was presented
as a means to evaluate independence between random variables in a non-parametric way. For
Ki,j = k(xi , xj ) and Li,j = l(yi , yj ) where k, l are kernels and for H = I − n1 11⊤ the centering
                                                       1
matrix, HSIC can be written as: HSIC(K, L) = (n−1)        2 tr(KHLH). CKA can then be computed as:


                                                       HSIC(K, L)
                             CKA(K, L) = p                                                           (1)
                                                HSIC(K, K)HSIC(L, L)
In the linear case k and l are both the inner product so K = XX ⊤ , L = Y Y ⊤ and we use the
notation CKA(X, Y ) = CKA(XX ⊤ , Y Y ⊤ ). Intuitively, HSIC computes the similarity structures
of X and Y , as measured by the kernel matrices K and L, and then compares these similarity
structures (after centering) by computing their alignment through the trace of KHLH.
Recent CKA results CKA has been used in recent years to make many claims about neural network
representations. Nguyen et al. (2021) used CKA to establish that parameter initialization drastically
impact feature similarity and that the last layers of overparameterized (very wide or deep) models


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learn representations that are very similar, characterized by a visible “block structure” in the networks
CKA heatmap. CKA has also been used to compare vision transformers with convolutional neural
networks and to find striking differences between the representations learned by the two architectures,
such as vision transformers having more uniform representations across all layers (Raghu et al.,
2021). Ramasesh et al. (2021) have used CKA to find that deeper layers are especially responsible
for forgetting in transfer learning settings.
Most closely related to our work, Ding et al. (2021) demonstrated that CKA lacks sensitivity to
the removal of low variance principal components from the analyzed representations even when
this removal significantly decreases probing accuracy. Also, Nguyen et al. (2022) found that the
previously observed high CKA similarity between representations of later layers in large capacity
models (so-called block structure) is actually caused by a few dominant data points that share similar
characteristics. Williams et al. (2021) discussed how CKA does not respect the triangle inequality,
which makes it problematic to use CKA values as a similarity measure in downstream analysis tasks.
We distinguish ourselves from these papers by providing theoretical justifications to CKA sensitivity
to outliers and to directions of high variance which were only empirically observed in Ding et al.
(2021); Nguyen et al. (2021). Secondly, we do not only present situations in which CKA gives
unexpected results but we also show how CKA values can be manipulated to take on arbitrary values.
Nonlinear CKA The original CKA paper (Kornblith et al., 2019) stated that, in practice, CKA with
a nonlinear kernel gave similar results as linear CKA across the considered experiments. Potentially
as a result of this, all subsequent papers which used CKA as a neural representation similarity measure
have used linear CKA (Maheswaranathan et al., 2019; Neyshabur et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021;
Raghu et al., 2021; Ramasesh et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2021; Williams et al., 2021; Kornblith et al.,
2021), and to our knowledge, no published work besides Kornblith et al. (2019); Nguyen et al. (2022)
has used CKA with a nonlinear kernel. Consequently, we largely focus our analysis on linear CKA
which is the most popular method and the one actually used in practice. However, our empirical
results suggest that many of the observed problems hold for CKA with an RBF kernel and we discuss
a possible way of extending our theoretical results to the nonlinear case.

3    CKA SENSITIVITY TO SUBSET TRANSLATION
Invariances and sensitivities are important theoretical characteristics of representation similarity
measures since they indicate what kind of transformations respectively maintain or change the
value of the similarity measure. In other words they indicate what transformations “preserve” or
“destroy” the similarity between representations as defined by the specific measure used. Kornblith
et al. (2019) argued that representation similarity measures should not be invariant to invertible
linear transformations. They showed that measures which are invariant to such transformations
give the same result for any set of representations of width (i.e. number of dimensions/neurons)
greater than or equal to the dataset size. They instead introduced the CKA method, which satisfies
weaker conditions of invariance, specifically it is invariant to orthogonal transformations such as
permutations, rotations and reflections and to isotropic scaling. Alternatively, transformations to
which representation similarity measures are sensitive have not been studied despite being highly
informative as to what notion of “similarity” is captured by a given measure. For example, a measure
that is highly sensitive to a transformation T is clearly measuring a notion of similarity that is
destroyed by T . In this section, we theoretically characterize CKA sensitivity to a wide class of
simple transformations, namely the translation of a subset of the representations. We also justify
why this class of transformations and the special cases it contains are important in the context of
predictive tasks that are solved using neural networks.
Theorem 1. Consider a set of n internal representations in p dimensions X ∈ Rn×p that have been
centered column-wise, let S ⊂ X such that ρ = |X| |S|
                                                      ≤ 12 and #»
                                                                v such that ∥ #»
                                                                              v ∥ = 1. We define
    #»                #»
XS, v ,c = S ∪ {x + c v : x ∈ X\S}. Then we have:
                                                        ∥Ex∈S [x]∥2 p
                    lim CKAlin (X, XS, #»
                                       v ,c ) = Γ(ρ)                  dimP R (X)                     (2)
                   c→∞                                  Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]
                                                              2
                                                     ( λi )
                                                       P
                  ρ
where Γ(ρ) = 1−ρ      ∈ (0, 1], and dimP R (X) ≜ Pi λ2 ∈ [1, p] the dimensionality estimate
                                                         i i
provided by the participation ratio of eigenvalues {λi } of the covariance of X.
                                                              |S|
Corollary 2. Thm. 1 holds even if S is taken such that ρ = |X|    ∈ (0.5, 1).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Visual representations of the transformations considered in the theoretical results. a) Thm. 1: The
original set of neural representations X contains subsets S (red) and X\S (green). We can then build XS, #v»,c as
a copy of X, where the points in X\S are translated a distance c in direction #» v . The linear CKA value between
X and XS, #v»,c is then computed. b) Cor. 3: X and XS, #v»,c differ by a single point, which has been translated by
c #»
  v in XS, #v»,c . c) Cor. 4: S and X\S are linearly separable (red line with orange margins), the transformation
made to obtain XS, #v»,c preserves the linear separability of the data as well as the margins.
Our main theoretical result is presented in Thm. 1 and Cor. 2, whose proofs are provided in the
Appendix (see Appendix C) along with additional details and further analysis (see Appendix D).
These show that any set of internal neural representations X (e.g., from hidden layers of a network)
can be manipulated with simple transformations (translations of a subset, see Fig. 1.a) to significantly
reduce the CKA between the original and manipulated set. We note that our theoretical results are
entirely class and direction agnostic (except for Cor. 4 which isn’t direction agnostic), see the last
paragraph of Sec. 4.2 for more details on this point.
Specifically, we consider a copy of X to which we apply a transformation where the representations
of a subset X\S of the data is moved a distance c along direction #»           v , resulting in the modified
representation set XS, #»v ,c . A closed form solution is found for the limit of the linear CKA value
between X and XS, #» v ,c as c tends to infinity. We note that up to orthogonal transformations (which
CKA is invariant to) the transformation X 7→ XS, #»  v ,c is not difficult to implement when transforming
representations between hidden layers in neural networks. More importantly, it is also easy to
eliminate or ignore in a single layer transformation, as long as the weight vectors associated with
the neurons in the subsequent layer are orthogonal to #»      v . Therefore, our results show that from a
theoretical perspective, CKA can easily provide misleading information by capturing representation
differences introduced by a shift of the form X 7→ XS, #»   v ,c (especially with high magnitude c), which
would have no impact on network operations or their effective task-oriented data processing.
The terms in Eq. 2 can each be analyzed individually. Γ(ρ) depends entirely on ρ, the proportion of
points in XS, #»
               v ,c that have not been translated i.e. that are exactly at the same place as in X. Its value
is between 0 and 1 and it tends towards 0 for small sizes of S. The participation ratio, with values in
[1, p], is used as an effective dimensionality estimate for internal representations (Mingzhou Ding
& Dennis Glanzman, 2011; Mazzucato et al., 2016; Litwin-Kumar et al., 2017). It has long been
observed that the effective dimensionality of internal representations in neural networks is far smaller
than the actual number of dimensions of the representation space (Farrell et al., 2019; Horoi et al.,
2020). Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ] and ∥Ex∈S [x]∥2 are respectively the average squared norms of all representations
in X and the squared norm of the mean of S, the subset of representations that are not being translated.
Since most neural networks are trained using weight decay, the network parameters, and hence the
resulting representations as well as these two quantities are biased towards small values in practice.
CKA sensitivity to outliers As mentioned in Sec. 2, it was recently found that the block structure in
CKA heatmaps of high capacity models was caused by a few dominant data points that share similar
characteristics (Nguyen et al., 2022). Other work has empirically highlighted CKA’s sensitivity to
directions of high variance, failing to detect important, function altering changes that occur in all
but the top principal components (Ding et al., 2021). Cor. 3 provides a concrete explanation to these
phenomena by treating the special case of Thm. 1 where only a single point, x̂ is moved and thus has
a different position in XS, #»v ,c with respect to X, see Fig. 1.b for an illustration. We note that the
term ”subset translation” was coined by us and wasn’t used in past work. However, all the papers
referenced in this paragraph and later in this section present naturally occurring examples of subset
translations in a set of representations relative to another, comparable set.
Corollary 3. Thm. 1 holds in the special case where S = {x̂} is a single point, i.e. an outlier.
Cor. 3 exposes a key sensitivity of linear CKA, namely its sensitivity to outliers. Consider two sets
of representations that are identical in all aspects except for the fact that one of them contains an
outlier, i.e. a representation further away from the others. Cor. 3 then states that as the difference


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


between the outlier’s position in the two sets of representations becomes large the CKA value
between the two sets drops dramatically, indicating high dissimilarity. Indeed, as previously noted,
 ∥Ex∈S [x]∥2
             p
Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]   dimP R (X) will be of relatively small value in practice so the whole expression in Eq.
                                      ρ                                            1
2 will be dominated by Γ(ρ) = 1−ρ        . In the outlier case Γ(ρ) ≈ ρ = # representations which will be
extremely small since for most modern deep learning datasets the number of examples in both the
training and test sets is in the tens of thousands or more. This will drastically lower the CKA value
between the two considered representations despite their obvious similarity.
CKA sensitivity to transformations preserving linear separability Classical machine learning
theory highlights the importance of data separability and of margin size for predictive models
generalization (Lee et al., 1995; Bartlett & Shawe-Taylor, 1999). Large margins, i.e. regions
surrounding the separating hyperplane containing no data points, are associated with less overfitting,
better generalization and greater robustness to outliers and to noise. The same concepts naturally
arise in the study of ANNs with past work establishing that internal representations become almost
perfectly linearly separable by the network’s last layer (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014a; Oyallon, 2017;
Jacobsen et al., 2018; Belilovsky et al., 2019; Davari & Belilovsky, 2021). Furthermore, the quality
of the separability, the margin size and the decision boundary smoothness have all been linked to
generalization in neural networks (Verma et al., 2019). Given the theoretical and practical importance
of these concepts and their natural prevalence in deep learning models it is reasonable to assume that a
meaningful way in which two sets of representations can be “similar” is if they are linearly separable
by the same hyperplanes in representation space and if their margins are equally as large. This would
suggest that the exact same linear classifier could accurately classify both sets of representations. Cor.
4 treats this exact scenario as a special case of Thm. 1, see Fig. 1.c for an illustration. If X contains
two linear separable subsets, S and X\S, we can create XS, #»    v ,c by translating one of the subsets in
a direction that preserves the linear separability of the representations and the size of the margins
while simultaneously decreasing the CKA between the original and the transformed representations,
counterintuitively indicating a low similarity between representations.
Corollary 4. Assume S and X\S are linearly separably i.e. ∃w ∈ Rp , the separating hyperplane’s
normal vector, and k ∈ R such that for every representation x ∈ X we have: x ∈ S ⇒ ⟨w, x⟩ ≤ k
and x ∈ X\S ⇒ ⟨w, x⟩ > k. We can then pick #»       v such that S and {x + c #»
                                                                              v : x ∈ X\S} are linearly
separable by the exact same hyperplane and with the exact same margins as S and X\S for any
value of c ∈ R≥0 and Thm. 1 still holds.
Extensions to nonlinear CKA As previously noted in Sec. 2, given the popularity of linear CKA,
it is outside the scope of our work to theoretically analyze nonlinear kernel CKA. However one can
consider extending our theoretical results to the nonlinear CKA case with symmetric, positive definite
kernels. Indeed we know from reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) theory that we can write
such a kernel as an inner product in an implicit Hilbert space. While directly translating points in the
representations space would likely not drive CKA values down as in the linear case, it would suffice
to find/learn which transformations in representations space correspond to translations in the implicit
Hilbert space. Our results should hold if we apply the found transformations, instead of translations,
to a subset of the representations. Although practically harder to implement than simple translations,
we hypothesize that it would be possible to learn such transformations.
4 E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
In this section we will demonstrate several counterintuitive results, which illustrate cases where
similarity measured by CKA is inconsistent with expectations (Sec 4.1) or can be manipulated without
noticeably changing the functional behaviour of a model (Sec. 4.2 and 4.3). We emphasize that only
Sec. 4.2 is directly tied to the theoretical results presented in the Sec. 3. On the other hand, sections
4.1 and 4.3 discuss empirical results which are not explicitly related to the theoretical analysis.
4.1   CKA E ARLY L AYER R ESULTS
CKA values are often treated as a surrogate metric to measure the usefulness and similarity of a
network’s learned features when compared to another network (Ramasesh et al., 2021). In order to
analyze this common assumption, we compare the features of: (1) a network trained to generalize on
the CIFAR10 image classification task (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), (2) a network trained to “memorize”
the CIFAR10 images (i.e. target labels are random), and (3) an untrained randomly initialized network
(for network architecture and training details see the Appendix). As show in Fig. 2, early layers
of these networks should have very similar representations given the high CKA values. Under the
previously presented assumption, one should therefore conclude that the learned features at these


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



         1.0                                           CKA vs. Depth                                                                             Generalized    Random        Memorized


         0.8
                                                                                                                                       Layer 1
         0.6
 CKA
         0.4

         0.2
                       Generalized vs. Random                                                                                          Layer 2
                       Generalized vs. Memorized
         0.0 1                 2           3            4           5                          6         7           8
                                                            Layer
Figure 2: A layer-wise comparison based on the value Figure 3: The convolution filters within the first two
of the CKA between a generalized, memorized, and layers of a generalized, memorized, and a randomly
randomly populated network. This comparison reveals initialized network. Each of 16 squares corresponds to
that early layers of these networks achieve relatively a filter. Layer 1 filter colors correspond to RGB, Layer
high CKA values. Mean and standard deviation across 2 for each filter we randomly samples 3 channels for
5 seeds are shown.                                     visualization. This elucidates that the features are (1)
                                                       drastically different, and (2) not equally useful despite
                                                       the CKA results in Fig. 2
layers are relatively similar and equally valuable. However this is not the case, we can see in Fig. 3
that the convolution filters are drastically different across the three networks. Moreover, Fig. 3
elucidates that considerably high CKA similarity values for early layers, does not necessarily translate
to more useful, or similar, captured features. In Fig. 16 of the Appendix we use linear classifying
probes to quantify the “usefulness” of learned features and those results further support this claim.
4.2                P RACTICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THEORETICAL RESULTS
Here we empirically test the behaviour of linear and RBF CKA in situations inspired by our theoretical
analysis, first in an artificial setting, then in a more realistic one. We begin with artificially generated
representations X ∈ Rn×d to which we apply subset translations to obtain Y ∈ Rn×d , similar to what
is described in Thm. 1. We generate X by sampling 10K points uniformly from the 1K-dimensional
unit cube centered at the origin and 10K points from a similar cube centered at (1.1, 0, 0, . . . , 0),
so the points from the two cubes are linearly separable along the first dimension. We translate the
representations from the second cube in a random direction sampled from the d-dimensional ball
and we plot the CKA values between X and Y as a function of the translation distance in Fig. 4a.
This transformation entirely preserves the topological structure of the representations as well as
their local geometry since the points sampled from each cube have not moved with respect to the
other points sampled from the same cube and the two cubes are still separated, only the distance
between them has been changed. Despite these multiple notions of “similarity” between X and Y
being preserved, the CKA values quickly drop below 0.2 for both linear and RBF CKA. While our
theoretical results (Thm. 1) predicted this drop for linear CKA, it seems that RBF CKA is also highly
sensitive to translations of a subset of the representations. Furthermore, it is surprising to see that the
drop in CKA value occurs even for relatively small translation distances. We note that RBF CKA
with σ equal to 0.2 times the median distance between examples is unperturbed by the considered
transformation. However, as we observe ourselves (RBF CKA experiments in the supplement) and
as was found in the original CKA paper (see Table 2 of Kornblith et al. (2019)), RBF CKA with
σ = 0.2 × median is significantly less informative than RBF CKA with higher values of σ. With
small values of σ, RBF CKA only captures very local, possibly trivial, relationships.
               a) Subset translation sensitivity test                                            b) Translation sensitivity test             Figure 4: a) Linear and RBF CKA values be-
                  points sampled from two cubes                                                CIFAR10 internal representations
             1.0                                                                         1.0                                                 tween the artificial representations X and the
             0.8                                                                         0.8                                                 subset translated version Y as a function of the
                                                                        Lin. CKA value


                                         Linear                                                        Whole class translation
 CKA value


             0.6                         RBF = median                                    0.6           (averaged across all classes)
                                                                                                                                             translation distance. b) CKA value between a
                                         RBF = 0.5*median                                              Single point translation              CNN’s internal representations of the CIFAR10
             0.4                         RBF = 0.2*median                                0.4           (averaged across 10 points)
                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                             training set and modified versions where either
             0.2                                                                                                                             a class or a single point is translated as func-
                                                                                         0.0
                   0       1        2        3     4        5                                      0 25 50     100       150    200          tions of the translation distance. The translation
                         Translation distance                                                         Translation distance                   distances are normalized by the average norm
                        normalized by x X[|x|]                                                       normalized by x X[|x|]
                                                                                                                                             of the unmodified representations, Ex∈X [∥x∥].
In a more realistic setting we test the practical implications of linear CKA sensitivity to outliers (see
Cor. 3) and to transformations that preserve the linear separability of the data as well as the margins
(see Cor. 4). We consider the 9 layers CNN presented in Sec. 6.1 of Kornblith et al. (2019) trained on
CIFAR10. As argued in Sec. 2, when trained on classification tasks, ANNs tend to learn increasingly
complex representations of the input data that can be almost perfectly linearly separated into classes
by the last layer of the network. Therefore a meaningful way in which two sets of representations can


                                                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                            Linear Kernel CKA
                                                      Original Map                   Maximizing CKA Sim. Between             Maximizing CKA Sim. Between               Minimizing CKA Sim. Between
                                                      Acc. 85.9%           1.0
                                                                                     1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.4%    1.0
                                                                                                                                ALL Layers: Acc. 85.5%       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                          ALL Layers: Acc. 85.4%                          1.0
                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.9
                                          1                                0.8                                       0.8                                     0.8
                                          2                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                           0.6                                       0.6                                     0.6                                                          0.7
                                          3


                                  Layer
                                          4                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                           0.4                                       0.4                                     0.4
                                          5                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                          6                                0.2                                       0.2                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                          7
                                                                           0.0                                       0.0                                     0.0                                                          0.3

                                                                                                            RBF Kernel CKA
                                                      Original Map                   Maximizing CKA Sim. Between             Maximizing CKA Sim. Between               Minimizing CKA Sim. Between
                                                      Acc. 85.9%           1.0
                                                                                     1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.5%    1.0
                                                                                                                                ALL Layers: Acc. 85.4%       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                          ALL Layers: Acc. 84.3%                          1.0
                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.9
                                          1                                0.8                                       0.8                                     0.8
                                          2                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                           0.6                                       0.6                                     0.6                                                          0.7
                                          3
                                  Layer   4
                                                                           0.4                                       0.4                                     0.4                                                          0.6
                                          5                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                          6                                0.2                                       0.2                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                          7
                                                                           0.0                                       0.0                                     0.0                                                          0.3


Figure 5: Original Map is the CKA map of a network trained on CIFAR10. We manipulate this network to
produce CKA maps which: (1) maximizes the CKA similarity between the 1st and last layer, (2) maximizes the
CKA similarity between all layers, and (3) minimizes the CKA similarity between all layers. In cases (1) and
(2), the network experiences only a slight loss in performance, which counters previous findings by achieving a
strong CKA similarity between early and late layers. We find similar results are easily achieved in the kernel
CKA case.                         Target CKA Maps                                Original Network CKA Map
        Christmas Tree
              0
                         Goblin   1.0
                                        Carrot0
                                                     Bow & Arrow    Sword
                                                                     1.0
                                                                                 0
                                                                                          Acc. 85.9%  1.0
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                  0.9                                0.9                              0.9                              0.9                                0.9           0
              2                   0.8         2                      0.8         2                    0.8    2                         0.8   2                            0.8
      Layer


                                  0.7                                0.7                              0.7                              0.7                                0.7           1
              4                   0.6         4                      0.6         4                    0.6    4                         0.6   4                            0.6
                                  0.5                                0.5                              0.5                              0.5                                0.5           2
              6                   0.4         6                      0.4         6                    0.4    6                         0.4   6                            0.4
                                  0.3                                0.3                              0.3                              0.3                                0.3           3


                                                                                                                                                                                Layer
                  0   2   4   6                   0     2   4    6                   0   2   4   6               0     2       4   6             0   2   4         6

                                                                     Network CKA Maps                                                                                                   4



              0
                Acc. 85.5%        1.0
                                              0
                                                Acc. 85.3%           1.0
                                                                                 0
                                                                                   Acc. 85.7%         1.0
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                               Acc. 85.6%              1.0
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                               Acc. 85.7%                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                      0.9                                                                               6
                                  0.8                                0.8                                                               0.8                                0.8
              2                               2                                  2                    0.8    2                               2
      Layer


                                                                                                      0.7                              0.6                                0.6           7
              4                   0.6         4                      0.6         4                           4                               4
                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                         0         1         2         3         4         5         6         7
              6                   0.4         6                      0.4         6                    0.5    6
                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                             6                            0.4                                                   Layer
                                                                                                      0.4                              0.2
                  0   2   4   6                   0     2   4    6                   0   2   4   6               0     2       4   6             0   2   4         6                        0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6       0.7       0.8       0.9       1.0
                      Layer                              Layer                           Layer                             Layer                     Layer

Figure 6: The comical target CKA maps (first row) are used as the objective for the CKA map loss in Eq. 3,
while prioritizing network performance (small tolerance for changes in accuracy δacc ). The second row shows
the CKA map produced by the network.
be “similar” in practice is if they are linearly separable by the same hyperplanes in parameter space,
with the same margins. Given X, the network’s internal representations of 10k training images at
the last layer before the output we can use an SVM classifier to extract the hyperplanes in parameter
space which best separate the data (with approx. 91% success rate). We then create Y by translating
a subset of the representations in a direction which won’t cross these hyperplanes, and won’t affect
the linear separability of the representations. We plot the CKA values between X and Y according
to the translation distance in Fig. 4b. The CKA values quickly drop to 0, despite the existence of
a linear classifier that can classify both sets of representations into the correct classes with > 90%
accuracy. In Fig. 4b we also examine linear CKA’s sensitivity to outliers. Plotted are the CKA values
between the set of training image representations and the same representations but with a single point
being translated from its original location. While the translation distance needed to achieve low CKA
values is relatively high, the fact that the position of a single point out of tens of thousands can so
drastically influence the CKA value raises doubts about CKA’s reliability as a similarity metric.
We note that our main theoretical results, namely Th. 1, Cor. 2 and Cor. 3 are entirely class and
direction agnostic. The empirical results presented in this section are simply examples that we
deemed particularly important in the context of ML but the same results would hold with any subset
of the representations and translation direction, even randomly chosen ones. This is important since
the application of CKA is not restricted to cases where labels are available, for example it can also
be used in unsupervised learning settings (Grigg et al., 2021). Furthermore, the subset translations
presented here were added manually to be able to run the experiments in a controlled fashion but these
transformations can naturally occur in ANNs, as discussed in Sec. 3, and one would not necessarily
know that they have occurred. We also run experiments to evaluate CKA sensitivity to invertible
linear transformations, see the Appendix for justification and results.

4.3       E XPLICITLY O PTIMIZING THE CKA M AP
The CKA map, commonly used to analyze network architectures (Kornblith et al., 2019) and their
inter-layers similarities, is a matrix M , where M [i, j] is the CKA value between the activations of
layers i, and j of a network. In many works (Nguyen et al., 2021; Raghu et al., 2021; Nguyen et al.,


                                                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                      Original CKA Maps                                                                                                Target CKA Map
                                                        Width x2                               Width x4                                   Width x5
                                         0
                                                       Acc. 93.9%                             Acc. 93.7%                                 Acc. 93.7%                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Width x1, Acc. 93.7%
                                         5

                                         10                                                                                                                                     5

                                         15

                                         20                                                                                                                                     10

                                         25

                                         30                                                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                                                                                        Layer
                                         35

                                                                  Maps optimized w.r.t Target CKA Map (width x1)                                                                20
                                                        Width x2                               Width x4                                   Width x5
                                         0
                                                       Acc. 93.3%                             Acc. 94.1%                                 Acc. 93.2%                             25
                                         5

                                         10                                                                                                                                     30
                                         15

                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                35
                                         25                                                                                                                                          0       5         10         15       20         25     30        35
                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Layer
                                         35
                                              0    5   10    15   20   25   30   35   0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35        0   5   10   15   20   25   30    35                            0.2        0.4                 0.6        0.8              1.0


Figure 7: ResNet-34 networks of different widths and their corresponding CKA Maps are modified to produce
CKA maps of thin networks. Top row Original shows the unaltered CKA map of the networks derived from
“normal" training. Optimized shows the CKA map of the networks after their map is optimized to mimic the
thin net target CKA map. See Appendix for more networks.
                                                   PCA: Representations of The Original Network                                                              PCA: Representations of The Manipulated Network
                                        30                                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                    80
                                        20
                Principal Component 2


                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                                 class 0
                                        10                                                                                                                                                                                                             class 1
                                                                                                                                                    40                                                                                                 class 2
                                         0                                                                                                          20                                                                                                 class 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       class 4
                                        10                                                                                                           0                                                                                                 class 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       class 6
                                        20                                                                                                          20                                                                                                 class 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       class 8
                                        30                                                                                                          40                                                                                                 class 9
                                              40            30         20         10 0         10 20                        30       40                           50                     0              50        100                            150
                                                                                 Principal Component 1                                                                                            Principal Component 1

Figure 8: PCA of the networks presented in Fig. 5 before (left) and after (right) being optimized to manipulate
the CKA map with Eq 3. Noticeably to achieve the objective the optimization displaces a subset of a single class.

2022) these maps are used explicitly to obtain insights on how different models behave, compared to
one another. However, as seen in our analysis so far it is possible to manipulate the CKA similarity
value, decreasing and increasing it without changing the behaviour of the model on a target task.
In this section we set to directly manipulate the CKA map of a trained network fθ∗ , by adding the
desired CKA map, Mtarget , to its optimization objective, while maintaining its original outputs via
distillation loss (Hinton et al., 2015). The goal is to determine if the CKA map can be changed while
keeping the model performance the same, suggesting the behaviour of the network can be maintained
while changing the CKA measurements. To accomplish this we optimize fθ over the training set
(X, Y ) (note however that the results are shown on the test set) via the following objective:
             ∗

           θnew   = argminθ Ldistill (fθ∗ (X), fθ (X)) + λLmap Mfθ (X) , Mtarget                    (3)
                                     P
where Lmap Mfθ (X) , Mtarget = i,j ln cosh M [i, j]fθ (X) − M [i, j]target . The λ multiplier in
Eq 3 is the weight that balances the two losses. Making λ large will favour the agreements between
the target and network CKA maps over preservation of the network outputs. In our experiments λ
is allowed to change dynamically at every optimization step. Using the validation set accuracy as a
surrogate metric for how well the network’s representations are preserved, λ is then modulated to
learn maps. If the difference between the original accuracy of the network and the current validation
accuracy is above a certain threshold (δacc ) we scale down λ to emphasize the alignment of the
network output with the outputs of fθ∗ , otherwise we scale it up to encourage finer agreement between
the target and network CKA maps (see Appendix for the pseudo code).
Fig. 5 shows the CKA map of fθ∗ along with the CKA map of three scenarios we investigated: (1)
maximizing the CKA similarity between the 1st and last layer, (2) maximizing the CKA similarity
between all layers, and (3) minimizing the CKA similarity between all layers (for network archi-
tecture and training details see Appendix). In cases (1) and (2), the network performance is barely
hindered by the manipulations of its CKA map. This is surprising and contradictory to the previous
findings (Kornblith et al., 2019; Raghu et al., 2021) as it suggests that it is possible to achieve a strong
CKA similarity between early and later layers of a well-trained network without noticeably changing
the model behaviour. Similarly we observe that for the RBF kernel based CKA (Kornblith et al.,
2019) we can obtain manipulated results using the same procedure. The bandwidth σ for the RBF
kernel CKA is set to 0.8 of the median Euclidean distance between representations (Kornblith et al.,
2019). In the Appendix we also show similar analysis on other σ values. We further experiment
with manipulating the CKA map of fθ∗ to produce a series of comical CKA maps (Fig. 6) while
maintaining similar model accuracy. Although the network CKA maps seen in Fig. 6 closely resemble


                                                                                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


their respective targets, it should be noted that we prioritized maintaining the network outputs, and
ultimately its accuracy by choosing small δacc . Higher thresholds of accuracy result in stronger
agreements between the target and network CKA maps at the cost of performance.
Wider networks Nguyen et al. (2021) and Nguyen et al. (2022) studied the behaviour of wider and
deeper networks using CKA maps, obtaining a block structure, which was subsequently used to obtain
insights. We revisit these results and investigate whether the CKA map corresponding to a wider
network can be mapped to a thin network. Our results for the CIFAR10 dataset and ResNet-34 (He
et al., 2016) are shown in Fig. 7 (for details on the architecture and training procedure see Appendix).
We observe that the specific structures associated with wider network can be completely removed and
the map can be nearly identical to the thinner model without changing the performance substantially.
Results on OOD datasets and with vision transformers yield similar results (appendix Fig. 10, 14).
Analysis of Modified Representations Our focus in Sec 4.3 has been to use optimization to
achieve a desired target CKA manipulations without any explicit specification of how to perform
this manipulation. We perform an analysis to obtain insights on how representations are changed by
optimizing Eq 3 in Fig. 8. Here using the modified network from case (2) of Fig. 5 we compute the
PCA of the test set’s last hidden representation (whose CKA compared to the first layer is increased).
We observe that a a single class has a very noticeable set of points that are translated in a particular
direction, away from the general set of classes. This mechanism of manipulating the CKA aligns
with our theoretical analysis. We emphasize, that in this case it is a completely emergent behavior.
5 D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
Given the recent popularity of linear CKA as a similarity measure in deep learning, it is essential to
better study its reliability and sensitivity. In this work we have presented a formal characterization
of CKA’s sensitivity to translations of a subset of the representations, a simple yet large class of
transformations that is highly meaningful in the context of deep learning. This characterization has
provided a theoretical explanation to phenomena observed in practice, namely CKA sensitivity to
outliers and to directions of high variance. Our theoretical analysis also show how the CKA value
between two sets of representations can diminish even if they share local structure and are linearly
separable by the same hyperplanes, with the same margins. This meaningful way in which two
sets of representations can be similar, as justified by classical machine learning theory and seminal
deep learning results, is therefore not captured by linear CKA. We further empirically showed that
CKA attributes low similarity to sets of representations that are directly linked by simple affine
transformations that preserve important functional characteristics and it attributes high similarity to
representations from unalike networks. Furthermore, we showed that we can manipulate CKA in
networks to result in arbitrarily low/high values while preserving functional behaviour, which we use
to revisit previous findings (Nguyen et al., 2021; Kornblith et al., 2019).
It is not our intention to cast doubts over linear CKA as a representation similarity measure in deep
learning, or over recent work using this method. Indeed, some of the problematic transformations
we identify are not necessarily encountered in many applications. However, given the popularity of
this method and the exclusive way it has been applied to compare representations in recent years, we
believe it is necessary to better understand its sensitivities and the ways in which it can be manipulated.
Our results call for caution when leveraging linear CKA, as well as other representations similarity
measures, and especially when the procedure used to produce the model is not known, consistent, or
controlled. An example of such a scenario is the increasingly popular use of open-sourced pre-trained
models. Such measures are trying to condense a large amount of rich geometrical information from
many high-dimensional representations into a single scalar ∈ [0, 1]. Significant work is still required
to understand these methods in the context of deep learning representation comparison, what notion
of similarity each of them concretely measures, to what transformations each of them are sensitive or
invariant and how this all relates to the functional behaviour of the models being analyzed.
In the meantime, as an alternative to using solely linear CKA, we deem it prudent to utilize multiple
similarity measures when comparing neural representations and to try relating the results to the
specific notion of “similarity” each measure is trying to quantify. Comparison methods that are
straightforward to interpret or which are linked to well understood and simple theoretical properties
such as solving the orthogonal Procrustes problem (Ding et al., 2021; Williams et al., 2021) or
comparing the sparsity of neural activations (Kornblith et al., 2021) can be a powerful addition to
any similarity analysis. Further, data visualizations methods can potentially help to better understand
the structure of neural representations in certain scenarios (e.g. Nguyen et al. (2019); Gigante et al.
(2019); Horoi et al. (2020); Recanatesi et al. (2021)).


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was partially funded by OpenPhilanthropy [M.D., E.B.]; NSERC CGS D, FRQNT B1X &
UdeM A scholarships [S.H.]; NSERC Discovery Grant RGPIN-2018-04821 & Samsung Research
Support [G.L.]; NSERC Discovery Grant 03267 [G.W.]; and Canada CIFAR AI Chairs [G.L., G.W.].
This work is also supported by resources from Compute Canada and Calcul Quebec. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views of the funding
agencies.

R EFERENCES
Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier probes,
  2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.01644.
Sercan Ö Arik and Tomas Pfister. Tabnet: Attentive interpretable tabular learning. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 6679–6687, 2021.
Sanjeev Arora,        Yingyu Liang, and         Tengyu Ma. A simple but tough-to-beat baseline
  for sentence embeddings. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2017,        Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net,
  2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SyK00v5xx.
Peter Bartlett and John Shawe-Taylor. Generalization performance of support vector machines and
  other pattern classifiers. Advances in Kernel methods—support vector learning, pp. 43–54, 1999.
Eugene Belilovsky, Michael Eickenberg, and Edouard Oyallon. Greedy layerwise learning can
  scale to ImageNet. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 583–593. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/belilovsky19a.html.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05709, 2020.
MohammadReza Davari and Eugene Belilovsky. Probing representation forgetting in continual
 learning. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and Applications,
 2021.
MohammadReza Davari, Leila Kosseim, and Tien Bui. TIMBERT: Toponym identifier for the
 medical domain based on BERT. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
 Computational Linguistics, pp. 662–668, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 2020. Interna-
 tional Committee on Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.58. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.58.
MohammadReza Davari, Nader Asadi, Sudhir Mudur, Rahaf Aljundi, and Eugene Belilovsky. Probing
 representation forgetting in supervised and unsupervised continual learning. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16712–16721,
 June 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Frances Ding, Jean-Stanislas Denain, and Jacob Steinhardt. Grounding representation similarity
  through statistical testing. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=_kwj6V53ZqB.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shimon Edelman. Representation is representation of similarities. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21
  (4):449–467, 1998. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X98001253.
Farhood Farahnak, Elham Mohammadi, MohammadReza Davari, and Leila Kosseim. Semantic simi-
  larity matching using contextualized representations. In Canadian Conference on AI, Vancouver,
  Canada (Online), June 2021.
Matthew Farrell, Stefano Recanatesi, Timothy Moore, Guillaume Lajoie, and Eric Shea-Brown.
 Recurrent neural networks learn robust representations by dynamically balancing compression
 and expansion. bioRxiv, 2019. doi: 10.1101/564476. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/
 content/early/2019/12/18/564476.
Scott Gigante, Adam S Charles, Smita Krishnaswamy, and Gal Mishne. Visualizing the phate of
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Arthur Gretton, Olivier Bousquet, Alex Smola, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Measuring statistical
  dependence with hilbert-schmidt norms. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 63–77.
  Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005. doi: 10.1007/11564089_7. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1007/11564089_7.
Tom George Grigg, Dan Busbridge, Jason Ramapuram, and Russ Webb. Do self-supervised and
  supervised methods learn similar visual representations?, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas G Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
  corruptions and surface variations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01697, 2018.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015.
Stefan Horoi, Victor Geadah, Guy Wolf, and Guillaume Lajoie. Low-dimensional dynamics of
  encoding and learning in recurrent neural networks. In Cyril Goutte and Xiaodan Zhu (eds.),
  Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 276–282, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
  ISBN 978-3-030-47358-7.
Xin Huang, Ashish Khetan, Milan Cvitkovic, and Zohar Karnin. Tabtransformer: Tabular data
  modeling using contextual embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.06678, 2020.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  PMLR, 2015.
Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Arnold W.M. Smeulders, and Edouard Oyallon. i-revnet: Deep invertible
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=HJsjkMb0Z.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. PMLR, 2019.
Simon Kornblith, Ting Chen, Honglak Lee, and Mohammad Norouzi. Why do better loss functions
  lead to less transferable features? In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=8twKpG5s8Qh.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis -
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2, 2008.
  ISSN 1662-5137. doi: 10.3389/neuro.06.004.2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Technical report, MIT & NYU, 2009.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aarre Laakso and Garrison Cottrell. Content and cluster analysis: Assessing representational
  similarity in neural systems. Philosophical Psychology, 13(1):47–76, 2000. doi: 10.1080/
  09515080050002726. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/09515080050002726.
Wee Sun Lee, Peter L. Bartlett, and Robert C. Williamson. Lower Bounds on the VC Dimension of
 Smoothly Parameterized Function Classes. Neural Computation, 7(5):1040–1053, 09 1995. ISSN
 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.1040. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.
 1995.7.5.1040.
Karel Lenc and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding image representations by measuring their equivariance
  and equivalence. International Journal of Computer Vision, 127(5):456–476, May 2018. doi: 10.
 1007/s11263-018-1098-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-018-1098-y.
Yixuan Li, Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Hod Lipson, and John Hopcroft. Convergent learning:
  Do different neural networks learn the same representations? In Dmitry Storcheus, Afshin
  Rostamizadeh, and Sanjiv Kumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Feature
  Extraction: Modern Questions and Challenges at NIPS 2015, volume 44 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 196–212, Montreal, Canada, 11 Dec 2015. PMLR. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v44/li15convergent.html.
Ashok Litwin-Kumar, Kameron Decker Harris, Richard Axel, Haim Sompolinsky, and L.F. Abbott.
  Optimal degrees of synaptic connectivity. Neuron, 93(5):1153–1164.e7, 2017. ISSN 0896-6273.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.01.030. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0896627317300545.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1608.03983, 2016.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Isabel I.C. Low, Alex H. Williams, Malcolm G. Campbell, Scott W. Linderman, and Lisa M. Gio-
   como. Dynamic and reversible remapping of network representations in an unchanging environ-
   ment. Neuron, 109(18):2967–2980.e11, 2021. ISSN 0896-6273. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   neuron.2021.07.005. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
   pii/S0896627321005043.
Niru Maheswaranathan, Alex Williams, Matthew Golub, Surya Ganguli, and David Sussillo.
  Universality and individuality in neural dynamics across large populations of recurrent net-
  works. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  5f5d472067f77b5c88f69f1bcfda1e08-Paper.pdf.
Luca Mazzucato, Alfredo Fontanini, and Giancarlo La Camera. Stimuli reduce the dimensionality
  of cortical activity. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 10, 2016. ISSN 1662-5137. doi: 10.
  3389/fnsys.2016.00011. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
  fnsys.2016.00011.
PhD Mingzhou Ding and PhD Dennis Glanzman. The Dynamic Brain. Oxford University Press,
  January 2011. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195393798.001.0001. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195393798.001.0001.
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in neural
  networks with canonical correlation. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
  N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2018/file/a7a3d70c6d17a73140918996d03c014f-Paper.pdf.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In
  Icml, 2010.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in trans-
  fer learning? In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 512–523. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  0607f4c705595b911a4f3e7a127b44e0-Paper.pdf.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Understanding Neural Networks via Feature Visu-
  alization: A Survey, pp. 55–76. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. ISBN 978-
  3-030-28954-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6_4. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-030-28954-6_4.
Thao Nguyen, Maithra Raghu, and Simon Kornblith. Do wide and deep networks learn the same
  things? uncovering how neural network representations vary with width and depth. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=KJNcAkY8tY4.
Thao Nguyen, Maithra Raghu, and Simon Kornblith. On the origins of the block structure phe-
  nomenon in neural network representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07184, 2022.
Edouard Oyallon. Building a regular decision boundary with deep networks. In 2017 IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1886–1894, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
  2017.204.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Maithra Raghu, Justin Gilmer, Jason Yosinski, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Svcca: Singu-
 lar vector canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability. In
 I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
 nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
 dc6a7e655d7e5840e66733e9ee67cc69-Paper.pdf.
Maithra Raghu, Thomas Unterthiner, Simon Kornblith, Chiyuan Zhang, and Alexey Dosovitskiy.
 Do vision transformers see like convolutional neural networks? Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ethan Dyer, and Maithra Raghu. Anatomy of catastrophic forgetting:
  Hidden representations and task semantics. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=LhY8QdUGSuw.
Stefano Recanatesi, Matthew Farrell, Guillaume Lajoie, Sophie Deneve, Mattia Rigotti, and Eric Shea-
  Brown. Predictive learning as a network mechanism for extracting low-dimensional latent space
  representations. Nature Communications, 12(1), March 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21696-1.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21696-1.
Le Song, Alex Smola, Arthur Gretton, Justin Bedo, and Karsten Borgwardt. Feature selection via
  dependence maximization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(5), 2012.
David Sussillo and Omri Barak. Opening the Black Box: Low-Dimensional Dynamics in High-
  Dimensional Recurrent Neural Networks. Neural Computation, 25(3):626–649, 03 2013. ISSN
  0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00409. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_
  00409.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Bastiaan S Veeling, Jasper Linmans, Jim Winkens, Taco Cohen, and Max Welling. Rotation equivari-
  ant CNNs for digital pathology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03962, June 2018.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vikas Verma, Alex Lamb, Christopher Beckham, Amir Najafi, Ioannis Mitliagkas, David Lopez-Paz,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Manifold mixup: Better representations by interpolating hidden states. In
  Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 6438–6447. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
  verma19a.html.
Liwei Wang, Lunjia Hu, Jiayuan Gu, Zhiqiang Hu, Yue Wu, Kun He, and John Hopcroft. Towards
  understanding learning representations: To what extent do different neural networks learn the
  same representation. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/file/
  5fc34ed307aac159a30d81181c99847e-Paper.pdf.
Alex H Williams, Erin Kunz, Simon Kornblith, and Scott Linderman. Generalized shape metrics on
  neural representations. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=L9JM-pxQOl.
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In Com-
 puter Vision – ECCV 2014, pp. 818–833. Springer International Publishing, 2014a. doi: 10.1007/
 978-3-319-10590-1_53. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_
 53.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 European conference on computer vision, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014b.
Daquan Zhou, Bingyi Kang, Xiaojie Jin, Linjie Yang, Xiaochen Lian, Zihang Jiang, Qibin Hou, and
  Jiashi Feng. Deepvit: Towards deeper vision transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.11886, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
A.1    M INIBATCH CKA

In our experiments (with the exception of subsection 4.2), in order to reduce memory consumption,
we use the minibatch implementation of the CKA similarity Nguyen et al. (2021; 2022). More
precisely, let ψ be a kernel function (we experiment with linear and RBF kernel), and Xb ∈ Rm×n1
and Yb ∈ Rm×n2 be the minibatches of m samples from two network layers containing n1 and n2
neurons respectively. We estimate the value of CKA by averaging the Hilbert-Schmidt independence
criterion (HSIC), over all minibatches b ∈ B via:
                                             1
                                                P
                                            |B|   b∈B HSIC1 (Qb , Zb )
          CKAminibatch = q                                 q                                  (4)
                                1                             1
                                   P                             P
                               |B|    b∈B HSIC1 (Qb , Qb )   |B|  b∈B HSIC1 (Zb , Zb )

Where Qb = ψ(Xb , Xb ), Zb = ψ(Yb , Yb ), and HSIC1 is the unbiased estimator of HSIC Song et al.
(2012), hence the value of the CKA is independent of the batch size.

A.2    N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

In Sec. 4.1 we use a 9 layer neural network; the first 8 of these layers are convolution layers and
the last layer is a fully connected layer used for classification. We use ReLU (Nair & Hinton, 2010)
throughout the network. The kernel size of every convolution layer is set to (3, 3) except the first
two convolution layers, which have (7, 7) kernels. All convolution layers follow a padding of 0
and a stride of 1. Number of kernels in each layer of the network, from the lower layers onward
follows: [16, 16, 32, 32, 32, 64, 64]. In this network, every convolution layer is followed by batch
normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). The network we used in Sec. 4.3 to obtain Figures 5 and 6 is
similar to the network we just described, except the kernel size for all layers are set to (3, 3). For the
Wider networks experiments in Sec. 4.3 we use a ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016) network, where we
scale up the channels of the network to increase the width of the network (see Fig. 7).

A.3    T RAINING D ETAILS

The models in Sec. 4.1, both the generalized and memorized network, were trained for 100 epochs
using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) optimizer with a learning rate (LR) of 1e-3 and a weight
decay of 5e-4. The LR is follows cosine LR scheduler (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016) with an initial
LR stated earlier.
The training of the base model (original) model in Sec. 4.3 seen in Figures 5 and 6 follows the same
training procedure as of the models from Sec. 4.1, except in this setting we train the model for 200
epochs, with an initial LR of 0.01. All other models in Sec. 4.3 seen in Figures 5 and 6 (with a
target CKA map to optimize) are also trained with similar training hyperparameters to that of the
base model, except the followings: (1) these models are only trained for 30 epochs. (2) the objective
function includes a hyperparameter λ (see Eq. 3), which we initially set to 500 for all models and
is changed dynamically following the Algo. 1 during the training by 0.8 on each iteration. (3) The
cosine LR scheduler includes a warm-up step of 500 optimization steps. (4) the LR is set to 1e-3 (4)
The distillation loss in the objective function depends on a temperature parameter, which we set to
0.2.
The training procedure for the Wider networks experiments in Sec. 4.3 is similar to the previous
training procedures in this section (Figures 5 and 6). Except that the Original models are trained for
only 100 epochs and the Optimized w.r.t Target Maps models are trained for 15 epochs.

A.4    CKA M AP L OSS BALANCE

Algo. 1 shows the pseudo code of the dynamical scaling of the λ loss balance parameter seen in Eq. 3.
Using the validation set accuracy as a surrogate metric for how well the network’s representations are
preserved, λ is then modulated to learn maps. If the difference between the original accuracy of the
network and the current validation accuracy is above a certain threshold (δacc ) we scale down λ to
emphasize the alignment of the network output with the outputs of fθ∗ , otherwise we scale it up to
encourage finer agreement between the target and network CKA maps.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: Dynamical balancing of Distillation and CKA map loss in Eq. 3
Data: 100 ≥ Original Accuracy > 0; 100 ≥ Current Validation Accuracy > 0;
Accuracy Threshold ≥ 0; 1 ≥ Scaling Factor > 0; Initial Lambda > 0
Result: λ
acc0 ← Original Accuracy;
acc1 ← Current Validation Accuracy;
η ← Accuracy Threshold;
α ← Scaling Factor;
λ ← Initial Lambda;
δacc ← acc0 − acc1 ;
if δacc > η then
     λ←λ×α
else
     λ ← λ/α
end

Return λ;



B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

B.1    CKA SENSITIVITY TO INVERTIBLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATIONS

We also experiment, for linear CKA, with a type of trans-
formation that isn’t considered by our theoretical results
but which we deemed interesting to analyze empirically,
namely multiplications by invertible matrices. Consider
a matrix M ∈ Rd×d whose elements are sampled from
a Gaussian with mean µ and standard deviation σ. We
verify the invertibility of M since it is not guaranteed and
only keep invertible matrices. We show the CKA values
between X and the transformed Y = XM in Fig. 9).
Since this is an invertible linear transformation we would
expect it to only modestly change the representations in
X and the CKA value to be only slightly lower than 1.
However, we observe that even for small values of µ and
σ, CKA drops to 0, which would indicate that the two Figure 9: Linear CKA values between the
sets of representations are dissimilar and not linked by a artificial representations X and Y = XM
simple, invertible transformation.                           with M being an invertible matrix with ele-
                                                                ments sampled from N (µ, σ 2 ) as a function
While Th.1 of Kornblith et al. (2019) implies that invari- of µ and σ. The mean and standard deviation
ance to invertible linear transformations is generally not a across 10 random instantiations the transla-
desirable property for ANN representation similarity mea- tion direction and M are shown.
sures, there are relatively common scenarios in which the
hypotheses of the theorem are not necessarily respected, i.e. where the dataset size is larger than the
width of the layer. Such is the case in smaller ANNs or even at the last layers of large models which
are often fully connected and of far smaller size than the input space or the intermediate layers. Given
these situations we see no reason to completely dismiss this invariance as being possibly desirable in
certain, albeit not all, contexts.

B.2    W IDER N ETWORKS

In Sec. 4.3 we investigated whether the CKA of the wide networks can be mapped to a thin network
(see Fig. 7) using ResNet-34 models and the CIFAR10 dataset. In Fig. 10, we use the same
networks (trained on CIFAR10) and measure their CKA similarity maps under the Patch Camelyon
dataset (Veeling et al., 2018). Patch Camelyon dataset contains histopathologic scans of lymph node
sections, which is drastically different from the CIFAR10 dataset both in terms of pixel distribution
and the semantics of the data. As we can see in Fig. 10, even under this drastic shift in data distribution


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Original CKA Maps Trained on CIFAR10                                                                                                                                   Target CKA Map Width x1
                                       Tested on Patch Camelyon                                                                                                                                                   Trained on CIFAR10
0
                    Width x2                                                       Width x4                                             Width x5                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tested on Patch Camelyon
5

10                                                                                                                                                                                   5

15

20                                                                                                                                                                                   10

25

30                                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                                                                                             Layer
35

         Maps Optimized w.r.t Target CKA Map (width x1) on CIFAR10                                                                                                                   20
                        Tested on Patch Camelyon
0
                    Width x2                                                       Width x4                                             Width x5                                     25
5

10                                                                                                                                                                                   30
15

20
                                                                                                                                                                                     35
25                                                                                                                                                                                        0            5         10              15              20               25          30              35
30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Layer
35
     0      5      10    15    20   25       30   35               0         5    10   15   20    25    30     35           0     5    10      15   20     25     30    35                    0.2          0.3        0.4          0.5          0.6         0.7         0.8        0.9              1.0



Figure 10: In Fig. 7 we are presented a series of ResNet-34 networks of different widths and their
corresponding CKA Maps, which are modified to produce CKA maps of thin networks using the
CIFAR10 dataset. We used these networks and measured their CKA maps using Patch Camelyon
dataset. Top row Original shows the unaltered CKA map of the networks derived from “normal"
training on CIFAR10, tested on Patch Camelyon dataset. Optimized shows the CKA map of the
networks after their map is optimized to mimic the thin network target CKA map using CIFAR10,
tested on Patch Camelyon dataset.



                                                                                 Original CKA Maps                                                                                                                          Target CKA Map
                  Width x2                                          Width x4                                        Width x8                                     Width x10
                 Acc. 88.6%                                        Acc. 90.9%                                      Acc. 91.9%                                    Acc. 92.3%                                                 Width x1, Acc. 85.9%
 0                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
 2
 4                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
 6
 8                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
10
12
                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
14
                                                                                                                                                                                              Layer


16

                                     Maps optimized w.r.t Target CKA Map (width x1)                                                                                                                   8


                  Width x2                                          Width x4                                        Width x8                                     Width x10
                 Acc. 88.4%                                        Acc. 90.7%                                      Acc. 91.5%                                    Acc. 92.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10

 0
 2                                                                                                                                                                                                    12

 4
 6                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
 8
10                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
12                                                                                                                                                                                                         0     2           4            6           8       10        12         14          16
14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Layer
16
     0.0   2.5    5.0   7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0             0.0   2.5       5.0   7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0        0.0   2.5    5.0   7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0         0.0   2.5    5.0   7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0                 0.2    0.3        0.4          0.5         0.6         0.7     0.8           0.9         1.0



Figure 11: VGG style networks of different widths and their corresponding CKA Maps are modified
to produce CKA maps of thin networks. Top row Original shows the unaltered CKA map of the
networks derived from “normal" training. Optimized shows the CKA map of the networks after their
map is optimized to mimic the thin net target CKA map.


the CKA maps of the networks Optimized w.r.t Target CKA Map resemble the CKA map of the thin
target network, suggesting the generalizability of the CKA map optimization.
The network architecture presented in the Wider networks experiments seen in Sec. 4.3 is ResNet-34.
We experimented with a VGG style network architecture to broaden our findings to other network
architectures (see Sec. A.2 for details). As we can see in Fig. 11 we observe similar results to the
ones shown in Fig. 7.


                                                                                                                                               17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                 Linear Kernel CKA
                    Original Map                   Maximizing CKA Sim. Between                  Maximizing CKA Sim. Between               Minimizing CKA Sim. Between
                    Acc. 85.9%               1.0
                                                   1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.4%          1.0
                                                                                                   ALL Layers: Acc. 85.5%           1.0
                                                                                                                                             ALL Layers: Acc. 85.4%           1.0
        0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.9
        1                                    0.8                                         0.8                                        0.8
        2                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                             0.6                                         0.6                                        0.6                                       0.7
        3
Layer


        4                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                             0.4                                         0.4                                        0.4
        5                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
        6                                    0.2                                         0.2                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
        7

                                                            RBF Kernel CKA = 0.2 x Median Distance
                                             0.0                                         0.0                                        0.0                                       0.3
            0   1    2   3   4   5   6   7
                         Layer
                    Original Map                   Maximizing CKA Sim. Between                  Maximizing CKA Sim. Between               Minimizing CKA Sim. Between
                    Acc. 85.9%               1.0
                                                   1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.6%          1.0
                                                                                                   ALL Layers: Acc. 85.4%           1.0
                                                                                                                                             ALL Layers: Acc. 85.3%           1.0
        0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.9
        1                                    0.8                                         0.8                                        0.8
        2                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                             0.6                                         0.6                                        0.6                                       0.7
        3
Layer


        4                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                             0.4                                         0.4                                        0.4
        5                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
        6                                    0.2                                         0.2                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
        7

                                                            RBF Kernel CKA = 0.4 x Median Distance
                                             0.0                                         0.0                                        0.0                                       0.3


                    Original Map                   Maximizing CKA Sim. Between                  Maximizing CKA Sim. Between               Minimizing CKA Sim. Between
                    Acc. 85.9%               1.0
                                                   1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.7%          1.0
                                                                                                   ALL Layers: Acc. 85.3%           1.0
                                                                                                                                             ALL Layers: Acc. 81.7%           1.0
        0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.9
        1                                    0.8                                         0.8                                        0.8
        2                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                             0.6                                         0.6                                        0.6                                       0.7
        3
Layer


        4                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                             0.4                                         0.4                                        0.4
        5                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
        6                                    0.2                                         0.2                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
        7

                                                            RBF Kernel CKA = 0.8 x Median Distance
                                             0.0                                         0.0                                        0.0                                       0.3


                    Original Map                   Maximizing CKA Sim. Between                  Maximizing CKA Sim. Between               Minimizing CKA Sim. Between
                    Acc. 85.9%               1.0
                                                   1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.5%          1.0
                                                                                                   ALL Layers: Acc. 85.4%           1.0
                                                                                                                                             ALL Layers: Acc. 84.3%           1.0
        0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.9
        1                                    0.8                                         0.8                                        0.8
        2                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                             0.6                                         0.6                                        0.6                                       0.7
        3
Layer


        4                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                             0.4                                         0.4                                        0.4
        5                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
        6                                    0.2                                         0.2                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
        7
                                             0.0                                         0.0                                        0.0                                       0.3
            0   1    2   3   4   5   6   7              0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7             0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
                         Layer                                       Layer                                      Layer                                     Layer

 Figure 12: Original Map is the CKA map of a network trained on CIFAR10. We manipulate this
 network to produce CKA maps which: (1) maximizes the CKA similarity between the 1st and last
 layer, (2) maximizes the CKA similarity between all layers, and (3) minimizes the CKA similarity
 between all layers. In cases (1) and (2), the network experiences only a slight loss in performance,
 which counters previous findings by achieving a strong CKA similarity between early and late layers.


  B.3               RBF K ERNEL

 In Fig. 12 we extend our results shown in Fig. 5 to other bandwidth values commonly used for the
 RBF kernel CKA (Kornblith et al., 2019). When the CKA values are meaningful, we observe that the
 RBF kernel CKA values can be manipulated via the procedure described in Sec. 4.3.



  B.4               CKA M AP O PTIMIZATION VIA L OGISTIC L OSS

 In Sec. 4.3, we manipulated a network’s CKA map, while closely maintaining its outputs via the
 distillation loss seen in Eq. 3. However, a logistic loss also works in this setting, i.e. the substitution
 of the distillation loss with cross-entropy loss in Eq. 3 yields similar results. In Fig. 13, we repeated
 the linear CKA experiments seen in the first row of the Fig. 5 using cross-entropy loss instead of
 distillation loss.


                                                                                               18
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Original Map                  Maximizing CKA Similarity Between Maximizing CKA Similarity Between Minimizing CKA Similarity Between
                               Acc. 85.9%             1.0     1st & Last Layer: Acc. 85.5% 1.0     ALL Layers: Acc. 85.6%      1.0   ALL Layers: Acc. 85.4%       1.0
                     0
                                                                                                                                                                      0.9
                     1                                0.8                                     0.8                                0.8
                     2                                                                                                                                                0.8
                     3                                0.6                                     0.6                                0.6                                  0.7
Layer


                     4                                0.4                                     0.4                                0.4                                  0.6
                     5                                                                                                                                                0.5
                     6                                0.2                                     0.2                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                     7
                                                      0.0                                     0.0                                0.0                                  0.3
                         0     2       4          6             0      2       4          6         0     2       4          6          0      2       4          6
                                   Layer                                   Layer                              Layer                                Layer

      Figure 13: Original Map is the CKA map of a network trained on CIFAR10. We manipulate this
      network following a modified version of Eq. 3 (distillation loss is substituted with cross-entropy loss)
      to produce CKA maps which: (1) maximizes the CKA similarity between the 1st and last layer, (2)
      maximizes the CKA similarity between all layers, and (3) minimizes the CKA similarity between
      all layers. In cases (1) and (2), the network experiences only a slight loss in performance, which
      counters previous findings by achieving a strong CKA similarity between early and late layers.

                              Original Map                  Maximizing CKA Similarity Between Maximizing CKA Similarity Between Minimizing CKA Similarity Between
                               Acc. 88.7%             1.0     1st & Last Block: Acc. 88.3% 1.0     ALL Blocks: Acc. 88.5%      1.0   ALL Blocks: Acc. 85.2%       1.0
                     0
                                                                                                                                                                      0.9
                     1                                0.8                                     0.8                                0.8
Transformer Blocks


                     2                                                                                                                                                0.8
                     3                                0.6                                     0.6                                0.6                                  0.7
                     4                                0.4                                     0.4                                0.4                                  0.6
                     5                                                                                                                                                0.5
                     6                                0.2                                     0.2                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                     7
                                                      0.0                                     0.0                                0.0                                  0.3
                         0     2       4          6             0      2       4          6         0     2       4          6          0      2       4          6
                             Transformer Blocks                      Transformer Blocks                 Transformer Blocks                   Transformer Blocks

      Figure 14: Original Map is the CKA map of a ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) network trained on
      CIFAR10. We manipulate this network following the Eq. 3 to produce CKA maps which: (1)
      maximizes the CKA similarity between the 1st and last Transformer block, (2) maximizes the
      CKA similarity between all Transformer blocks, and (3) minimizes the CKA similarity between all
      Transformer blocks.



       B.5                   CKA O PTIMIZATION OF V I T

      In Fig. 5, we manipulated the CKA map of a VGG style model trained on CIFAR10 in order to:
      (1) maximize the CKA similarity between the 1st and last layer, (2) maximize the CKA similarity
      between all layers, and (3) minimize the CKA similarity between all layers.
     We further explored this setting at the model architecture level. Given the recent popularity of the
     Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture in a variety of domains such as NLP Devlin et al.
     (2018); Farahnak et al. (2021); Raffel et al. (2020); Davari et al. (2020), Computer Vision Dosovitskiy
     et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2021), and Tabular Huang et al. (2020); Arik & Pfister
     (2021), we implemented a Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) style model for the
     CIFAR10 dataset, containing 8 Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) blocks (see other architectural
     details in Tab. 1) in order to: (1) maximize the CKA similarity between the 1st and last Transformer
     block, (2) maximize the CKA similarity between all Transformer blocks, and (3) minimize the CKA
     similarity between all Transformer blocks. As we can see in Fig. 14 these manipulations are achieved
     with minimal loss of performance, which underlines the model-agnostic nature of our approach.



                                           # Transformer Blocks                    # Attention Heads            Hidden Size            # Epochs
                                                        8                                     12                        256                 200

      Table 1: Architectural details of out implementation of ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) for the CIFAR10
      dataset. Note that the training process (except the number of epochs, which is listed above) follows
      the Sect. A.3.


                                                                                               19
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Seed = Same                      Seed = Different
                   1.0
                   0.8
                   0.6                                                                                  Experiment
                                                                                              Generalized vs. Generalized
CKA


                   0.4                                                                        Generalized vs. Memorized
                                                                                              Generalized vs. Random
                   0.2
                   0.0
                                  1                 2                  1             2
                                         Layer                              Layer
        Figure 15: A layer wise comparison between a generalized, memorized, and randomly populated
        network using either (left figure) the same random seed or (right figure) different random seeds. This
        comparison reveals that, in either case (with same or different random seeds) early layers of these
        networks achieve relatively high CKA values.


                                                            Linear Probe Accuracy on Early Layers
                                                                                                               Model
Linear Probe Accuracy


                        60                                                                                     Generalized
                                                                                                               Memorized
                                                                                                               Random
                        40

                        20

                         0
                                                        1                                           2
                                                                            Layer
        Figure 16: The linear probe accuracy obtained on the CIFAR10 test set for the generalized, memorized,
        and randomly populated network seen in Fig. 2 and 3. The results shown in this figure along with the
        ones shown in Fig. 15 suggests that high values of CKA similarity between two networks does not
        necessarily translate to similarly useful features.



        B.6                  C LOSER L OOK AT T HE E ARLY L AYERS

        In this section, we extend the study of the behaviour of CKA over the early layers presented in
        Fig. 2 and 3. In Fig. 15, we can see a layer wise comparison between a generalized, memorized,
        and randomly populated network using either (Fig. 15-left) the same random seed or (Fig. 15-right)
        different random seeds. This comparison reveals that, in either case (with same or different random
        seeds) early layers of these networks achieve relatively high CKA values.
       However, as it was shown in Fig. 3, high values of CKA similarity between two networks does not
       necessarily translate to more useful, or similar, captured features. In order to quantify the usefulness
       of the features captured by each network in Fig. 2 and 3, we follow the same methodology as used in
       Self-supervised Learning (Chen et al., 2020) and in the analysis of intermediate representations (Zeiler
       & Fergus, 2014b). We evaluate the adequacy of representations by an optimal linear classifier using
       training data from the original task, in this case the CIFAR10 training data. The test set accuracy
       obtained by the linear probe is used as a proxy to measure the usefulness of the representations.
       Fig. 16, shows the linear probe accuracy obtained on the CIFAR10 test set for the generalized,
       memorized, and randomly populated network seen in Fig. 2 and 3. The results shown in this figure
       along with the ones shown in Fig. 15 suggests that high values of CKA similarity between two
       networks does not necessarily translate to similarly useful features.


                                                                           20
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                            Effect of CKA Manipulation on CIFAR10-C Evaluation
             Original Network. (avg. 66.0)                                  Maximizing CKA Similarity                                                    Maximizing CKA Similarity                                 Minimizing CKA Similarity
                                                                            Between 1st & Last Layer (avg. 65.7)                                         Between ALL Layers (avg. 66.0)                            Between ALL Layers (avg. 65.5)
   80
   60
Acc.

   40
   20
       0


                                                        elastic transform


                                                                                                                                              jpeg compression
                                         defocus blur


                                                                                            gaussian blur
                                                                                                            gaussian noise
                                                                                                                              impulse noise


                                                                                                                                                                 motion blur
           avg
                 brightness
                              contrast


                                                                                    frost


                                                                                                                                                                                          saturate
                                                                                                                                                                                                     shot noise


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   speckle noise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   zoom blur
                                                                            fog


                                                                                                                                                                               pixelate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  snow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         spatter
                                                                                                                             Noise
 Figure 17: Results of OOD evaluation of models from Figure17 on CIFAR-10C (Hendrycks &
 Dietterich, 2018) corruptions data. We show results for each corruptions as well as the average results.
 We observe the performance remains largely unchanged.


 B.7        O UT OF D ISTRIBUTION E VALUATION

 In Sec. 4.3 we have showed that the CKA maps of models can be modified while maintaining an
 equivalent accuracy for the performance on the test set. We can also consider how the functionality
 of these models varies under other kinds of inputs. We thus consider evaluating the models created
 in Sec. 4.3, in particular those corresponding to Fig. 5 on the popular CIFAR-10 Corruptions
 datasets (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018). Figure 17 shows the results of this evaluation schema for
 the 3 different models explored in Fig. 5. We observe that overall the average performance of these
 models on this out-of-distribution data remains effectively unchanged. We emphasize that the models
 are trained only on uncorrupted data as in Sec. 4.3.


                                                                                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    P ROOFS

Proof. Theorem 1
First we introduce the notation C1 = S and C2 = X\S and note that C1 and C2 form a partition
of X, i.e. X = C1 ∪ C2 with C1 ∩ C2 = ∅. We note Cj′ the set of indices of Cj , meaning that
i ∈ Cj′ ⇔ xi ∈ Cj . We then rewrite XS, #»   v ,c as being the union of the set of points in C1 and the
points in C2 translated by c in direction #»
                                          v:

                                 XS, #»                            #»
                                     v ,c = {x : x ∈ C1 } ∪ {x + c v : x ∈ C2 }



It is standard practice to center the two sets of representations being compared before using a
representation similarity measures. X is centered by hypothesis but XS, #»v ,c is not. We first note that
the mean of XS, #»
                 v ,c across all representations X    #»
                                                   S, v ,c is the vector:

                     1      X
       X S, #»
            v ,c =                     x
                     n
                         x∈XS, #v»,c
                                                
                 1 X
                                      xi + c #»
                                 X
               =          xi +                 v                                by definition of XS, #»
                                                                                                      v ,c
                 n
                    i∈C1′       i∈C2′
                                               
                 1 X
                                           c #»
                                     X
               =               xi +          v
                 n      ′    ′           ′
                           i∈C1 ∪C2                i∈C2
                     1 X               1 X
               =               x+                  c #»
                                                     v            because C1 , C2 form a partition of X
                     n                 n
                         x∈X               i∈C2′

                     |C2 |c #»
                            v
               =                                                   because X is centered by hypothesis
                        n

From now on we note Y as being the centered set of representations XS, #»
                                                                       v ,c where we subtracted the
mean X S, #»
          v ,c (here we used the fact that |C 1 | + |C 2 | = n):


                                           |C2 |c #»
                                                  v                    |C1 |c #»
                                                                              v
                          Y = {x −                   : x ∈ C1 } ∪ {x +           : x ∈ C2 }
                                              n                           n

Now that we have workable expressions for X and XS, #»
                                                     v ,c we focus on the computation of linear
CKA which relies on the computation of three HSIC values: between X and itself, between Y and
itself and between X and Y :

                                                    HSIClin (X, Y )
                             CKAlin (X, Y ) = p                                                              (5)
                                               HSIClin (X, X)HSIClin (Y, Y )

We also remind the reader that linear HSIC takes the form:

                                                                        n X n
                                      1           ⊤     ⊤        1     X
          HSIClin (X, Y ) =                 tr(XX   Y Y   ) =                  ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨yj , yi ⟩          (6)
                                   (n − 1)2                   (n − 1)2 i=1 j=1


We can split the terms of the two sums into three distinct categories and compute the values of the
inner products independently in terms of xi , xj and c for the three HSIC terms:


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


1. i ∈ C1′ and j ∈ C1′ (i.e. xi ∈ C1 and xj ∈ C1 ):


               ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 = ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                                 c|C2′ | #»       c|C2′ | #»
       ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨yi , yj ⟩ = ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨xi −            v , xj −         v⟩
                                        "          n                n                                               #
                                                                                                           2
                                                     c|C2′ |             c|C2′ | #»               c|C2′ |

                           = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −               #»
                                                             ⟨xi , v ⟩ −        ⟨ v , xj ⟩ + −                #» #»
                                                                                                             ⟨v, v⟩
                                                       n                   n                         n
                                                     c|C2′ |             c|C2′ | #»          c2 |C2′ |2

                           = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −         ⟨xi , #»
                                                                   v⟩−          ⟨ v , xj ⟩ +
                                                       n                   n                    n2
                                            c|C2′ |                        c|C2′ | #»                     c2 |C2′ |2
                           = ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 −          ⟨xi , #»
                                                          v ⟩⟨xi , xj ⟩ −          ⟨ v , xj ⟩⟨xi , xj ⟩ +            ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                              n                               n                              n2
                                      c2 |C2′ |2
                           = O(c) +              ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                         n2
                                    c|C2′ | #»          c|C2′ | #» 2
               ⟨yi , yj ⟩2 = ⟨xi −          v , xj −            v⟩
                                      n                    n
                                                                                                   2
                                            c|C2′ |               c|C2′ | #»           c2 |C2′ |2

                           = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −           ⟨xi , #»
                                                           v⟩−           ⟨ v , xj ⟩ +
                                               n                    n                     n2
                                           c4 |C2′ |4
                           = O(c3 ) +
                                              n4


2. i ∈ C1′ and j ∈ C2′ (i.e. xi ∈ C1 and xj ∈ C2 ):


             ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 = ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                             c|C2′ | #»          c|C1′ | #»
     ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨yi , yj ⟩ = ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨xi −          v , xj +            v⟩
                                                n                   n
                                                      c|C1′ |               c|C2′ | #»          c2 |C1′ ||C2′ | #» #»

                          = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +           ⟨xi , #»
                                                                    v⟩−            ⟨ v , xj ⟩ −                ⟨ v , v ⟩
                                                        n                     n                      n2
                                                          ′                     ′
                                                                                                c |C1′ ||C2′ |
                                                                                                 2

                                                      c|C1 |                c|C2 | #»
                          = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +           ⟨xi , #»
                                                                    v⟩−            ⟨ v , xj ⟩ −
                                                        n                     n                      n2
                                          c|C1′ |                        c|C2′ |                         c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |
                         = ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 +          ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨xi , #»
                                                                  v⟩−            ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨ #»
                                                                                             v , xj ⟩ −                  ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                            n                               n                                 n2
                                    c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |
                         = O(c) −                   ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                          n2
                                  c|C2′ | #»          c|C1′ | #» 2
             ⟨yi , yj ⟩2 = ⟨xi −          v , xj +             v⟩
                                    n                    n
                                                                                                       2
                                          c|C1′ |               c|C2′ | #»           c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |2

                         = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +           ⟨xi , #»
                                                        v⟩−            ⟨ v , xj ⟩ −
                                             n                     n                       n2
                                         c4 |C1′ |2 |C2′ |2
                         = O(c3 ) +
                                                n4

                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3. i ∈ C2′ and j ∈ C2′ (i.e. xi ∈ C2 and xj ∈ C2 ):
                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 = ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                                        c|C1′ | #»       c|C1′ | #»
               ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨yi , yj ⟩ = ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨xi +           v , xj +         v⟩
                                                "         n                n                          #
                                                                                             2
                                                           2c|C1′ |                 c|C1′ |

                                 = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +                #»
                                                                    ⟨xi , v ⟩ + +               #» #»
                                                                                               ⟨v, v⟩
                                                              n                        n
                                                           2c|C1′ |            c2 |C1′ |2

                                 = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +          ⟨xi , #»
                                                                          v⟩+
                                                             n                    n2
                                                   2c|C1′ |                          c2 |C1′ |2
                                 = ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 +            ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨xi , #»
                                                                            v⟩+                 ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                      n                                 n2
                                             c2 |C1′ |2
                                  = O(c) +              ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                n2
                                           c|C1′ | #»         c|C1′ | #» 2
                      ⟨yi , yj ⟩2 = ⟨xi +          v , xj +           v⟩
                                             n                   n
                                                                                      2
                                                   2c|C1′ |               c2 |C1′ |2

                                  = ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +            ⟨xi , #»
                                                                  v⟩+
                                                      n                      n2
                                                  c4 |C1′ |4
                                 = O(c3 ) +
                                                     n4

                                                                    HSIClin (X,Y )
When we take lim CKAlin (X, Y ) = lim √                                                      , it is easy to see that the
                c→∞                               c→∞          HSIClin (X,X)HSIClin (Y,Y )
terms with the highest powers of c will dominate the expression. At the numerator that is c2 and at
the denominator that is c4 inside the square root. To convince oneself of this it suffices to divide by
c2 at the numerator and at the denominator, all terms except the higher power ones will then tend to 0
as c tends to infinity, so at the limit we have:


                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   lim CKAlin (X, Y )
   c→∞
               HSIClin (X, Y )
   = lim p
    c→∞   HSIClin (X, X)HSIClin (Y, Y )
                 Pn P  n
                          ⟨xi , xj ⟩⟨yj , yi ⟩
                 i=1 j=1
   = lim v
    c→∞ u                      !                           !
         u Pn P n                   Pn P  n
         t         ⟨xi , xj ⟩2                ⟨yi , yj ⟩ 2
                            i=1 j=1                          i=1 j=1

                 c2 |C2′ |2         P P                           2c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |    P P                                c2 |C1′ |2    P P
                    n2                           ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −          n2                              ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +         n2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                   i∈C1′ j∈C1′                                       i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                      i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   = lim s
       c→∞                n P
                            n                      rP P 4 ′4                              P P 2c4 |C1′ |2 |C2′ |2                      P P c4 |C1′ |4
                          P                             c |C2 |
                                     ⟨xi , xj ⟩2                          n4         +                              n4           +                     n4
                         i=1 j=1                       i∈C1′ j∈C1′                       i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                  i∈C2′ j∈C2′

                 c2 |C2′ |2         P P                           2c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |    P P                                c2 |C1′ |2    P P
                    n2                           ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −          n2                              ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +         n2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                   i∈C1′ j∈C1′                                       i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                      i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   = lim                              s
       c→∞                                n P
                                            n                      q
                                          P                            c4 |C2′ |4 |C1′ |2   2c4 |C1′ |3 |C2′ |3   c4 |C1′ |4 |C2′ |2
                                                     ⟨xi , xj ⟩2              n4          +       n4            +        n4
                                          i=1 j=1

                 c   2
                         |C2′ |2    P P                           2c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |    P P                                c2 |C1′ |2    P P
                         n2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −          n2                              ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +         n2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                   i∈C1′ j∈C1′                                       i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                      i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   = lim                               s
       c→∞                                 n P
                                             n                       q
                                                                         c4 |C2′ |2 C1′ |2
                                                                                           (|C2′ |2 + 2|C1′ ||C2′ | + |C1′ |2 )
                                           P
                                                       ⟨xi , xj ⟩2             n4
                                           i=1 j=1

                 c   2
                         |C2′ |2    P P                           2c2 |C1′ ||C2′ |    P P                                c2 |C1′ |2    P P
                         n2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩ −          n2                              ⟨xi , xj ⟩ +         n2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                   i∈C1′ j∈C1′                                       i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                      i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   = lim                                                    s
       c→∞                                                      n P
                                                                  n
                                          c2 |C2′ ||C1′ |                                p
                                                                                             |C2′ |2 + 2|C1′ ||C2′ | + |C1′ |2
                                                                P
                                               n2                        ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                                              i=1 j=1

                 |C2′ |       P P                                P P                                  |C ′ |    P P
                 |C1′ |                    ⟨xi , xj ⟩ − 2                      ⟨xi , xj ⟩ + |C1′ |                           ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                                                                         2
                            i∈C1′ j∈C1′                         i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                    i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   = lim                              s
       c→∞                                n P
                                            n                      p
                                                                       |C2′ |2 + 2|C1′ ||C2′ | + |C1′ |2
                                          P
                                                     ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                          i=1 j=1

       |C2′ |    P P                                    P P                              |C ′ |       P P
       |C1′ |                       ⟨xi , xj ⟩ − 2                    ⟨xi , xj ⟩ + |C1′ |                          ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                                                             2
                i∈C1′ j∈C1′                            i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   =                         s
                                   n P
                                     n                      p
                                                                |C2′ |2 + 2|C1′ ||C2′ | + |C1′ |2
                                   P
                                            ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                   i=1 j=1

       |C2′ |    P P                                    P P                              |C ′ |       P P
       |C1′ |                       ⟨xi , xj ⟩ − 2                    ⟨xi , xj ⟩ + |C1′ |                          ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                                                             2
                i∈C1′ j∈C1′                            i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   =                                   s
                                           n P
                                             n                       q
                                                                                                  2
                                                                         (|C2′ | + |C1′ |)
                                           P
                                                  ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                           i=1 j=1

       |C2′ |    P P                                    P P                              |C ′ |       P P
       |C1′ |                       ⟨xi , xj ⟩ − 2                    ⟨xi , xj ⟩ + |C1′ |                          ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                                                             2
                i∈C1′ j∈C1′                            i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   =                                             s
                                                     n P
                                                     P n                    √
                                                                 ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 n2
                                                     i=1 j=1

       |C2′ |    P P                                    P P                              |C ′ |       P P
       |C1′ |                       ⟨xi , xj ⟩ − 2                    ⟨xi , xj ⟩ + |C1′ |                          ⟨xi , xj ⟩
                                                                                             2
                i∈C1′ j∈C1′                            i∈C1′ j∈C2′                                i∈C2′ j∈C2′
   =                                                   s
                                                            n P
                                                            P n
                                                   n                 ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                                                            i=1 j=1
                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If we look directly at the numerator, by linearity of the inner product we have:


         |C2′ | X X                 X X              |C ′ | X X
            ′        ⟨xi , xj ⟩ − 2      ⟨xi , xj ⟩ + 1′         ⟨xi , xj ⟩
         |C1 |   ′ ′                 ′ ′
                                                     |C2 |   ′ ′
              i∈C1 j∈C1                           i∈C1 j∈C2                        i∈C2 j∈C2
                         1 X         1 X                          1 X         1 X
         = |C1′ ||C2′ |⟨ ′      xi , ′      xj ⟩ − 2|C1′ ||C2′ |⟨ ′      xi , ′      xj ⟩
                        |C1 | ′
                                    |C1 | ′
                                                                 |C1 | ′
                                                                             |C2 | ′
                                i∈C1                  j∈C1                               i∈C1      i∈C2
                               1 X         1 X
               + |C1′ ||C2′ |⟨ ′      xi , ′      xj ⟩
                              |C2 | ′
                                          |C2 | ′
                                          i∈C2               j∈C2

         = |C2′ ||C1′ | [⟨x1 , x1 ⟩ − 2⟨x1 , x2 ⟩ + ⟨x2 , x2 ⟩]
         = |C2′ ||C1′ |∥x1 − x2 ∥2


Where xj = Ex∈Cj [x] = |C1′ |
                                          P
                                                  xi is the mean of the points in Cj . At the denominator we can
                                 j
                                      i∈Cj′
multiply by nn to obtain:


                            sX X                                   v
                        n                                               1
                                                                   uX X
                                                                    2u
                      n                            ⟨xi , xj ⟩2 = n t       ⟨xi , xj ⟩2
                        n                                               n2
                                xi ∈X xj ∈X                          xi ∈X xj ∈X
                                                                  v
                                                                  u n
                                                                  uX
                                                                 2t
                                                              =n      λ2       i
                                                                         i=1



We note that the term with the square root function is the Frobenius norm of the Gram matrix of the
data (matrix of inner products) XX ⊤ multiplied by n1 which, in turn, is equal to the square root of
the sum of it’s squared eigenvalues, where λi is the i-th eigenvalue of the matrix n1 XX ⊤ . However,
through singular value decomposition, the Gram matrix (multiplied by n1 ) has the same eigenvalues
as the (biased) covariance matrix of the data, i.e. n1 X ⊤ X. Using the notation Xi,j to go over the
rows (representations) of X with i and over the columns (dimensions or neurons) of X with j we can
write the variance in the data as the sum of the variances from all dimensions:

                                p
                                X
               V ar(X) =              V ar(X:,j )
                                j=1
                                 p Xn
                                X       1
                            =             (Xi,j − X:,j )2
                                j=1 i=1
                                        n
                                      p       n
                                1 XX 2
                            =            X                                because the data is centered
                                n j=1 i=1 i,j
                                      n       p
                                1 XX 2
                            =            X
                                n i=1 j=1 i,j
                            = Ei [∥Xi,: ∥2 ]
                            = Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]
                              Xp
                            =    λi
                                l=1



                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We can then write the denominator as:
                              v                      v
                              u n                    u n
                              u
                             2t
                                X
                                      2    2 V ar(X) uX
                           n        λi = n           t     λ2i
                                i=1
                                             V ar(X)   i=1
                                                     s
                                                        n
                                                          λ2i
                                                       P
                                                               i=1
                                         = n2 V ar(X)
                                                           V ar(X)
                                                              s
                                                                 n
                                                                           λ2i
                                                                P
                                                                     i=1
                                         = n2 Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ] P
                                                           n
                                                                       λi
                                                                 i=1

                                         = n2 Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]P R(X)−1/2
And we can rewrite the whole expression as:
                                                                      p
                                               |C1′ ||C2′ |∥x1 − x2 ∥2 P R(X)
                      lim CKAlin (X, Y ) =
                      c→∞                                 n2 Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]


Where P R(X) is the participation ratio, an effective dimensionality estimator often used in the
literature and is defined as:                     p       2
                                                   P
                                                      λi
                                    P R(X) = i=1    p
                                                      λ2i
                                                   P
                                                         i=1

With λi being the i-th eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of the data X. We make the replace-
ments |Cn1 | = |S|         |C2 |
                n = ρ and n =
                                   n−|C1 |
                                      n    = 1 − ρ. Also, because the data is centered we have
|C1 |x1 + |C2 |x2 = 0 and we can isolate x2 = −|C 1 |x1
                                                |C2 |   so we have:

                                                      |C1 |x1 2
                                ∥x1 − x2 ∥2 = ∥x1 +            ∥
                                                        |C2 |
                                                     |C1 | 2
                                              = (1 +       ) ∥x1 ∥2
                                                     |C2 |
                                                     n|C1 | 2
                                              = (1 +        ) ∥x1 ∥2
                                                     n|C2 |
                                                       ρ 2
                                              = (1 +        ) ∥x1 ∥2
                                                     1−ρ


We then define Γ to contain all terms of ρ:
                                                                ρ 2
                                   Γ(p) = ρ(1 − ρ)(1 +             )
                                                               1−ρ
                                               ρ
                                        =
                                              1−ρ
The following bounds hold: Γ(ρ) ∈ (0, 1] for ρ ∈ (0, 0.5] reached when ρ = 12 . Finally, we get the
final expression by changing x1 = Ex∈C1 [x] = Ex∈S [x]:
                                                         ∥Ex∈S [x]∥2 p
                        lim CKAlin (X, Y ) = Γ(ρ)                      P R(X)
                       c→∞                               Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]



                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Corollary 2
                                                                |S|
To prove Corollary 2 it suffices to note that the fact that ρ = |X| is in (0, 21 ] is not used anywhere in
the proof of Thm. 1 other than to derive the bounds for Γ(ρ). We can then conclude that Thm. 1 still
                                   |S|
holds if S is taken such that ρ = |X|  ∈ (0.5, 1) only with different bounds for Γ(ρ).
We note however that the expression in Thm. 1 can be written in terms of S and ρ or in terms of
                      ′
S ′ = X\S and ρ′ = |S   |                                   ′
                   |X| interchangeably. We first note that ρ = 1 − ρ and for simplicity purposes
we will use the notation S = Ex∈S [x] and S ′ = Ex∈S ′ [x]. We recall that the expression in Thm. 1 is:
                                                               ∥S∥2     p
                        lim CKAlin (X, XS, #»
                                           v ,c ) = Γ(ρ)             2
                                                                         P R(X)
                        c→∞                                 Ex∈X [∥x∥ ]
           √
               P R(X)
The term Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ] does not depend on the choice of using S or X\S so we can focus on the rest:

                                                                   ρ′ 2 ′ 2
                              Γ(ρ′ )∥S ′ ∥2 = ρ′ (1 − ρ′ )(1 +          ) ∥S ∥
                                                                 1 − ρ′
ρ′ (1 − ρ′ ) is easily found to be equal to (1 − ρ)ρ and for the rest we have:
                                        ρ′ 2 ′ 2               ρ′
                               (1 +          ) ∥S ∥ = ∥(1  +        )S ′ ∥2
                                      1 − ρ′                 1 − ρ′
                                                    = ∥S ′ − S∥2
                                                     = ∥S − S ′ ∥2
                                                                ρ
                                                     = ∥S +         S∥2
                                                            1−ρ
                                                              ρ 2
                                                     = (1 +        ) ∥S∥2
                                                            1−ρ
                                                                                                      ′   ′
Where we used the fact that the data is centered so |S|S + |S ′ |S ′ = 0 so we can isolate S = −|S |S
                                                                                                 |S| .
We conclude that we have:
                                                        ′    ∥S ′ ∥2 p
                    lim CKAlin (X, XS, #»   v ,c ) = Γ(ρ )                 P R(X)
                   c→∞                                     Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]



Proof. Corollary 4
We already have x ∈ S ⇒ ⟨w, x⟩ ≤ k. Pick any #»
                                             v ∈ Rp that is orthogonal to w and we have:
         ⟨w, x + c #»
                   v ⟩ = ⟨w, x⟩ + c⟨w, #»
                                       v⟩        by the linearity of the inner product
                       = ⟨w, x⟩                            since #»
                                                                 v is orthogonal to w
                          >k                                                       ∀x ∈ X\S



D     F URTHER DISCUSSION OF THEORETICAL RESULTS
D.1    A NALYSIS OF THE TERMS IN T HEOREM 1

In addition to the description of the terms that we provide in Section 3 (page 4 before the paragraph
on CKA sensitivity to outliers) we go here into further detail regarding the terms from Thm. 1.
The two expectation terms, Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ] and ∥Ex∈S [x]∥2 are relatively simple to describe. They
respectively represent the average squared norms of all representations in X and the squared norm
of the mean of S, the subset of representations that are not being translated. As mentioned in the
main text, since most neural networks are trained using weight decay, the network parameters, and
hence the resulting representations as well as these two quantities are biased towards small values in
                    ρ
practice. Γ(ρ) = 1−ρ   is the ratio of the points in S, that are not translated, with respect to the points


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                    p
in X\S that are translated. Finally, the last term dimP R (X) is the square root of the participation
ratio, which is used as an effective dimensionality estimate for internal representations. It is defined
                            2
                    ( λi )
                     P
as dimP R (X) ≜ Pi λ2 ∈ [1, p] where {λi } are the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of X.
                        i i
These eigenvalues are perhaps best understood through the lens of principal component analysis
which uses the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix as principal components and the eigenvalues
for describing the variability of the data which is found along the direction of it’s corresponding
eigenvector. In other words, the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix encode the amount of variance
in the data in an orthogonal basis of the ambient space of the data points. The participation ratio is the
ratio between the squared sum of eigenvalues and the sum of the squared eigenvalues. We describe
the two extreme cases for intuition. If all the variance of the data comes from a single direction then
only one of the eigenvalues will be non zero (WLOG λj ) and therefore both the numerator and the
denominator will be equal to λ2i so the PR will be 1, i.e. the estimated dimensionality will be 1 which
makes sense given that all the variability comes from a single direction. On the other hand, if the
variance is equally distributed across all directions, all the eigenvalues will have the same value λ and
                                      2
                               ( λ)
                                P
                                             2 2
the participation ratio will be Pi λ2 = ppλλ2 = p. Therefore the effective dimensionality will be the
                                  i
full dimensionality of the ambient space. Since there is an equal amount of variance in all directions,
all dimensions of the ambient space ”participate” equally in describing the dataset X.

D.2    A DDITIONAL INTUITION ON T HEOREM 1 AND C OROLLARY 2

A question that may arise related to Corollary 2 is: what happens when S is such that ρ >> 12 and
the value of Γ quickly grows beyond 1? It turns out that it is the fraction of expectations that will
cancel out large Γ values. As a side note, before we start explaining the previous sentence, we point
out that since X contains a finite number of data points Γ will never actually tend to infinity even if it
can take on large values. Now suppose S is such that ρ >> 12 , i.e. S contains a majority of the points
in X, therefore Γ will have a large value. Since the points in X are centered and since S contains a
majority of the points from X, this implies one of two things. Either:

      1. The mean of the points in S will be almost zero (Ex∈S [x] ≈ 0), therefore the numerator
         will be almost zero since it is the squared norm of this mean. This can easily occur if S is a
         very large part of X (which is centered) and the points in X\S are not outliers with large
         norms so the mean of S will be very close to the mean of X, which is 0 in this case. The
         denominator on the other hand (Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]) can be large since we take the squared norm
         of the points in X, which are all positive values, and only afterwards compute the expected
         value.
      2. The small number of points in X\S will have very large norms relative to those in S and
         will be positioned on the opposite side of the origin with respect to the mean of S (so the
         mean of X can be at the origin). The bigger S is inside X, the bigger the norms of the
         points in X\S will need to be to compensate. Therefore, the numerator ∥Ex∈S [x]∥2 will
         again be very small with respect to the denominator Ex∈X [∥x∥2 ]. At the denominator, since
         we take the squared norm of the points in X before computing the expected value, the points
         in X\S which have very large norms compared to those in S will dominate the expected
         value. Consequently, the value of the fraction of these two terms will be very small.

Another insightful way of analyzing this situation, which is perhaps more intuitive, is to look at it
through the lens of the proof of Corollary 2. Given the fact that the data is centered before applying
CKA, translating the points in X\S in any random direction or translating the points in S in the
exact opposite direction will yield the same set of representations post-centering, and thus will give
the same CKA value. Therefore, for any S such that ρ > 12 we can look at the complementary case
where we swap the definitions of S and X\S in Theorem 1 and the translation direction is inverted
(opposite direction) and we find ourselves with the new ρ being smaller than 12 , the new Γ smaller
than 1 and Theorem 1 still applies. More explicitly we can apply the Theorem 1 to S ′ = X\S with
                                          #»
ρ′ = (1 − ρ) < 21 and the new direction v ′ = − #»v.


                                                   29
