Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L INEARLY M APPING FROM I MAGE TO T EXT S PACE
 Jack Merullo, Louis Castricato, Carsten Eickhoff, Ellie Pavlick
 Department of Computer Science
 Brown University
 Providence, RI, USA
 {jack merullo,louis castricato,carsten,ellie pavlick}@brown.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         The extent to which text-only language models (LMs) learn to represent features
         of the non-linguistic world is an open question. Prior work has shown that pre-
         trained LMs can be taught to caption images when a vision model’s parameters
         are optimized to encode images in the language space. We test a stronger hy-
         pothesis: that the conceptual representations learned by frozen text-only models
         and vision-only models are similar enough that this can be achieved with a lin-
         ear map. We show that the image representations from vision models can be
         transferred as continuous prompts to frozen LMs by training only a single lin-
         ear projection. Using these to prompt the LM achieves competitive performance
         on captioning and visual question answering tasks compared to models that tune
         both the image encoder and text decoder (such as the MAGMA model). We com-
         pare three image encoders with increasing amounts of linguistic supervision seen
         during pretraining: BEIT (no linguistic information), NF-ResNET (lexical cate-
         gory information), and CLIP (full natural language descriptions). We find that
         all three encoders perform equally well at transferring visual property informa-
         tion to the language model (e.g., whether an animal is large or small), but that
         image encoders pretrained with linguistic supervision more saliently encode cat-
         egory information (e.g., distinguishing hippo vs. elephant) and thus perform sig-
         nificantly better on benchmark language-and-vision tasks. Our results indicate
         that LMs encode conceptual information structurally similarly to vision-based
         models, even those that are solely trained on images. Code is available here:
         https://github.com/jmerullo/limber


1   I NTRODUCTION

Much recent work in NLP has revolved around studying the limits on representational capacity in-
curred by training on form-only text data, as discussed in Bender & Koller (2020). Tied to this
argument is the idea that without explicit grounding, language models are not inclined to learn con-
ceptual representations of language that reflect the rich conceptual knowledge that humans gain from
interacting with the physical, non-linguistic world. Despite this, there have been remarkable find-
ings in large language models’ abilities to generalize to and reason about non-linguistic phenomena
(Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021; Eichenberg et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Patel & Pavlick, 2022). Thus, an
open question in the field is to what extent (if at all) a language model trained on text-only data can
learn aspects of the physical world. In this paper, we test a specific hypothesis about the relationship

              A frozen image encoder   A linear projection is tuned   The image projections are
              encodes an image as a       to project from image       fed as soft prompts into a
                    feature map            space to text space              generative LM
                                                                                                   “A picture of
                 Image Encoder            ! Linear Proj. !                 Text Decoder             a dog on a
                                                                                                   skateboard”


Figure 1: We train linear projections from image representations into the input space of a language
model to produce captions describing images. We find that LMs can describe the contents of most
image representations, but performance varies based on the type of image encoder used.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


between language model and image encoder representations: that these conceptual representations
can be approximately mapped to one another through a linear transformation. To do this, we train
a single linear layer to project from the representation space of images into the language space of a
generative LM without tuning any other model parameters, which we call LiMBeR: Linearly Map-
ping Between Representation spaces. That is, we linearly transform an image representation into
“soft prompts”–vector(s) in the embedding space that do not correspond to discrete language tokens
(Lester et al., 2021). The weights of this linear projection are tuned for an image captioning task
(illustrated in Figure 1). We can then evaluate its performance on vision-language (VL) tasks at test
time by exploring the text the LM generates. Because of the simplicity of the linear transformation,
we would expect that if the conceptual representation spaces of the two models are structured sim-
ilarly, this transfer will be successful and the LM will have little trouble describing the contents of
images.
We use three different image encoders with increasing levels of linguistic supervision in pretraining:
BEIT (Bao et al., 2021), Normalizer Free Resnet50 (NFRN50) (Brock et al., 2021), and CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021) to train different projections into the LM. By linguistic supervision, we refer to the
extent to which the image encoder was exposed to language data during its pretraining, thus influ-
encing the expected representational similarity between it and an LM. While CLIP was pretrained to
align images with full natural language captions in a shared image-text representation space, BEIT
had no exposure to language and was trained by predicting the contents of masked out sections of
images. NFRN50 falls somewhere between these extremes: having been pretrained on an image
classification task for identifying the subject of an image over the set of classes in ImageNet1k Rus-
sakovsky et al. (2015). Although there is no natural language in this task, the pretraining objective
encourages the model to map visual features along lexical categorical concepts (the image classes)
derived from the WordNet hierarchy (Miller, 1995).
We show that prompting an LM with any of the three image encoders effectively transfers semantic
content in the image that the LM describes with natural language. However, performance also
appears proportional to the strength of the linguistic supervision the image encoder had. While CLIP
and NFRN50 perform competitively with tuning the models freely (e.g., Tsimpoukelli et al. (2021),
Eichenberg et al. (2021)), BEIT appears to transfer mostly coarse-grained visual properties and
struggles with encouraging the LM to generate exact lexical categories. We interpret this as evidence
that models trained on either language or vision data learn conceptual spaces that are structurally
similar to each other, but that the exact degree of similarity depends on the type of supervision the
image encoder receives. In summary, we show: (1) that visual semantic information can be linearly
mapped to language models in the form of soft prompts without tuning any model parameters.
(2) That this mapping allows generative models to describe images and answer questions about
images at a level that is comparable to what is achieved by multimodal models which tune image
and language representations jointly. And (3) by training our prompting pipeline with different
image encoder backbones, we demonstrate that linguistic supervision in pretraining plays a key role
in concept formation in models and thus, the transferability of visual features from vision to text
spaces.



2   R ELATED W ORK

Our approach takes inspiration from recent work in adapting pretrained language models for ac-
cepting representations of images as inputs. Particularly, the Frozen and MAGMA models (Tsim-
poukelli et al., 2021; Eichenberg et al., 2021), as well as Sung et al. (2022); Alayrac et al. (2022);
Mokady et al. (2021); Luo et al. (2022); Lin et al. (2021); Zhai et al. (2022), which show that pre-
trained image and text networks can be tuned together on an image captioning task and applied to
downstream vision-language (VL) tasks. These approaches either fine-tune the pretrained models,
or train non-linear MLP projection/fusion networks between modalities, making interpretation of
the representations difficult compared to our approach. Scialom et al. (2020) show a learned linear
transformation is sufficient for BERT to encode image region representations which are then fed to
a text decoder to generate questions about the image, but it is not well understood what abstractions
LMs are able to transfer from a transformation of this type, or if a text decoder can operate on linear
transformations of visual encodings directly.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pretrained/from scratch LMs have typically been used in the past for image captioning applications
in which an image representation is fed into the LM as input (Desai & Johnson, 2021; Shen et al.,
2021; Devlin et al., 2015). Gui et al. (2022); Yuan et al. pretrain vision-language models from
scratch using image-caption data. Zeng et al. (2022); Xie et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2022) augment
multimodal performance by feeding text prompts derived from VL models into an LM, in order to
incorporate knowledge learned by LM training. These show LMs can interface with visual inputs
described in text; our work questions whether the visual input can be fed directly into the LM, with-
out bridging through language first. The success of aforementioned models on VL tasks indicates
there is a representational similarity learned by text and image models independently, which we
investigate in this paper.
Our work is also highly related to the idea of model “stitching” (Lenc & Vedaldi, 2015) in which two
different models are attached at a certain layer. LiMBeR can be described as stitching the output of
an image encoder to the input of an LM in the form of soft prompts (Lester et al., 2021). Stitching
offers distinct advantages in evaluating the representational similarity between two models, as de-
scribed in Bansal et al. (2021), over other conventional methods like RSA and CKA (Kriegeskorte
et al., 2008; Kornblith et al., 2019). For example, LiMBeR allows us to show not just that CLIP en-
codings are more similar to text encodings than BEIT representations, but that BEIT representations
are nevertheless able to transfer visual property information to the LM (§5.3).
There has been considerable interest in recent work in establishing if LMs model aspects of the non-
linguistic world in order to model language. Lu et al. (2021) show that the weights of a pretrained
LM can generalize to tasks with different modalities. Hao et al. (2022) similarly show that LMs
can act as interfaces for multiple modalities. Li et al. (2021) show that models of entities and
situations can be derived from contextual word representations. Patel & Pavlick (2022) show that
very large LMs (GPT-3 scale (Brown et al., 2020)) can learn in-context non-linguistic conceptual
domains depicted in text. Our work differs from these in that we have an LM interface directly with
non-text data without changing model weights and show that, although fundamentally different, the
representation space of a text-only LM shares non-trivial similarities to that of several vision-based
models.


3   M ETHOD : L INEARLY M APPING FROM I MAGE TO T EXT R EPRESENTATIONS

While previous work has shown success in mapping images to language model soft prompts as
a method for multimodal pretraining (e.g., Frozen, Magma; see Section 2), there have been no
attempts to restrict the mechanism behind this mapping and understand how it works. Our basic
approach is to train a single linear layer P to project from the hidden size hI of a pretrained image
encoder into the input space eL of a generative language model for an image captioning task. The
projected inputs do not correspond to discrete language tokens, and can be thought of as soft prompts
(Lester et al., 2021) representing the image. For brevity, we refer to training P as Linearly Mapping
Between Representation spaces (i.e., LiMBeR)1 . Our approach can also be viewed as paring down
the method used in Tsimpoukelli et al. (2021) and Eichenberg et al. (2021), such that the only trained
parameters reside in the projection P . By freezing the image encoder E and LM on either side of
the projection, we can examine the similarities between the representation spaces of the two as a
function of the ability of the LM to describe an image input or perform some task relating to it.
We expect that, if a language model represents visual conceptual information structurally similarly
to that learned by a vision encoder, then a simple linear transformation to the language space is all
that is required to transfer visual features into the language model. Before describing the training
procedure, we will describe the basic components of the model, and the variations we chose.

Language Model LM & Image Encoders E We hypothesize that the conceptual representations
learned by an LM are equivalent, up to a linear transformation, to the representations from an image
encoder E. The language model used is the 6 billion parameter decoder-only GPT-J model (Wang
& Komatsuzaki, 2021). P is trained to project from hI to the input space eL = 4096 of the LM.
We train several models with different E’s to determine the compatibility between encodings from

   1
     We avoid specifying images or text in our backronym because one could linearly map between any two
representation spaces of any modalities (e.g. video-to-text or text-to-text)


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E and the LM. We also test how the choice of E influences performance on this task, specifically,
with regards to the degree of linguistic supervision E saw in pretraining, as described in Section 1.
From E we extract an image encoding of dimensionality hI representing the image. We then project
that encoding to a eL ∗ k sequence of soft prompts, which we hereafter refer to as image prompts.
k is determined by the architecture of the E. For example, for consistency with the MAGMA
model, we use the 12x12x3072d feature map before pooling from CLIP, which we flatten to k =
12 ∗ 12 = 144. The encoders we experiment with are (1) CLIP RN50x16 (Radford et al., 2021),
k = 144, hI = 3072. Because CLIP is trained to learn multimodal image-text embeddings, we
expect that it will be easier for the model to learn a projection into language space than a vision only
encoder. (2) NFRN50 (Brock et al., 2021), k = 2, hI = 2048. We train three variants using NF-
Resnet50: one pretrained and frozen during caption training (NFRN50), one tuned during caption
training (NFRN50 Tuned; note that the LM is still frozen), and one randomly initialized (NFRN50
Random). The NFRN50 models are pretrained on an image classification task on data that is labeled
according to WordNet hypo/hypernym structure. This signal trains the model to separate object
classes according to these words. For this reason, we consider it to have indirect access to linguistic
supervision. (3) BEIT-Large (Bao et al., 2021), k = 196, hI = 1024. BEIT is pretrained using
a self-supervised masked visual token modeling task and does not have access to any labeled data
which may give the model an inductive bias towards a linguistic structure. We use the 16-pixel patch
version that was pretrained only on ImageNet22k. We additionally test two variants of this model:
BEIT Random, is randomly initialized, and BEIT FT, which was pretrained on the same task and
then finetuned for image classification on the same dataset. We use this model to show that it is
indeed the linguistic supervision of the pretraining objective which induces better performance in
the captioning task.


3.1   T RAINING P ROCEDURE

Following the MAGMA and Frozen models (Eichenberg et al., 2021; Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021),
we train a projection on an image captioning task so that we can learn to align the representation
spaces of E and the LM. All models are trained with the same basic hyperparameters and settings
as described in the MAGMA paper (see Appendix A for details) on the Conceptual Captions 3M
dataset (CC3M, Sharma et al. (2018)) for 15,000 training steps.


Baselines As baselines, we use NFRN50 Random, NFRN50 Tuned, and train our own instance of
MAGMAbase . Please note that NFRN50 Tuned is a stand-in for the Frozen model: it is architec-
turally the same, but differs in that we use the hyperparameters used to train the MAGMA model.
NFRN50 Random allows us to test the efficacy of LiMBeR when the image encoder backbone has
not learned any useful visual features. The MAGMA we train uses the CLIP RN50x16 image en-
coder (Radford et al., 2021), GPT-J as the LM, and adapters in sequence in the attention blocks with
a downsample factor of 4.


3.2   L IMITATIONS

Due to computational constraints, we did not control for the prompt length (k) for each image
encoder. Tsimpoukelli et al. (2021) experiment with a small range for the value of k for the Frozen
model and show that while there are some differences, k is mostly a factor in hyperparameter tuning
and should not strongly affect the comparison between models. We use much higher values of k for
CLIP and BEIT, and this is therefore is not strongly controlled for in our study.
We consider LM runoff another potential confound. In some cases, if the LM recognizes and gen-
erates a relevant word for one concept (e.g., “the beach”), it might continue generating relevant
information due to a strong linguistic prior for that info showing up (e.g., “building a sandcastle”),
giving the illusion it is recognizing every element in an image (even if it never saw “the sandcastle”).
Regardless, the scope of this problem is very limited, and across multiple large datasets our results
show that recovery of any image information is still possible, even if the full and precise extent of
which is impossible to know. We also include a ‘blind’ model in visual question answering analysis
to further control for this.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                Image Captioning
                                    a giraﬀe in the lobby
                         CLIP                                                   CLIP       tennis player in action
                                       of the building
                                                                                         tennis player at the tennis
                         NFRN50     the giraﬀe in the zoo.                      NFRN50
                                                                                                tournament.
                                                                                           tennis player during a
                         BEIT      a peacock in the garden                      BEIT
                                                                                               tennis match.
                         NFRN50 a man and a woman in a                          NFRN50
                                                                                         the new logo for the team
                         Random     field of flowers                            Random
                                         Visual Question Answering
                          CLIP      He is surfing a wave.                       CLIP          A tennis racket

                          NFRN50 He is surfing the waves.                       NFRN50        A tennis racket
                                    He is jumping into the
                          BEIT                                                  BEIT          A baseball bat.
                                            water.
                          NFRN50    He is swimming in the                       NFRN50
                                                                                                   A tree
                          Random             pool.                              Random
Q: What is the person doing?                                 Q: What is the person holding?
A: surfing                                                   A: tennis racket

Figure 2: Curated examples of captioning and zero-shot VQA illustrating the ability of each model to
transfer information to the LM without tuning either model. We use these examples to also illustrate
common failure modes for BEIT prompts of sometimes generating incorrect but conceptually related
captions/answers.


4       P ERFORMANCE ON V ISION -L ANGUAGE TASKS

We first verify that image representations that are linearly projected into the input space of the LM
carry semantic information about the content of the image that the LM can make sense of. Since we
only tune a single projection between the image encoder and text decoder, the prompt tokens in the
LM are equivalent to the image representation up to that linear transformation. If LMs are learning a
conceptual space that reflects that of the non-linguistic, purely visually grounded space of the image
encoder, the LM should be able to capture the image information and describe it in text.
Data We evaluate on image prompts generated by each image encoder on multiple image captioning
datasets: MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014) and NoCaps (Agrawal et al., 2019), as well as the VQA2
(Goyal et al., 2017) visual question-answering dataset. Following convention from SimVLM and
MAGMA, we input the prefix “A picture of” after every image to prompt the model. Like in previous
work, we find that this is a favorable prompt which tends to increase performance.
Metrics For image captioning, we report CIDEr-D (Vedantam et al., 2015), CLIPScore, and Ref-
CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2021). CIDEr-D rewards generating accurate words which are more likely
to be visually informative, and CLIPScore can evaluate similarity between an image and caption
without references, which helps us give credit for captions that vary greatly from the ground truth,
but similar in semantic content (e.g. describing a pool as a lake). We report additional captioning
metrics in Appendix B. For visual question answering, we follow the few-shot procedure used in
Eichenberg et al. (2021) in which we prompt the models with the “[image] Q: [q] A:” format. We
take the first word of the generation and, like in the MAGMA paper, truncate to the length of the
longest ground truth answer. We also use the normalization procedure and accuracy metric described
in the VQA repo2
Results Our main results can be seen in Table 1. As evidenced by comparing MAGMA and CLIP,
and NFRN50 tuned and frozen, we find that there is relatively little benefit in training parameters in
either encoder or decoder. Note that the MAGMA model we implemented is identical to the frozen
CLIP model, with the exceptions that MAGMA tunes the image encoder and LM. On captioning
and VQA tasks, performance of the jointly-tuned models (MAGMA, NFRN50 Tuned) is not con-
sistently better, and is often worse, than just training the projection with frozen models. This trend
persists across over 10 automatic captioning metrics, which are described in Appendix B. Our results
indicate that there is in fact a relationship between the linguistic supervision of the pretraining task
    2
        https://github.com/GT-Vision-Lab/VQA


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Image Captioning            NoCaps - CIDEr-D           NoCaps (All)        CoCo            CoCo
                            In     Out Near All           CLIP-S Ref-S        CIDEr-D      CLIP-S Ref-S
     NFRN50 Tuned          20.9 30.8 25.3 27.3             66.5    72.5         35.3        69.7    74.8
    MAGMA (released)       18.0 12.7 18.4 16.9             63.2    68.8         52.1        76.7    79.4
     MAGMA (ours)          30.4 43.4 36.7 38.7             74.3    78.7         47.5        75.3    79.6
     BEIT Random            5.5    3.6    4.1    4.4       46.8    55.1          5.2        48.8    56.2
    NFRN50 Random           5.4    4.0    4.9    5.0       47.5    55.7          4.8        49.5    57.1
        BEIT               20.3 16.3 18.9 18.9             62.0    69.1         22.3        63.6    70.0
       NFRN50              21.3 31.2 26.9 28.5             65.6    71.8         36.2        68.9    74.1
       BEIT FT.            38.5 48.8 43.1 45.3             73.0    78.1         51.0        74.2    78.9
        CLIP               34.3 48.4 41.6 43.9             74.7    79.4         54.9        76.2    80.4

     VQA n-shots                        0                         1               2               4
        Blind                         20.60                     35.11           36.17           36.99
     NFRN50 Tuned                     27.15                     37.47           38.48           39.18
     MAGMA (ours)                     24.62                     39.27           40.58           41.51
    MAGMA (reported)                  32.7                      40.2             42.5           43.8
    NFRN50 Random                     25.34                     36.15           36.79           37.43
        BEIT                          24.92                     34.35           34.70           31.72
       NFRN50                         27.63                     37.51           38.58           39.17
         CLIP                         33.33                     39.93           40.82           40.34

Table 1: Captioning Performance and Visual Question Answering (VQA) accuracy for all variations
on model architecture and image encoders used. On captioning, we see a consistent increasing trend
in performance that correlates with an increase in linguistic supervision. However BEIT (the only
vision-only model), performs far above a randomly initialized NFRN50 model and is on par with
the other models on CLIPScore (CLIP-S) and RefCLIP Score (Ref-S) (Hessel et al., 2021). We see
that BEIT performs at the level of our random baselines on VQA, suggesting there is a deficiency in
relating visual information to more complex visual-linguistic reasoning tasks


and performance on transferring to the LM. That is, CLIP outperforms NFRN50, which outperforms
BEIT. To confirm this, we apply LiMBeR to a BEIT model finetuned on image classification (BEIT
FT.), and find that this model improves performance drastically, even outperforming CLIP on No-
Caps, and improving over BEIT on all metrics, including CLIP-Score by 9-10 points. This suggests
the importance of the linguistic supervision in the pretraining task, rather than perhaps architecture,
as the important factor for successful transfer.
Notably, we find that even vanilla BEIT, which has no linguistic supervision in pretraining, still
transfers well to the LM for captioning, far outperforming random NFRN50 across the board, which
had no pretraining to learn visual features. We do find that BEIT captions using vaguer language,
and/or semantically related-but-incorrect descriptions of objects (Figure 2; more examples in Ap-
pendix B). We see this reflected in the CLIPScores of the captions as well, which reward semantic
similarity rather than precise lexical overlap with a reference caption. BEIT captions score 62 and
63.6 for NoCaps and COCO respectively; on average only 4.5 points behind NFRN50 but 14.3 ahead
of random NFRN50. Perhaps we see the greatest failure of BEIT prompts in the inability to transfer
details that the LM can use to answer questions about images (At 4-shot VQA, BEIT scores 31.72%
while a ‘blind’ LM with no image input scores 36.99%). We hypothesize this is because BEIT rep-
resentations do not encode visual information that corresponds well to lexical categories. In Section
5, we provide evidence in favor of this hypothesis, and investigate the granularity of detail prompts
from each frozen encoder transfer to the LM.

5    T RANSFER OF V ISUAL C ONCEPTS
Examining the conditions that cause an image prompt to succeed or fail to transfer to the LM can help
us understand the differences between the text and image representation spaces. Doing so can also
help us understand why BEIT prompts perform so poorly for VQA despite performing decently for
captioning. In Section 5.1, we analyze the ability to accurately generate specific lexical categories
in captions when they appear in images (e.g., mentioning “squirrel” when given a picture of one).


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: On average, recall of nouns in generated captions follows the standard pattern
(CLIP>NFRN50>BEIT). However, judging by Wu-Palmer similarity, BEIT performs nearly the
same or better than NFRN50 and CLIP on 4/5 of the noun categories. This indicates that although
BEIT struggles to transfer the exact correct concept, it is transferring a related one based on visual
similarity. On the right we show this effect for individual vehicle words. BEIT may have never
learned to distinguish the ‘bus’ concept, but the LM still understands to generate a highly related
concept, i.e., another vehicle. Average random Wu-Palmer similarity is around .4 consistently.


Following that, in Section 5.3 we focus on mistakes the models make: when the LM generates a
bad caption, does it generate a caption that describes entities with similar visual properties? For
example, a caption generated from an image of a “small”, “woodland”, and “furry” animal might
not mention the actual animal depicted (e.g., a squirrel); but does it instead mention a different
but similar furry animal (e.g., a rabbit)? We find that only linguistically informed image encoders
(NFRN50, CLIP) tend to strongly encode concepts aligning to lexical categories, but all pretrained
models including BEIT encode property information approximately equally well, and far better than
a randomly initialized image encoder baseline.

5.1   T RANSFER OF L EXICAL C ATEGORICAL C ONCEPTS

Using the COCO validation set, we count the top 50 nouns, modifiers (e.g., adjectives), and relations
(e.g., verbs, prepositional phrases) that appear in the ground truth captions and calculate how often
they appear in the generated captions that were used to calculate the scores in Table 1.
Metrics We calculate the precision/recall/F1 for each word, broken down along conceptual cate-
gories. To test our hypothesis that BEIT transfers coarser information, we also report the Wu-Palmer
similarity (Wup) (Wu & Palmer, 1994) between the ground truth word and the most similar word in
the generated caption. The Wup score works by calculating the distance between the ground truth
word and the generated word in the WordNet taxonomy, offering a way to measure ‘how close’ a
word was to the correct answer.
Results In Figure 3, we show that BEIT’s recall for nouns in categories like ‘people’, ‘environment’,
‘vehicles’, and ‘objects’ is lower than NFRN50 or CLIP, but is comparable in terms of Wup sim-
iliarity in many categories. Unlike NFRN50 and CLIP’s pretraining, BEIT’s pretraining does not
encourage it to learn conceptual differences between two similar looking objects that use different
words. Compared to prompts from a randomly initialized NFRN50, for which very few consistent
patterns emerge, the LM can still extract the broad conceptual meaning behind BEIT prompts, as
evidenced by high Wup similarity (and CLIPScore results in Table 1). We interpret these results as
supporting the hypothesis that BEIT prompts transfer conceptual information from the purely visual
to purely text space, but only in terms of coarse-grained conceptual information corresponding to
visual properties, not lexical categories. Our full analysis, including additional metrics and results
for each individual word from the top 50 nouns, modifiers, and relations can be found in Appendix
B.

5.2   P ROBING

To rule out the possibility that BEIT representations are encoding lexical concept information, but
are merely unable to linearly transfer it to the LM due to representational differences, we train linear
probes on several datasets for image classification. We find that BEIT typically does not encode fine-


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


grained information as well as NFRN50 or CLIP, though it far outperforms the randomly initialized
NFRN50 baseline. We discuss training details and results in Appendix E.

5.3     T RANSFER OF C OARSE -G RAINED P ERCEPTUAL C ONCEPTS

To better understand what BEIT encodes, if not word category information, we further investigate
where errors arise, and how the structures of the embedding spaces for each frozen image encoder
differ. For the sake of this analysis, we constrain the task to generating captions for pictures of
animals. The reason for this narrower scope is that the captions are easier to analyze: the caption
describing a picture of an animal should virtually always mention the name of that animal, and the
word used to describe the animal is mostly unambiguous.


(a) Left: Wu-Palmer Similarity for captions in which the models don’t mention the animal show that BEIT,
NFRN50, and CLIP are all similarly close, meaning that even if they predict the wrong animal, it is on average
very taxonomically similar. Right: When the model mistakes one animal for another in the dataset, how
similar are the AWA properties for the true animal and the one it mistakes it most for? The average number
of overlapping properties show that animals predicted from BEIT are at least as similar to the real animal as
NFRN50 and CLIP. Median is shown as the solid orange line while the dashed green line shows the mean.

       NFRN50 Random                    BEIT                   NFRN50                       CLIP
••    Land
      Ocean
                           ••   Land
                                Ocean


(b) UMAP projections of AWA images:While NFRN50 and CLIP cluster tightly along lexical categories
(color coded by animal), BEIT clusters the most distinctly along animals that live in water/the ocean; the
randomly initialized NFRN50 mostly randomly overlap in one cluster.

                                                  Figure 4

Data For this task we use the Animals With Attributes 2 (AWA) dataset (Xian et al., 2019) which
contains 37k total images covering 50 animal classes. Each animal class also comes with annota-
tions for 85 properties describing the animals (e.g., ‘claws’, ‘stripes’, ‘jungle’), which allow us to
analyze if prompts from certain encoders consistently make mistakes along any of these dimensions.
Metrics When an image prompt produces a caption, we can measure the similarity of any animals
mentioned to the WordNet synset of the ground truth animal label. We can also measure similarity
using the annotated properties provided by the AWA dataset. For a given animal (e.g., “squirrel”),
we can look at the other animal in the dataset that it is most often mistaken for (e.g., “rabbit”) and
compare the proportion of properties that they share.
Results We generate captions for each image using prompts from each frozen image encoder. We
consider a caption to be ‘correct’ if it contains the name of the animal the image depicts. CLIP and
NFRN50 are correct most often: 59% and 43% of the time respectively. BEIT and the randomly
initialized NFRN50 only achieve 13% and 0.4% accuracy, respectively. This aligns with previous


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


observations that BEIT struggles with encoding fine-grained lexical level concepts. By looking at
failure cases for each model, we can establish whether each model is predicting the presence of a
similar animal or not. In Figure 4a, we show that when captions generated from each model mistake
one animal for another, the mistaken animals are highly similar to the ground truth animal when
measuring both Wu-Palmer similarity (Averages: BEIT: 0.8, NFRN50: 0.81, CLIP: 0.8) and overlap
of AWA properties (Averages: BEIT: 0.62, NFRN50: 0.68, CLIP: 0.59). Although BEIT prompts
do not transfer the exact animal concept to the LM, the coarse grained perceptual information is
transferred and ‘understood’ by the LM. In Figure 4b we create UMAP projections of the encodings
for each image in AWA and indeed find that NFRN50 and CLIP cluster according to tight lexical
categories (the animal types), BEIT clusters most tightly by perceptual features, such as habitat,
having flippers, etc.

6   D ISCUSSION & F UTURE W ORK
We connect image representations as inputs to an LM with an extremely simple transformation: a
linear projection. We interpret the success of generating text relevant to an image with this approach
as indicative of an underexplored representational similarity between language and vision repre-
sentations. Depending on the linguistic guidance in the pretraining task used to pretrain the image
encoder, we see varying performance. Using a vision-only encoder (BEIT) leads to generations from
the LM that are often incorrect but close under measures of perceptual relatedness. Unless finetuned
with image classification BEIT has no inductive bias in pretraining to distinguish concepts that we
might normally distinguish with language, especially when they are perceptually very similar. The
fact that only image encoders trained with linguistic supervision can do this suggests interesting
future work on the role of language in category formation. Despite strong performance with a linear
transformation, the representation spaces of these models seem to contain differences that cannot be
approximated in the language space. Multimodal models, ideally, will learn richer representations
by taking advantage of these differences. It is useful to think about how current multimodal pretrain-
ing objectives succeed and/or fail at doing this. LiMBeR can serve as a strong baseline for future
multimodal models, as it provides a point of comparison for a minimal mapping between vision and
language.
We see LiMBeR as a useful tool for understanding how representations trained from different modal-
ities can be similar or different. For concepts that are represented similarly, can we take advantage
of this fact to reduce the amount of data required for learning good text representations? Where
they are different, can multimodal models learn richer representations by incorporating information
from both? For example, vision data may help with reporting bias in text corpora (Paik et al., 2021).
Answering these questions can help us understand the limits of text-only pretraining, as well as how
to better ground LMs to non-linguistic data.

7   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we test how similar pretrained image and text representations are by training a lin-
ear map to project image representations into the input space of a language model (LM), such that
the LM can accurately describe the contents of the images. We show that models trained through
LiMBeR (Linearly Mapping Between Representation spaces) are competitive on image captioning
and visual question answering benchmarks with similar models like MAGMA that tune both image
and text networks. However, we also find that such transfer is highly dependant on the amount of
linguistic supervision the image encoder backbone had during its pretraining phase. BEIT, which
is a vision-only image encoder underperforms compared to a Resnet model trained on image clas-
sification, which in turn underperforms compared to CLIP, which was pretrained with natural lan-
guage captions. We explore what conceptual information transfers successfully, and find through
analysis of generated text, clustering, and probing that the representational similarity between LMs
and vision-only image representations is mostly restricted to coarse-grained concepts of perceptual
features, while linguistically supervised vision models can transfer lexical concepts. Our findings
indicate that LMs and vision models learn conceptually similar representation spaces, such that a
minimal linear transformation is an adequate approximation for transferring information about an
image. The extent of this representational similarity is not well understood and is an interesting
direction for future work.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We are committed to making all of our results reproducible. Code for training all models, as well
as weights of the linear projections can be found here: https://github.com/jmerullo/
limber. We also release the weights of the linear projections that were trained for LiMBeR.
Because we froze the image and text models attached to the projection, the weights can be used to
quickly reproduce our results with the corresponding off-the-shelf pretrained models with no other
tuning necessary. We use the default data splits for all datasets we used and release the random seeds
used for all tasks that require generation from the LM in our codebase as well. For the AWA tasks
that require matching Wordnet synsets, we document the exact animal synsets that we used as the
‘ground truth’ for the animal labels in Appendix D, Table 6.

9   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Aaron Traylor and Nihal Nayak for thoughtful discussions and feedback on
this work, as well as StabilityAI for donating compute resources for model training. This research
is supported in part by ODNI and IARPA via the BETTER program (2019-19051600004). The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or the
U.S. Government.

R EFERENCES
Harsh Agrawal, Karan Desai, Yufei Wang, Xinlei Chen, Rishabh Jain, Mark Johnson, Dhruv Batra,
  Devi Parikh, Stefan Lee, and Peter Anderson. Nocaps: Novel object captioning at scale. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8948–8957,
  2019.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.
Yamini Bansal, Preetum Nakkiran, and Boaz Barak. Revisiting model stitching to compare neural
  representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:225–236, 2021.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. Climbing towards NLU: On meaning, form, and under-
  standing in the age of data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 5185–5198, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.463. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.acl-main.463.
Andy Brock, Soham De, Samuel L Smith, and Karen Simonyan. High-performance large-scale
  image recognition without normalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  1059–1071. PMLR, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Karan Desai and Justin Johnson. Virtex: Learning visual representations from textual annotations.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  11162–11173, 2021.
Jacob Devlin, Hao Cheng, Hao Fang, Saurabh Gupta, Li Deng, Xiaodong He, Geoffrey Zweig,
  and Margaret Mitchell. Language models for image captioning: The quirks and what works. In
  Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
  pp. 100–105, 2015.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Constantin Eichenberg, Sid Black, Samuel Weinbach, Letitia Parcalabescu, and Anette Frank.
  Magma - multimodal augmentation of generative models through adapter-based finetuning.
  ArXiv, abs/2112.05253, 2021.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the V
  in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in Visual Question Answering. In
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Liangke Gui, Qiuyuan Huang, Alex Hauptmann, Yonatan Bisk, and Jianfeng Gao. Training vision-
  language transformers from captions alone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09256, 2022.
Yaru Hao, Haoyu Song, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Zewen Chi, Wenhui Wang, Shuming Ma, and
  Furu Wei. Language models are general-purpose interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06336,
  2022.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. CLIPScore: a
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. In EMNLP, 2021.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neu-
  ral network representations revisited. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3519–3529. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v97/kornblith19a.html.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, pp. 4, 2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Karel Lenc and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding image representations by measuring their equiv-
  ariance and equivalence. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 991–999, 2015.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient
  prompt tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, pp. 3045–3059, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.243. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.243.
Belinda Z Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural lan-
  guage models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 1813–1827, 2021.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Xudong Lin, Gedas Bertasius, Jue Wang, Shih-Fu Chang, Devi Parikh, and Lorenzo Torresani.
  Vx2text: End-to-end learning of video-based text generation from multimodal inputs. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7005–7015,
  2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Kevin Lu, Aditya Grover, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Pretrained transformers as univer-
  sal computation engines. CoRR, abs/2103.05247, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2103.05247.
Ziyang Luo, Yadong Xi, Rongsheng Zhang, and Jing Ma. A frustratingly simple approach for end-
  to-end image captioning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12723.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
Cory Paik, Stéphane Aroca-Ouellette, Alessandro Roncone, and Katharina Kann. The world of an
  octopus: How reporting bias influences a language model’s perception of color. In Proceedings of
  the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 823–835, 2021.
Roma Patel and Ellie Pavlick. Mapping language models to grounded conceptual spaces. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=gJcEM8sxHK.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
S Rajbhandari, J Rasley, O Ruwase, and Y He. Zero: memory optimization towards training a
  trillion parameter models. arxiv e-prints arxiv: 11910.02054 (2019), 2019.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
  (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Thomas Scialom, Patrick Bordes, Paul-Alexis Dray, Jacopo Staiano, and Patrick Gallinari. What
  bert sees: Cross-modal transfer for visual question generation. In Proceedings of the 13th Inter-
  national Conference on Natural Language Generation, pp. 327–337, 2020.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  2556–2565, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P18-1238. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1238.
Sheng Shen, Liunian Harold Li, Hao Tan, Mohit Bansal, Anna Rohrbach, Kai-Wei Chang, Zhewei
  Yao, and Kurt Keutzer. How much can clip benefit vision-and-language tasks? In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yi-Lin Sung, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. Vl-adapter: Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  vision-and-language tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5227–5237, 2022.
Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob Menick, Serkan Cabi, S. M. Ali Eslami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill.
 Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen language models. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
 P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WtmMyno9Tq2.
Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image
  description evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4566–4575, 2015.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Zhenhailong Wang, Manling Li, Ruochen Xu, Luowei Zhou, Jie Lei, Xudong Lin, Shuohang Wang,
  Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Derek Hoiem, et al. Language models with image descriptors are
  strong few-shot video-language learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10747, 2022.
Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer. Verbs semantics and lexical selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd
  annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 133–138, 1994.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yongqin Xian, Christoph H. Lampert, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. Zero-shot learning—a com-
  prehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 41(9):2251–2265, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2857768.
Yujia Xie, Luowei Zhou, Xiyang Dai, Lu Yuan, Nguyen Bach, Ce Liu, and Michael Zeng. Visual
  clues: Bridging vision and language foundations for image paragraph captioning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.01843, 2022.
Lu Yuan, Dongdong Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Noel Codella, Xiyang Dai, Jianfeng Gao, Houdong Hu,
  Xuedong Huang, Boxin Li, Chunyuan Li, et al. Florence: A new foundation model for computer
  vision.
Andy Zeng, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Krzysztof Choromanski, Federico Tombari, Aveek Puro-
  hit, Michael S Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Socratic models:
  Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. 2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Xiao Wang, Basil Mustafa, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Alexander Kolesnikov,
  and Lucas Beyer. Lit: Zero-shot transfer with locked-image text tuning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18123–18133, 2022.


A     L I MB E R T RAINING D ETAILS

A.1    T RAINING D ETAILS

We mimic the MAGMA pretraining process for each of our models as outlined in Eichenberg et al.
(2021). As described above, the training task is caption generation. For each training example,
an image and caption pair (x, y) is fed into the model. The image encoder E encodes the image
into a i1 , ..., ik of dimensionality hI and length k. For the CLIP Encoder, for example, we extract
(12,12,3072) feature patches, which we resize to (144,3072) and feed into the projection layer P .
The output of P is fed as tokens representing the image into the language model LM . The caption
y is tokenized as t1 , ..., tm where m is the variable length of the caption. LM is given the encoded
image tokens and starting with t1 learns to minimize the next token log probability of ti for timestep
i conditioned on i1 , ..., ik and t1 , ...ti−1 .
During training, we minimize the loss with the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) optimizer per
mini-batch, with the help of ZeRO stage 2 (Rajbhandari et al., 2019). We use a dropout probability
of 0.1, a weight decay of 0, betas = (0.9, 0.95), and gradient clipping = 1.0. All models are trained
for 15,000 training steps across 16 A100 GPUs for approximately 1.75 days. Our effective batch
size was 2048. We use a learning rate of 8 ∗ 10− 4 for the projection layer P . For models where we
tune E as well, we tune its parameters with a learning rate of 2 ∗ 10− 6.

      Model         Prompt Length (k)      Hidden size (hI )       Pretraining
                                                                   Contrastive
 CLIP RN50x16               144                  3072            Image-caption
                                                                    matching
      NFRN50                 2                   2048          Image Classification
       BEIT                 196                  1024            Self-supervised

Table 2: Summary of image encoders used for pretraining. Prompt length refers to the number of
the tokens fed into the language model representing the image.



B     C APTIONING P ERFORMANCE

To get a better idea of the kinds of captions LiMBeR produces, see Figure 6, which includes 15
images that were randomly selected from the COCO validation set (2017) and the generated cap-
tions for all models we test. We include a greater range captioning metric results in Table 3 for
the COCO dataset. Overall, we find the same trends that we report in the main paper, which are


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: RSA similarity scores between representations of images of animals and the ground truth
captions describing them. GPT-J is has very low correlation with image encoder representations


that 1.) the greater amount of linguistic supervision that an image encoder has, the better its cap-
tioning performance and 2.) unfreezing the image encoder does not seem to lead to consistently
significant improvements. We also include the breakdown of the SPICE metric across the associ-
ated subcategories such as relations, attributes, and objects. Of the LiMBeR models, we find that
CLIP based models do the best across the board (12.1 for CLIP vs. 9.28 for NFRN50). Besides the
random baseline, BEIT performs the worst overall except in the color category (0.45 vs. 0.42 for
NFRN50). We also include heatmaps with recall/precision/F1/Wu-Palmer similarity metrics com-
paring the captions generated by each model and the top 50 nouns (objects), modifiers, and relations
from the ground truth captions from the COCO validation set (Figures 7, 8, 9).
We also use COCO images and captions to measure the similarity between vision and text encodings
of the same concepts. That is, if there is a structural similarity between image and text encodings,
do typical representational similarity metrics reflect this? For this experiment we want to encode a
large number of images and captions that depict a set of concepts, and compare the relative repre-
sentational similarity between the concepts for the image and text representations. The intuition is
that if image and text models are representing concepts in a similar structure, then two concepts that
are represented similarly in an image model should be similar within text representations as well.
We sample a small subset of images depicting 10 different animals from the COCO dataset, and
encode each image with each of our four image encoders (without a LiMBeR projection), and the
ground truth captions with GPT-J. We use the last hidden state of the last token as the representation
of the caption. We choose animals because it is easy for humans to intuitively compare how similar
two animals are. In total, we collect 939 images and captions for each animal class and compare the
representational similarity of the subset of encodings using the representational similarity analysis
(RSA) technique from Kriegeskorte et al. (2008). The similarity matrix between each representation
for each set is calculated, and then the upper triangular matrix for each similarity matrix is used to
calculate the Pearson correlation. The results of this can be seen in Figure 5. We zero out the diago-
nal for visibility of the other values, since the diagonal is always equal to 1. RSA does not seem to
capture similarity in a way that reflects the transfer performance to the LM. For example, similarity
between the BEIT and randomly initialized NFRN50 model are unusually high given differences in
performance in our experiments. Further analysis on the geometry of these representation spaces is
required to make stronger statements about how (dis)similar they are. We leave this for future work.

C    V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING P ERFORMANCE
The VQA accuracies are broken down by question type and model for the 4-shot case in Table 5.
We don’t notice any significant patterns in the per question type breakdown. It does seem perhaps


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Model         BLEU-1    BLEU-2   BLEU-3    BLEU-4   METEOR   ROUGE     CIDER    SPICE   CLIPScore   RefCLIPScore
  NFRN50 Tuned       0.375     0.229    0.134     0.080    0.127    0.316     0.353   0.091     0.697         0.748
  MAGMA (Ours)       0.309     0.216    0.145     0.097    0.146    0.341     0.475   0.110     0.753         0.796
 MAGMA (Released)    0.432     0.300    0.203     0.137    0.159    0.376     0.521   0.117     0.767         0.794
   BEIT Random       0.288     0.132    0.052     0.022    0.068    0.232     0.052   0.022     0.488         0.562
  NFNRN Random       0.261     0.115    0.044     0.018    0.062    0.208     0.048   0.021     0.495         0.571
      BEIT           0.319     0.187    0.105     0.060    0.106    0.299     0.223   0.064     0.636         0.697
     NFRN50          0.409     0.254    0.149     0.088    0.132    0.334     0.362   0.093     0.689         0.741
     BEIT FT.        0.420     0.283    0.182     0.116    0.155    0.367     0.510   0.116     0.742         0.789
      CLIP           0.400     0.278    0.187     0.126    0.161    0.376     0.549   0.121     0.762         0.804


          Table 3: All of the caption metrics for the models. For all scores, higher is better

      Model                  SPICE (All)    Relations      Cardinality      Attributes    Size       Color    Object
   NFRN50 tuned                  9.1          1.12            0.02            1.64        0.33       0.40      19.9
  MAGMA (ours)                  11.0          1.37            0.00            3.94        0.36       1.31      22.6
 MAGMA (released)               11.7          1.99            1.30            3.95        0.50       1.32      23.8
  NFRN50 random                 2.14          0.06            0.00            0.22        0.00       0.12      4.93
      BEIT                       6.4          0.61             0.0            1.26        0.21       0.45      14.1
     NFRN50                     9.28          1.28            0.02            1.70        0.27       0.42      20.2
      CLIP                      12.1          1.83            0.08            3.76        0.39       0.75     25.08

Table 4: F-scores (x100) for each fine-grained category of the SPICE metric, evaluated on the 2017
COCO validation dataset. The top and bottom divide separates models where the image encoder is
either tuned of frozen, respectively. Models that use CLIP as their image encoder show a large jump
in improvement over other models (even compared to tuned ResNet), especially in the Attributes
(e.g. adjectives) and Object (e.g. nouns) categories.


NFRN50 is better at questions that require counting objects in an image. Future work is needed to
determine if this is just noise or a significant trend.

          Q Type               # Q’s     Blind     RN Tune     MAGMA          RN Rand         BEIT     RN      CLIP
        how many               20462     33.6       34.7         32             33            18.8     34.8    23.3
            is the             17265     64.1       64.7        65.3           64.8           58.9     64.6    61.1
            what               15897     17.4       19.9        22.4           16.7            8.9     20.3    26.9
     what color is the         14061     30.5       33.7        36.7           33.1           28.9      34     40.3
       what is the             11353     15.5       18.7        23.2           16.1           11.9     18.7    29.5
    none of the above          8550      38.5       40.1         36            38.7           26.8     39.9    37.4
           is this              7841     62.4       64.1        65.8           64.2           57.7     63.7    57.1
          is this a             7492     63.3       63.8        67.6           63.4           59.5     63.5    58.5
          what is              6328       9.3       12.9        21.2            10             6.6     13.2    24.1
      what kind of              5840      15        22.5        29.5           15.8           11.1     22.5    36.9
           are the             5264       63        64.2        64.3           63.9           59.4     63.8    58.9
         is there a             4679     60.6       61.6        63.8           61.7           60.2     61.5    58.6
      what type of             4040      16.4        23         30.7           17.2           12.8      23     38.2
       where is the             3716       2         1.1         2.4            0.9            1.0      1.3     3.1
             is it             3566      63.6       60.3        62.3            60            57.5     60.4    58.3
       what are the            3282      13.4       17.3        23.1           14.7            9.8      18     28.6
          does the             3183      66.6       67.6         66            67.4           63.0     67.6    64.6
              is               3169      63.8       63.4        65.0           63.1           56.6     62.6    58.5
          is there              3120     62.4       62.3        64.6           61.7           59.2     63.1    54.5
    what color are the          3118      32        36.3        35.8           34.6           29.4      36     39.7
         are these              2839     62.3       65.1        66.8           64.1           60.3     64.9    56.6
         are there              2771     60.1       60.2        62.8           60.1           57.5     60.1    55.4
     what is the man            2663      10        16.7        30.1           11.4           10.3     15.6    34.7
        is the man             2511      61.9       61.7        64.6           62.2           58.9     61.5    59.2
           which                2448     23.8        26         27.9           22.7            7.1     26.1     26
             how               2422      12.2       10.2         7.5            9.7            4.0     10.8     9.8
             are               2359      60.6       62.9        63.5           62.4           57.1     62.5    56.8
         does this              2227     66.3       67.2        66.2           67.6           62.7     67.7    61.3
      what is on the            2174     11.5       14.9        17.8           13.2            7.3     15.2    23.0
   how many people are         2005      27.2       28.0        26.7            27            10.6     27.7    18.7
      what does the            1970        7         7.6         12             6.8            2.7      7.4    14.2
        what time               1746     15.4       18.9        13.4           16.6           16.0     19.1    22.4
      what is in the           1733       9.8       13.7        23.8           10.8            6.8     13.8    30.1


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Q Type             # Q’s   Blind   RN Tune    MAGMA       RN Rand     BEIT    RN     CLIP
        what is this         1696     9.6     21.7       35.2         9.6       11.6    21.8   41.3
          what are           1556     9.2     16.8       28.6        10.4        8.7    17.4   36.0
             do              1503    68.8     70.1       65.9        70.2       61.4    69.7   64.9
             why             1438     3.2       2         2.8         1.5        0.6     1.9    2.8
        what color           1428    26.9     28.5       32.1        28.4       23.8    27.8   35.0
          are they           1335    60.8     61.2       65.8        62.5       59.8    61.4   59.4
      what color is          1335    25.4     26.5       35.8        26.1       29.1    26.6   36.4
      are there any          1330    59.1     58.3       61.6        58.7       54.4     58    52.7
      where are the          1313     2.8      1.7        2.4         1.2        0.9     1.7    3.3
            is he            1087    61.8     62.2       64.2        61.6       59.8    63.1   61.2
       what sport is         1086     22      37.1       63.4        24.9       36.6    36.7   67.6
           who is            1070    13.6     14.4       14.3        13.7        5.3    14.8    9.6
      is the woman            992    63.2     62.2       66.6         61        59.3    61.5   60.9
             has              946     64      65.3       65.5        65.5       62.7    66.3   63.5
        what brand            935    20.0     16.5        4.4        17.8        6.3    17.8   12.4
  how many people are in      905    23.9     28.3       29.0        25.8       15.8    26.9   17.4
    what is the person        900     8.2     16.3       32.2         9.2       12.4    17.7   38.0
         is this an           890    65.1     67.6       68.2        67.7       61.4    67.4   59.2
          can you             872    59.5     58.9       62.3        59.9       58.8    59.6   59.5
    what is the woman         853     8.5      15        28.5        10.2        6.7    14.6   32.6
      what animal is          833    10.2     28.5       56.1        10.8       16.8    28.6   63.6
  what is the color of the    826    35.4     40.4       39.3        36.8       34.3    39.3   44.7
             was              818    62.6     61.8       63.8        62.1       59.9    60.9   59.5
       is the person          794    61.9     61.7       61.3        62.4       57.5     62    57.1
     what is the name         780     3.4      4.4         8          3.8        1.5     4.5    9.0
      what room is            762     15      43.4       62.9        19.9       24.0    39.3   65.9
      is this person          734     62      61.3       63.3        62.5       60.2    61.9   57.5
           do you             724    61.7     62.1       60.1        60.8       55.6     62    58.3
          is that a           714    60.9     63.1       62.7        61.5       57.5    62.4   59.6
     what number is           673     8.8      7.6       12.6         7.5        0.5     8.9   10.2
            could             618    72.3     71.8       67.5        73.6       67.4    71.5   58.9
         why is the           514     1.6      1.9        2.5         1.3        0.5     1.6    2.6

Table 5: Average 4-shot accuracies of models on every question type from the VQA2.0 dataset.
Note that NFRN50, NFRN Random, and NFRN Tuned are renamed to save space. MAGMA refers
to our version of the model.


D    A NIMALS WITH ATTRIBUTES
AWA2 The Animals with Attributes 2 Dataset contains 37k images of 50 animal classes annotated
with 85 properties (e.g. ‘stripes’, ‘tough’). For each image encoder we generate captions using
image projections into the LM for each image in the dataset and identify any animals mentioned
using overlapping WordNet synsets with the ground truth labels. We report the animal synsets that
we used as the ‘ground truth’ synsets. For example, to calculate accuracy, etc. we split generated
captions on white space and check the possible synsets of each word and check if there is any overlap
with our list. Each label synset is listed in Table 6.
We report two AWA experiments here: (1) the first appears in the main paper, and investigates how
similar the most similar words mentioned in the generated captions are to the ground truth animal in
terms of Wu-Palmer similarity for the generated captions in which the ground truth animal does not
appear – i.e., mistakes. The per animal results can be found in Table 7. (2) We also report the average
precision (AP) of the average animal properties vector for the animals predicted to the ground truth
for each model. This experiment is similar to the properties-overlap experiment reported in the paper
but is a measure of how often the predicted animal properties are similar vs. very different from the
ground truth. If the LM mentions an animal in the dataset, we add that animal’s property vector to
a running list. If the LM does not mention an animal in the dataset, we ignore that caption. For
each image-caption pair, we take the average of the properties vectors that correspond to the animals
mentioned in the captions, and calculate the AP against the ground truth binary properties vector.
Results per animal class are in Table 8. We exclude any entries for which a model makes fewer than
50 mistakes for an animal class. For example, for all of the images labeled as depicting a tiger in the
AWA dataset, CLIP based captions fail to mention a tiger a single time.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Animal Name           WordNet Synset
                             antelope              antelope.n.01
                             grizzly+bear          grizzly.n.01
                             killer+whale          killer whale.n.01
                             beaver                beaver.n.07
                             dalmatian             dalmatian.n.02
                             persian+cat           persian cat.n.01
                             horse                 horse.n.01
                             german+shepherd       german shepherd.n.01
                             blue+whale            blue whale.n.01
                             siamese+cat           siamese cat.n.01
                             skunk                 skunk.n.04
                             mole                  mole.n.06
                             tiger                 tiger.n.02
                             hippopotamus          hippopotamus.n.01
                             leopard               leopard.n.02
                             moose                 elk.n.01
                             spider+monkey         spider monkey.n.01
                             humpback+whale        humpback.n.03
                             elephant              elephant.n.01
                             gorilla               gorilla.n.01
                             ox                    ox.n.02
                             fox                   fox.n.01
                             sheep                 sheep.n.01
                             seal                  seal.n.09
                             chimpanzee            chimpanzee.n.01
                             hamster               hamster.n.01
                             squirrel              squirrel.n.01
                             rhinoceros            rhinoceros.n.01
                             rabbit                rabbit.n.01
                             bat                   bat.n.01
                             giraffe               giraffe.n.01
                             wolf                  wolf.n.01
                             chihuahua             chihuahua.n.03
                             rat                   rat.n.01
                             weasel                weasel.n.02
                             otter                 otter.n.02
                             buffalo               american bison.n.01
                             zebra                 zebra.n.01
                             giant+panda           giant panda.n.01
                             deer                  deer.n.01
                             bobcat                bobcat.n.01
                             pig                   hog.n.03
                             lion                  lion.n.01
                             mouse                 mouse.n.01
                             polar+bear            ice bear.n.01
                             collie                collie.n.01
                             walrus                walrus.n.01
                             raccoon               raccoon.n.02
                             cow                   cow.n.01
                             dolphin               dolphin.n.02

Table 6: To aid with reproducibility, we report all animal synsets that were used for experiments
that require disambiguating words in captions to animal classes. This allows us to correctly count a
mention of “tigress” in a caption as a mention of the “tiger” animal type without relying on unreliable
string matching techniques.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Random      NFRN50 Random       BEIT     NFRN50     CLIP
            polar+bear      0.79           0.60            0.86      0.95      0.96
              buffalo       0.73           0.64            0.84      0.93      0.95
               bobcat       0.72           0.71            0.83      0.90      0.94
           grizzly+bear     0.76           0.70            0.88      0.95      0.94
           blue+whale       0.73           0.43            0.69      0.76      0.87
            dalmatian       0.77           0.72            0.79      0.83      0.85
            chihuahua       0.74           0.70            0.84      0.85      0.85
              leopard       0.77           0.70            0.82      0.81      0.85
               collie       0.72           0.70            0.85      0.85      0.85
        german+shepherd     0.72           0.67            0.84      0.85      0.85
           siamese+cat      0.75           0.69            0.85      0.85      0.84
           persian+cat      0.74           0.67            0.85      0.85      0.84
                  ox        0.73           0.69            0.82      0.84      0.84
                 seal       0.77           0.55            0.77      0.74      0.82
         spider+monkey      0.74           0.65            0.81      0.80      0.81
             antelope       0.75           0.72            0.78      0.80      0.81
               skunk        0.79           0.65            0.84      0.79      0.81
                mole        0.79           0.64            0.79      0.84      0.80
                 lion       0.77           0.74            0.82      0.80      0.79
                  rat       0.80           0.67            0.79      0.85      0.78
              hamster       0.80           0.66            0.79      0.80      0.78
               walrus       0.78           0.56            0.72      0.76      0.78
                wolf        0.80           0.69            0.85      0.83      0.77
           killer+whale     0.71           0.46            0.71      0.73      0.77
        humpback+whale      0.73           0.43            0.66      0.67      0.77
           chimpanzee       0.72           0.64            0.85      0.74      0.76
               moose        0.75           0.60            0.81      0.79      0.74
                 fox        0.80           0.72            0.84      0.84      0.74
               weasel       0.79           0.68            0.81      0.83      0.73
          hippopotamus      0.79           0.58            0.76      0.74      0.73
                 deer       0.77           0.66            0.81      0.80      0.73
                otter       0.79           0.60            0.80      0.82      0.72
                  pig       0.76           0.67            0.83      0.75      0.71
                 cow        0.71           0.65            0.78      0.78      0.70
               sheep        0.76           0.65            0.84      0.82      0.68
               horse        0.75           0.62            0.77      0.75      0.59
           giant+panda      0.79           0.70            0.87      0.90      0.52
               beaver       0.80           0.55            0.77      0.76        –
                tiger       0.77           0.74            0.82        –         –
             elephant       0.79           0.64            0.79        –         –
               gorilla      0.72           0.60            0.91      0.84        –
              squirrel      0.80           0.67            0.80      0.83        –
            rhinoceros      0.78           0.67            0.80      0.76        –
               rabbit       0.76           0.69            0.82      0.81        –
                  bat       0.82           0.67            0.74      0.74        –
               giraffe      0.78           0.70            0.79      0.76        –
                zebra       0.76           0.68            0.78        –         –
               mouse        0.79           0.64            0.75      0.83        –
              raccoon       0.79           0.64            0.83      0.81        –
              dolphin       0.73           0.49            0.72      0.68        –

            Mean=            0.76              0.64         0.80      0.81      0.79

Table 7: Wu-Palmer Similarity for mistakes. Animals for which a model made fewer than 50 mis-
takes are dashed out


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Animal/Model       Random      NFRN50 Random   BEIT   NFRN50   CLIP
             hamster        0.70           0.74        0.83    1.00    1.00
                 rat        0.79           0.83        0.81    0.99    1.00
             squirrel       0.76           0.70        1.00    1.00    1.00
           rhinoceros       0.48           0.41        0.81    0.96    1.00
              rabbit        0.75           0.76        0.85    1.00    1.00
                 bat        0.59           0.58        0.58    0.99    1.00
              giraffe       0.66           0.73        0.92    1.00    1.00
               wolf         0.87           0.84        0.94    1.00    1.00
           chihuahua        0.80           0.80        0.79    0.91    1.00
               zebra        0.79           0.86        1.00    1.00    1.00
          chimpanzee        0.86           0.84        0.83    1.00    1.00
          giant+panda       0.71           0.74        0.76    1.00    1.00
                deer        0.83           0.91        1.00    1.00    1.00
              bobcat        0.72           0.79        0.80    1.00    1.00
                lion        0.74           0.93        0.93    1.00    1.00
              mouse         0.77           0.69        0.81    0.98    1.00
           polar+bear       0.72           0.76        1.00    1.00    1.00
             raccoon        0.76           0.77        0.85    1.00    1.00
          grizzly+bear      0.70           0.68        1.00    1.00    1.00
             dolphin        0.55           0.69        1.00    1.00    1.00
               tiger        0.77           0.84        1.00    1.00    1.00
             leopard        0.79           0.86        0.95    1.00    1.00
              horse         0.88           1.00        1.00    1.00    1.00
       german+shepherd      0.87           0.86        0.76    1.00    1.00
          blue+whale        0.42           0.34        1.00    1.00    1.00
          siamese+cat       0.83           1.00        1.00    1.00    1.00
          killer+whale      0.42           0.56        0.88    1.00    1.00
              beaver        0.68           0.66        0.77    1.00    1.00
         hippopotamus       0.47           0.41        0.80    1.00    1.00
          persian+cat       0.75           1.00        1.00    1.00    1.00
        spider+monkey       0.79           0.77        0.99    1.00    1.00
       humpback+whale       0.43           0.82        0.97    1.00    1.00
            elephant        0.61           0.61        1.00    1.00    1.00
              gorilla       0.76           0.75        0.89    1.00    1.00
              moose         0.77           0.82        0.88    1.00    1.00
                cow         0.74           0.82        1.00    1.00    1.00
                fox         0.80           0.77        0.96    1.00    1.00
                seal        0.57           0.51        0.95    1.00    1.00
              sheep         0.59           0.70        0.98    1.00    1.00
                 pig        0.72           0.70        0.98    1.00    1.00
               otter        0.66           0.72        0.73    0.76    1.00
               mole         0.72           0.68        0.88    0.82    1.00
              walrus        0.39           0.38        0.70    0.72    0.99
            antelope        0.81           0.85        0.94    0.97    0.98
                 ox         0.74           0.69        0.89    0.93    0.95
              collie        0.84           0.87        0.80    0.93    0.91
              weasel        0.85           0.77        0.86    0.90    0.90
             buffalo        0.64           0.69        0.91    0.74    0.85
              skunk         0.70           0.79        0.83    0.83    0.84
           dalmatian        0.86           0.86        0.83    0.72    0.73

            Mean=            0.71              0.74    0.89    0.96    0.98


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Animal/Model        Random      NFRN50 Random           BEIT    NFRN50       CLIP

Table 8: Per animal average precision (AP) for properties of mentioned animal in captions per model
for the Animals with Attributes 2 (AWA2) dataset. BEIT, which tends to do worse at captioning and
question answering consistently predicts animals which share similar properties, and considerably
better than randomly initialized NFRN50 and randomly selecting animals as baselines. This sug-
gests that BEIT representations encode similar animals into broad conceptual categories (e.g. large
savanna animals) which are able to linearly transfer to the LM. Without linguistic supervision, BEIT
does not naturally distinguish these by the words we use to describe them, as NFRN50 and CLIP
do.


              Animal/Model         NFRN50 Random          BEIT     NFRN50      CLIP
              giraffe              0.00                   0.16     0.96        1.00
              zebra                0.00                   0.77     1.00        1.00
              tiger                0.00                   0.75     0.98        1.00
              elephant             0.00                   0.37     0.96        0.99
              dolphin              0.00                   0.37     0.58        0.98
              rabbit               0.00                   0.13     0.85        0.98
              rhinoceros           0.00                   0.04     0.30        0.98
              squirrel             0.00                   0.41     0.88        0.97
              gorilla              0.00                   0.20     0.93        0.96
              sheep                0.00                   0.27     0.91        0.96
              raccoon              0.00                   0.00     0.73        0.95
              bat                  0.00                   0.00     0.28        0.94
              horse                0.09                   0.85     0.94        0.92
              humpback+whale       0.00                   0.21     0.56        0.92
              hippopotamus         0.00                   0.06     0.59        0.92
              fox                  0.00                   0.15     0.91        0.91
              cow                  0.00                   0.41     0.82        0.90
              giant+panda          0.00                   0.00     0.76        0.90
              moose                0.00                   0.01     0.41        0.89
              deer                 0.02                   0.41     0.79        0.87
              pig                  0.00                   0.15     0.76        0.86
              leopard              0.00                   0.42     0.92        0.86
              seal                 0.00                   0.27     0.73        0.86
              wolf                 0.00                   0.03     0.76        0.85
              hamster              0.00                   0.00     0.69        0.83
              mouse                0.00                   0.01     0.25        0.82
              beaver               0.00                   0.01     0.49        0.80
              rat                  0.00                   0.00     0.37        0.78
              chimpanzee           0.00                   0.00     0.44        0.76
              lion                 0.08                   0.14     0.40        0.66
              killer+whale         0.00                   0.00     0.10        0.53
              otter                0.00                   0.03     0.06        0.48
              mole                 0.00                   0.01     0.02        0.40
              walrus               0.00                   0.00     0.00        0.36
              bobcat               0.00                   0.00     0.16        0.33
              grizzly+bear         0.00                   0.00     0.06        0.15
              chihuahua            0.00                   0.00     0.04        0.14
              antelope             0.00                   0.00     0.07        0.05
              collie               0.00                   0.00     0.06        0.04
              weasel               0.00                   0.00     0.03        0.03
              buffalo              0.00                   0.04     0.02        0.02
              dalmatian            0.00                   0.00     0.00        0.02
              ox                   0.00                   0.00     0.00        0.01
              skunk                0.00                   0.00     0.00        0.01
              siamese+cat          0.00                   0.00     0.00        0.00
              german+shepherd      0.00                   0.00     0.00        0.00


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Animal/Model         NFRN50 Random           BEIT     NFRN50       CLIP
               persian+cat          0.00                    0.00     0.00         0.00
               polar+bear           0.00                    0.00     0.00         0.00
               spider+monkey        0.00                    0.00     0.00         0.00
               blue+whale           0.00                    0.00     0.00         0.00

               Mean=                0.00                    0.13     0.43         0.59

Table 9: Accuracy for each model and each animal class in Animals with Attributes 2. A caption is
considered correct if the animal name is mentioned in the caption for the image.


E     P ROBING V ISUAL R EPRESENTATIONS

We train probes on the image encodings from each of our image encoders to classify fine-grained
lexical and coarse grained categorical concepts on several datasets: COCO (Lin et al., 2014), and
CC3M (Sharma et al., 2018), and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). The architecture is a single
linear layer which takes an image encoding of dimension hI (see Table 2) and projects to the number
of classes for the classification task. For single label classification, we use a softmax activation on
the logits and train with cross entropy as the loss function. For multilabel classification tasks, we
use a sigmoid activation layer on top of the logits and train with a binary cross entropy loss function.
We consider a certain class predicted if the value of the class after the sigmoid is ¿0.5.

Hyperparameters For simplicity, all probes are trained with the same hyperparameters (with a
few exceptions for the CC3M probes): learning rate: 1e-4, optimizer: AdamW (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2018), betas=(0.9, 0.999), batch size: 48 for CC3M probes; 32 for all others, max epochs:
300 for CC3M probes; 300 for all others.

 Object Supercategory          Objects within class
 accessory                     backpack, umbrella, handbag, tie, suitcase
 animal                        bird, cat, dog, horse, sheep, cow, elephant, bear, zebra, giraffe
 appliance                     microwave, oven, toaster, sink, refrigerator
 electronic                    tv, laptop, mouse, remote, keyboard, cell phone
                               banana, apple, sandwich, orange, broccoli, carrot, hot dog,
 food
                               pizza, donut, cake
 furniture                     chair, couch, potted plant, bed, dining table, toilet
 indoor                        book, clock, vase, scissors, teddy bear, hair drier, toothbrush
 kitchen                       bottle, wine glass, cup, fork, knife, spoon, bowl
 outdoor                       traffic light, fire hydrant, stop sign, parking meter, bench
 person                        person
                               frisbee, skis, snowboard, sports ball, kite, baseball bat,
 sports
                               baseball glove, skateboard, surfboard, tennis racket
 vehicle                       bicycle, car, motorcycle, airplane, bus, train, truck, boat
Table 10: All individual object labels and supercategories they fall under as annotated in the COCO
dataset.


E.1   COCO O BJECT C LASSES P ROBE

The COCO dataset contains labels for 80 objects in images, typically used for object detection or
segmentation tasks. Because one image can be labeled for multiple objects, we train the probe as a
multi-label classification task.
In addition to having fine-grained labels for each type, COCO provides labels for each broad cate-
gory that each object belongs to, called the supercategory. In Table 10, we show which supercate-
gory each object label falls under.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.1.1    C OARSE -G RAINED S UPERCATEGORY P ROBES

We train a multilabel classification probe to classify the object category seen in a given image. We
report F1 for each LiMBeR model in Figure 11. We find that BEIT does a bit worse than NFRN50
and CLIP overall, but is able to classify some categories (images with accessories, vehicles, and
‘outdoor’ objects) well.

E.1.2    F INE -G RAINED O BJECT L ABEL P ROBES

Next, we look at the probe results for probes trained to identify individual objects by type. Our
results can be found in Figure 12d. We find the same pattern emerges, and that BEIT does not
seem to be significantly closer to the other pretrained models in terms of F1 on the coarse-grained
vs. fine-grained patterns as we might expect. However, we do show that BEIT encodes strong, but
weaker lexical concept categories than the other two models, and that the finding that BEIT transfers
coarser grained information is not due to irreconcilable representational differences between BEIT
space and the LM space.

E.2     CC3M P ROBES

We also train the same set of probes on image data from CC3M, but evaluate on the same validation
set from COCO (i.e., the same evaluation as used in Section E.1.2). The purpose of this experiment
is to create a setting for a linear probe that better matches the LiMBeR setup we use in the main
paper. If there are concepts that the probe has no trouble with, but rarely appear in captions, that
could be an indicator that the LM and the image encoder represent that concept very differently in
representation space.

Data To align the CC3M images with the object labels in COCO, we create labels by looking
for exact string matches of the object label words (e.g. “teddy bear”) in CC3M captions. Of the
80 object classes, we cut out any that have fewer than 1000 images. This leaves us with 782,794
training images for the probes across 53 object classes; fewer than the CC3M dataset used to train
LiMBeR, but far more than the previous datasets we used for probing.

Results Because, in this setting, we train our probes on the same distribution as the LiMBeR
models, we compare the F1 of the probes identifying objects in images to the F1 of those concepts
appearing in the generated captions. Our results can be seen in Figure 13. It appears that if the image
encoder encodes the lexical concept, it generally also transfers to the LM with LiMBeR. Limitations
of this approach are that (1) the BEIT probe appears much worse at the domain shift from CC3M to
COCO (e.g., F1 for animals drops 0.3 compared to when the probes are trained on COCO) and (2)
some words in the label space are often substituted for more common words in generated captions
(e.g. “person” could be generated as “man”, “woman”, etc.). This makes it difficult to recognize
cases where the probe succeeds but the transfer fails. An interesting problem for future work is
better understanding which concepts are encoded in an image encoder’s representations, but do not
transfer well with a linear map to the LM.

E.3     CIFAR-100 P ROBES

CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) is a dataset of 60,000 32x32 images balanced across 100 object
classes. Like COCO, the 100 object labels are also annotated for coarse-grained object categories
including ‘aquatic mammals’ and ‘household furniture’. For CIFAR data, we train a classifier which
classifies an image for a single object label. Like with COCO, we train a set of probes for the fine
and coarse labels. We were surprised to find that for CIFAR images, BEIT representations tended
to better than NFRN50 in terms of average F1 (for the fine-grained probe, BEIT: 0.57, NFRN50:
0.47); a first for any of the experiments we ran. Given the majority of evidence shows NFRN50
encodes lexical category information stronger than BEIT, we hypothesize this is not because of BEIT
encoding lexical concepts more strongly, but due to the small resolution of images: because BEIT
uses visual tokens, it may be more robust to extremely blurry images, which are out of distribution
for both NFRN50 and BEIT.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.3.1   C OARSE -G RAINED P ROBES
In Figure 14 we show the F1 results for the coarse-grained image labels probes trained on image
encodings from each model. Each coarse-grained class in the testing set has 500 images each.

E.3.2   F INE -G RAINED P ROBES
In Figure 15d we show the per object class F1 results for the image encodings from each model. Each
class in the testing set has 100 images each. Similar to the COCO probe we do not see significant
intra-model changes between the coarse-grained and fine-grained probe results.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Ground Truth: A bicycle is standing next to a bed in a room.
                                  NFRN50 Tuned : my bike with a basket.
                                  MAGMA (Ours) : my bike
                                  MAGMA (Rel.) : a vintage bike vintage bike
                                  NFRN Random: a young boy in a blue shirt and a red hat on a bicycle
                                           BEIT: the bike.
                                       NFRN50: my bicycle with a basket on the front.
                                           CLIP: my bike, which is a fixed gear bike.
                                 Ground Truth: garage.
                                                             A black Honda motorcycle parked in front of a


                                NFRN50 Tuned : my motorcycle
                                MAGMA (Ours) : my bike
                                MAGMA (Rel.) : a 1973 Honda CB750
                                NFRN Random: the car on the road
                                         BEIT: the bike.'
                                     NFRN50: a motorcycle on a motorcycle.
                                         CLIP: my motorcycle.
                                       Ground Truth: A man riding a wave on top of a white surfboard.
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : a surfer in the water
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : a surfer riding a wave.
                                     MAGMA (Rel.) : a surfer riding a wave
                                       NFRN Random: the view from the top of the mountain
                                               BEIT: a surfer riding a wave.
                                            NFRN50: a surfer in the water.
                                               CLIP: a surfer riding a wave.
                                  Ground Truth: A person standing on top of a beach flying a kite.
                                 NFRN50 Tuned : a man standing on the beach with a surfboard.
                                 MAGMA (Ours) : a kite on a beach.
                                MAGMA (Rel.) : a man running on the beach
                                  NFRN Random: the new car in the garage
                                          BEIT: a man standing on a rock in the sea.
                                       NFRN50: a man surfing on the beach.
                                          CLIP: a man flying a kite on the beach.
                                       Ground Truth: A lady explains the process of milking a cow.
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : a horse and rider at the fair.
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : a woman on a stage with kids in the audience.
                                      MAGMA (Rel.) : a woman milking a cow in front of a group of children.
                                      NFRN Random: the new restaurant.
                                               BEIT: the crowd at the event.
                                           NFRN50: a crowd of people at a festival
                                               CLIP: the dairy cows.
                                   Ground Truth: A woman is taking notes in front of her laptop
                                  NFRN50 Tuned : the man who was shot and killed in the lobby of the building.
                                  MAGMA (Ours) : a student studying.
                                 MAGMA (Rel.) : a student working on a paper
                                   NFRN Random: the man who was killed in the attack.
                                           BEIT: the room where the meeting took place.
                                        NFRN50: the room where the meeting took place.
                                           CLIP: a student working on his laptop.
                                       Ground Truth: A couple of men standing on top of a field together.
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : the team before the match
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : men playing a game of sport.
                                     MAGMA (Rel.) : a men's lacrosse game at the University of New England
                                       NFRN Random: the new home of the football team
                                               BEIT: football player and football player during a training session.
                                            NFRN50: the team before the game.
                                               CLIP: the team during a practice session.

Figure 6: 15 randomly selected images from the COCO 2017 validation dataset and the generated
captions from all models.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     Ground Truth: The vegetable are laid out neatly at the table.
                                    NFRN50 Tuned : vegetables and fruits for sale at a market in the city
                                    MAGMA (Ours) : fresh produce.
                                    MAGMA (Rel.) : a farmers market
                                    NFRN Random: a woman and her child in a garden
                                             BEIT: the garden
                                         NFRN50: the vegetables and fruits available at the farmers market.
                                             CLIP: the farm stand with a variety of vegetables
                                   Ground Truth:           A woman standing in front of a box handing a woman a bag of food.


                                  NFRN50 Tuned :           a woman with a box of food on her head.


                                  MAGMA (Ours) :           a volunteer distributing food to the homeless.


                                  MAGMA (Rel.) :
                                                           a woman in a white shirt and black pants handing out food to a man in a
                                                           '
                                                             'white shirt and black pants.

                                  NFRN Random:             a young girl with a flower in her hair and a smile on her face


                                           BEIT:           a woman cooking in her kitchen.


                                       NFRN50:             a woman selling fruit and vegetables in a market


                                           CLIP:           person, a volunteer at the food distribution.


                                         Ground Truth: A man lies on the beach while someone else holds a kite.
                                        NFRN50 Tuned : the beach with a person lying on the sand.
                                        MAGMA (Ours) : person and i braiding a kite on the beach.
                                        MAGMA (Rel.) : a man and a woman playing on the beach.
                                        NFRN Random: a man and a woman sitting on a bench in the park
                                                 BEIT: a man and woman doing a handstand on the beach.
                                             NFRN50: a young man sitting on the beach.
                                                 CLIP: a man playing with a kite on the beach.
                                       Ground Truth: The young boy is playing in the living room of his house.
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : a little girl with a doll and a toy
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : person with a prosthetic finger
                                        MAGMA (Rel.) : a toddler boy standing up and holding his head.
                                       NFRN Random: the artist with his son.
                                               BEIT: a boy in a wheelchair.
                                            NFRN50: a little girl with a toy airplane
                                               CLIP: person with his new toy
                                    Ground Truth: A white toilet sitting in a corner of a room.
                                  NFRN50 Tuned : the toilet in the bathroom.
                                  MAGMA (Ours) : actor and a toilet
                                   MAGMA (Rel.) : the bathroom in the <PERSON>'s suite.
                                   NFRN Random: the bride and groom at the wedding
                                            BEIT: a white and black cat on a black background.
                                        NFRN50: a toilet in a public restroom.
                                            CLIP: the toilet in the room
                                    Ground Truth: computers on a desk.
                                                  Several different pieces of electronic equipment and


                                  NFRN50 Tuned : my desk at work.
                                  MAGMA (Ours) : my desk with a laptop and various devices
                                   MAGMA (Rel.) : my desk
                                   NFRN Random: a man and a woman sitting on a bench in a park.
                                            BEIT: the computer i use.
                                        NFRN50: my computer desk at work.
                                            CLIP: my desk as it looked after a few days of working.
                                    Ground Truth: A living room filled with furniture and a table.
                                  NFRN50 Tuned : the living room.
                                  MAGMA (Ours) : the living room
                                  MAGMA (Rel.) : the living room.
                                  NFRN Random: the living room in the house
                                            BEIT: the living room.
                                        NFRN50: the living room in the house.
                                            CLIP: the living room.
                                      Ground Truth: A row of cows standing behind a metal fence.
                                     NFRN50 Tuned : a cow in a pen with a calf
                                     MAGMA (Ours) : dairy cows on a dairy farm.
                                    MAGMA (Rel.) : a dairy farm
                                      NFRN Random: the interior of the church
                                              BEIT: a horse being led through the streets.
                                           NFRN50: a horse and a cow in a barn
                                              CLIP: a dairy farm.

Figure 6: 15 randomly selected images from the first random seed taken from the COCO 2017
validation dataset with the generated captions from all models.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             (a) times generated / # of times in ground truth


                                              (b) precision


                                                (c) recall


(d) The Wu-Palmer Similarity between the ground truth word and the most similar word in the generated
captions.


                                                  (e) f1

Figure 7: The top 50 nouns that appear in the ground truth captions of the COCO validation set and
how often each model generates them


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            (a) times generated / # of times in ground truth


                                             (b) precision


                                               (c) recall


                                                 (d) f1

Figure 8: The top 50 modifiers that appear in the ground truth captions of the COCO validation set
and how often each model generates them


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            (a) times generated / # of times in ground truth


                                             (b) precision


                                               (c) recall


                                                 (d) f1

Figure 9: The top 50 relations that appear in the ground truth captions of the COCO validation set
and how often each model generates them


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      How much pickle will                Answer: 1/3
          they eat?                 NFRN50 Tuned : Enough to make them sick.
                                    MAGMA (Ours) : enough to fill a lunch box.
                                    MAGMA (Rel.) : Enough to make them sick.
                                     NFRN Random: They will eat as much as they want.
                                             BEIT: They will eat about a cup of pickle.
                                          NFRN50: They will eat as much as they want.
                                             CLIP: All of it!
   What is the thing above the            Answer: microwave
          stove called?             NFRN50 Tuned : A stove.
                                    MAGMA (Ours) : microwave oven.
                                    MAGMA (Rel.) : A vent hood.
                                    NFRN Random: A hob.
                                             BEIT: A stove.
                                          NFRN50: The stove.
                                             CLIP: The oven.
                                              Answer: cloudy
                                         NFRN50 Tuned : Clear
       How are the skies?                MAGMA (Ours) : it rains most of the time and the clouds are dark.
                                         MAGMA (Rel.) : The skies are cloudy.
                                         NFRN Random: They are clear and blue.
                                                  BEIT: The sky is clear and the sun is shining.
                                              NFRN50: Very cloudy
                                                  CLIP: The skies are cloudy and the winds are strong.
  What color is the dog on the           Answer: Gray
            table?                  NFRN50 Tuned : The dog is brown.
                                    MAGMA (Ours) : he's blue.
                                    MAGMA (Rel.) : It's a brown dog.
                                    NFRN Random: The dog is black.
                                             BEIT: It's a brown dog.
                                         NFRN50: It is a black and white dog.
                                             CLIP: It's a white dog.
  Is this picture taken inside or             Answer: outside
              outside?                   NFRN50 Tuned : It's outside.
                                         MAGMA (Ours) : both.
                                         MAGMA (Rel.) : Inside
                                         NFRN Random: It is a picture of a person sitting on a bench
                                                  BEIT: It's outside.
                                              NFRN50: Inside
                                                  CLIP: It's outside.
 Is he on his way to a corporate          Answer: no
               job?
                                     NFRN50 Tuned : Â he is wearing a suit and tie, but he
                                     MAGMA (Ours) : he's probably just a street performer.
                                     MAGMA (Rel.) : No, he's on his way to a skateboard
                                     NFRN Random: He is a very smart guy.
                                              BEIT: No, he's on his way to a job interview
                                          NFRN50: He is on his way to a corporate job
                                              CLIP: No, he's on his way to a skate park
 Is the street a two-way street?              Answer: Yes
                                         NFRN50 Tuned : Yes, it is.
                                         MAGMA (Ours) : no.
                                         MAGMA (Rel.) : Yes.
                                         NFRN Random: Yes, it is a two-way street.
                                                  BEIT: Yes, it is.
                                              NFRN50: Yes, it is.
                                                  CLIP: Yes, it is.
  Does the zebra look happy?                     Answer: Yes
                                    NFRN50
Figure 10: 15 randomly selected images       Tuned
                                       from the    : No,validation
                                                VQA2     it looks likeset  and
                                                                       it is     the
                                                                             about    generated
                                                                                   to eat you   answers
from all models.                    MAGMA (Ours) : he looks like he is trying to be happy.
                                        MAGMA (Rel.) : It's a zebra, so it's always happy
                                        NFRN Random: Yes, he is enjoying the sunshine.
                                              29BEIT: Yes, it is happy.
                                             NFRN50: Yes!
                                                CLIP: Yes, he is enjoying the grass.
What activity caused him to fall?               Answer: skiing
                                                NFRN50:
                                                  CLIP: No, he's on his way to a skate park
 Is the street a two-way street?            Answer: Yes
                                       NFRN50 Tuned : Yes, it is.
Published as a conference paper at ICLRMAGMA
                                        2023 (Ours) : no.
                                       MAGMA (Rel.) : Yes.
                                       NFRN Random: Yes, it is a two-way street.
                                                BEIT: Yes, it is.
                                            NFRN50: Yes, it is.
                                                CLIP: Yes, it is.
  Does the zebra look happy?                 Answer: Yes
                                        NFRN50 Tuned : No, it looks like it is about to eat you
                                        MAGMA (Ours) : he looks like he is trying to be happy.
                                        MAGMA (Rel.) : It's a zebra, so it's always happy
                                        NFRN Random: Yes, he is enjoying the sunshine.
                                                 BEIT: Yes, it is happy.
                                             NFRN50: Yes!
                                                 CLIP: Yes, he is enjoying the grass.
What activity caused him to fall?          Answer: skiing
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : He was skiing on a slope that was covered in ice
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : skiing!
                                      MAGMA (Rel.) : He was skiing.
                                      NFRN Random: He was a member of the wrestling team.
                                               BEIT: He was trying to catch a ball.
                                           NFRN50: He was skiing on a slope that was covered in ice
                                               CLIP: He was skiing on a chair lift.
                                                Answer: 60
                                           NFRN50 Tuned : ___
                                           MAGMA (Ours) : it took.
                                           MAGMA (Rel.) : It took her about 10 minutes.
                                           NFRN Random: It took her about 10 minutes to make the kite fly
How many minutes did it take for                    BEIT: It took her about five minutes to make it fly.
the little girl to make her kite y?             NFRN50: ___
                                                    CLIP: It took her about a minute to make it fly.
    What brand shirt is man                    Answer: Polo
          wearing?                        NFRN50 Tuned : It's a brand called.
                                          MAGMA (Ours) : brand.
                                            MAGMA (Rel.) : <PERSON>
                                           NFRN Random: It is a white shirt with a blue collar and a
                                                   BEIT: The shirt is a brand.
                                                NFRN50: It's a new one.
                                                   CLIP: It's a sweater.
    What is the zebra doing?                Answer: eating
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : It is eating grass.
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : he is eating grass!
                                       MAGMA (Rel.) : It is eating grass.
                                       NFRN Random: It is trying to get out of the water.
                                               BEIT: It is eating grass.
                                            NFRN50: Eating grass
                                               CLIP: Eating grass.
  Is the player wearing helmet?             Answer: no
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : No, he is not.
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : no
                                       MAGMA (Rel.) : No.
                                       NFRN Random: Yes, he is wearing a helmet.
                                               BEIT: No, he is not.
                                            NFRN50: No, he is not.
                                               CLIP: No.
   What is the cat sitting on?
                                            Answer: suitcase
                                      NFRN50 Tuned : It's a book.
                                      MAGMA (Ours) : a suitcase.
                                      MAGMA (Rel.) : A suitcase.
                                      NFRN Random: It is a cat.
                                               BEIT: It's a cat.
                                            NFRN50: It's a laptop!
                                               CLIP: A suitcase.
 Are there people in the photo?               Answer: no
                                         NFRN50 Tuned : Yes, there are people in the photo.
                                         MAGMA (Ours) : yes
                                          MAGMA (Rel.) : Yes, there are people in the photo.
                                         NFRN Random: Yes, there are people in the photo.
                                                  BEIT: yes, there are people in the photo.
                                              NFRN50: Yes, there are.
                                                  CLIP: Yes, there are people in the photo.

Figure 10: 15 randomly selected images from the VQA2 validation set and the generated answers
from all models.               fl


                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              (a) NFRN50 Random                                  (b) BEIT


                  (c) NFRN50                                      (d) CLIP

Figure 11: Probes trained on COCO images to classify the supercategories of the objects in the
images


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) NFRN50 Random Per COCO object label probe F1 results


                         (b) BEIT Per COCO object label probe F1 results


                        (c) NFRN50 Per COCO object label probe F1 results


                         (d) CLIP Per COCO object label probe F1 results


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: F1 of image encoder probes trained on CC3M and evaluated on COCO. We find that F1
of captions by object category tend to follow those of probe performance. Notably the BEIT probe
is much worse at transferring from CC3M to COCO, and the captioning F1 tends to be consistently
higher which makes it difficult to draw conclusions for this model. Generally, it appears the abil-
ity to encode lexical information into the image representation entails being able to transfer that
information to the LM with a linear map.


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               (a) NFRN50 Random                                      (b) BEIT


                   (c) NFRN50                                         (d) CLIP

Figure 14: Probes trained on CIFAR images to classify the coarse labels of the objects in the images


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) NFRN50 Random Per CIFAR object label probe F1 results


                         (b) BEIT Per CIFAR object label probe F1 results


                        (c) NFRN50 Per CIFAR object label probe F1 results


                         (d) CLIP Per CIFAR object label probe F1 results


                                               35
