Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T OWARD L EARNING G EOMETRIC E IGEN -L ENGTHS
C RUCIAL FOR ROBOTIC F ITTING TASKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

          Some extremely low-dimensional yet crucial geometric eigen-lengths often deter-
          mine whether an object can be fitted in the environment or not. For example, the
          height of an object is important to measure to check if it can fit between the shelves
          of a cabinet, while the width of a couch is crucial when trying to move it through
          a doorway. Humans have materialized such crucial geometric eigen-lengths in
          common sense since they are very useful in serving as succinct yet effective, highly
          interpretable, and universal object representations. However, it remains obscure
          and underexplored if learning systems can be equipped with similar capabilities of
          automatically discovering such key geometric quantities in doing robotic fitting
          tasks. In this work, we therefore for the first time formulate and propose a novel
          learning problem on this question and set up a benchmark suite including the tasks,
          the data, and the evaluation metrics for studying the problem. We explore poten-
          tial solutions and demonstrate the feasibility of learning such eigen-lengths from
          simply observing successful and failed fitting trials. We also attempt geometric
          grounding for more accurate eigen-length measurement and study the reusability
          of the learned geometric eigen-lengths across multiple tasks. Our work marks the
          first exploratory step toward learning crucial geometric eigen-lengths and we hope
          it can inspire future research in tackling this important yet underexplored problem.


1    I NTRODUCTION


                              Fit under the table:        Place into the box:   Put into and close the drawer:
    Stack plates: diameter    height and width            width and length      height, width, and length
            (a)                    (b)                          (c)                     (d)


    Figure 1: Example tasks and the hypothesized crucial geometric measurements by humans.

Consider a robot tasked with placing many small objects on warehouse shelves, where both the
objects and the shelves have diverse geometric configurations. While the robot can simply try to
accomplish the task by trial-and-error, to us as humans, it is clear that certain placements should not
be attempted because they will obviously fail. For example, we should not attempt to place a tall
object on a shelf whose height is too low. We base this judgement on the estimation of a critical
geometric eigen-length or measurement, the height of the object and the shelf, whose comparison
allows a quick estimate of task feasibility.
While object height is an example of important eigen-lengths of an object that is crucial for the above
shelf placement task, it is not hard to think of many other types of object eigen-lengths for other
fitting tasks. Figure 1 presents some other example tasks together with the presumable geometric
eigen-lengths based on human common sense. For example, the geometric eigen-length diameter is
important for the task of stacking plates in different sizes (Figure 1, (a)), while the width and length


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of an object are crucial geometric eigen-lengths for deciding if one can put an arbitrary shape object
into an open box (Figure 1, (c)).
Having such extremely low-dimensional yet crucial geometric eigen-lengths extracted as the repre-
sentations for objects is certainly beneficial for designing learning systems for robotic fitting tasks.
One telling evidence is that we humans have naturally built up the vocabulary of geometric key
quantities, such as height, width, and diameter, when perceiving and modeling everyday objects, and
used them to perform various object fitting tasks. Besides being succinct yet effective abstractions of
objects for quickly estimating the feasibility for the downstream fitting tasks, such crucial geometric
eigen-lengths are also highly interpretable, which exposes the principled reasoning process behind
the feasibility checking, and universal, as they are generally applicable to objects with arbitrary shape
and useful across different downstream tasks.
Current research in representation learning for computer vision and robotics has mostly been focusing
on learning high-dimensional latent codes or injecting human knowledge as inductive bias for
learning structured representations. While learning high-dimensional latent codes provides total
flexibility learning any useful feature for mastering the downstream tasks, these latent codes are high-
dimensional, hard to interpret, and may be prone to overfitting to the training domain. For structured
representations, though researchers have explored using different kinds of object representations, such
as bounding boxes (Tulsiani et al., 2017) and key points (Manuelli et al., 2019), to accomplish various
downstream tasks in computer vision and robotics, these structure priors are manually specified based
on human knowledge about the tasks. In contrast, we aim to explore the automatic discovery of
low-dimensional yet crucial geometric quantities for robotic fitting tasks while injecting the minimal
human prior knowledge – only assuming that we are measuring eigen-lengths of the input objects.
In this paper, we first propose to study a novel learning problem on discovering low-dimensional
geometric eigen-lengths crucial for fitting tasks and set up the benchmark suite for studying the
problem. As illustrated in Figure 2, given a fitting task (putting the bowl inside the drawer of the
table) that involves a scene geometry (the table) and an object shape (the bowl), we are interested
in predicting whether the object can fit in the scene accomplishing the task or not, via discovering
a few crucial geometric eigen-lengths and composing them into a task program which outputs the
final task feasibility estimation. To study the problem, we also define a set of commonly seen robotic
fitting tasks, generate large-scale data for the training and evaluating on each task, and set up a set
of quantitative metrics for evaluating and analyzing the method performance and if the emergent
geometric eigen-lengths match the desired ones humans usually use.
We also explore potential solutions to the proposed learning problem and present several of our key
findings. First of all, we will show that learning such low-dimensional key geometric eigen-lengths are
achievable from only using weak supervision signals such as the success or failure of training fitting
trials. Secondly, the learned crucial geometric eigen-lengths can be more accurately measured if
geometric grounding is allowed and attainable for certain fitting tasks. Finally, we make an initial stab
at exploring how to share and re-use the learned geometric eigen-lengths across different tasks and
even for novel tasks. Marking the first step defining and exploring this important yet underexplored
problem, we hope our work can draw people’s attention to this task and inspire future research in
designing solutions tackling it.
To summarize, this work makes the following contributions:
    • We propose a novel learning problem on discovering low-dimensional geometric eigen-lengths
      crucial for fitting tasks;
    • We set up a benchmark suite for studying the problem, including a set of fitting tasks, the dataset
      for each task, and a range of quantitative and qualitative metrics for thorough performance
      evaluation and analysis;
    • We explore potential solutions to the proposed learning problem and present some key take-away
      messages summarizing both the successes and unresolved challenges.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Learning Geometry Abstraction. A long line of research has focused on learning low-dimensional
and compact abstraction for input geometry. Given as input a 2D or 3D shape, past works have studied
learning various geometric abstraction as the shape representation, such as bounding boxes (Tulsiani
et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019), convex shapes (Deng et al., 2020), Gaussian mixtures (Genova et al.,


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Eigen-Lengths
                                                                            Task Program
                                                    Env H


                                                     Obj H
                                                                      >
                                                                                    Task
                                                                            AND


                                                      …


                                                                  …
                                                                                   Output
                                                    Env W
                                                                      >
                   Input Geometry                   Obj W


Figure 2: Proposed Learning Paradigm where we first predict a set of geometric eigen-lengths
from the input geometries, then compose them using a task program to get the final task output.


2019; 2020), superquadratics (Paschalidou et al., 2019; 2020), parametric curves (Reddy et al., 2021)
and surfaces (Sharma et al., 2020; Smirnov et al., 2020), etc.. Most of these works use geometry
fitting as the primary objective. Our work, however, focuses on discovering geometric abstraction
that can help solve the downstream manipulation tasks instead of reconstruction.
There are also previous works exploring ways to learn task-specific geometry representation for
manipulation tasks. For example, researchers have tried to learn key points (Manuelli et al., 2019; Qin
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Jakab et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) and affordance
information (Kim & Sukhatme, 2014; Mo et al., 2021a;b; Turpin et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2021) for
robotic manipulation tasks. These works mostly pre-define the types of geometry abstraction and the
downstream policies to use the extracted shape summaries, and the abstraction is mostly dense or
high dimensional. In this paper, we aim for useful geometric eigen-lengths and ways to automatically
discover and compose them for solving manipulation tasks.
Disentangled Visual Representation Learning. Another line of work focuses on unsupervised
representation learning techniques that pursue disentangled and compositional latent representations
for visual concepts. For example, InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016), beta-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017),
and many more works (Higgins et al., 2016; Siddharth et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020) discover
disentangled features, each of which controls a certain aspect of visual attributes, usually with
reconstruction as the objective. In contrast to their primary objectives of controllable reconstruction
or generation, we explore the problem of learning geometric eigen-lengths driven by the goal of
accomplishing downstream fitting tasks. Also, our task involves reasoning over two geometric inputs
and comparing the extracted eigen-lengths on both inputs, while these previous works on disentangled
visual representation learning factor out visual attributes for a single input datum.


3    L EARNING P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Given a robotic fitting task T ∈ T , we aim to learn very few but the crucial geometric eigen-lengths
LT (e.g., width, length, height) of the object shape O ∈ O and the environment geometry E ∈ E
that are useful for checking the feasibility of fitting O into E under the task T . Figure 2 presents an
example of the proposed learning problem where the task is to put the bowl (O) inside the drawer
of the cabinet (E). In this example, the width, length, height of the drawer and the bowl are the
crucial desired geometric eigen-lengths (LT ) and we can compose them in a task program to output
the final task feasibility prediction. We consider each eigen-length L ∈ LT as a function mapping
from the input object shape O or the environment geometry E to a scalar value for the eigen-length
measurement, i.e. L : O ∪ E → R. After obtaining the eigen-length measurements for both the
object and environment inputs, i.e. {L(O)|L ∈ LT } and {L(E)|L ∈ LT }, we perform pairwise
comparisons between the corresponding eigen-lengths checking if L(O) < L(E) holds for every
L ∈ LT . The task of fitting O in E under the task T is predicted as successful if all the conditions
hold and as failed if any condition does not hold. This format of task program is based on the
intuition that in fitting tasks, we require the object to be “smaller” than the parts of the environment
affording the action. Durining training, the learning systems see many fitting trials over different
objects and environment geometric configurations together with their ground-truth fitting feasibility,
i.e. {(Oi , Ei , Successful/Failed)|i = 0, 1, 2, · · · }. The goal is to learn eigen-length functions based
on which correct prediction of task feasibility given test input (Otest , Etest ) can be made.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4       C AN G EOMETRIC E IGEN -L ENGTHS BE L EARNED FROM B INARY TASK
        S UPERVISION ?
In this work, we are interested in learning geometric eigen-lengths that are crucial for downstream
tasks. We hope to achieve automatic discovery of these eigen-lengths from doing tasks as it requires
the least human prior and allows maximum flexibility. Therefore, we start with the minimum form of
supervision and explore the following question: given only binary task success/failure supervision, is
it possible to learn geometric eigen-lengths of input geometries that are sufficient for the task?
4.1       T ESTBED FOR E IGEN -L ENGTH L EARNING

                 width                          radius                                                                          len
                                                                                          width                                    gt
                                                                                                                                      h      holder radius
                                  height                                                  length
                                                                                          height
                         height


                                                                                                                        width
                                                                      radius


      (a) Tube Passing                (b) Cylinder Fitting   (c) Sphere Fitting       (d) Container Fitting   (e) Countertop Placing      (f) Mug Hanging


    Figure 3: Summary of tasks and their human-hypothesized key measurements/eigen-lengths.
We start by curating a set of tasks as the testbed for the learning problem, as summarized in Fig. 3.
For each task, we build a large-scale dataset comprising diverse shapes and configurations.
Task Design Principles We design the tasks to (1) cover a wide range of geometries, including
synthetic, simple primitive shapes and more complex ones like ShapeNet objects; (2) facilitate
the analysis and interpretation of learned eigen-lengths. Specifically, here we base the analysis on
comparisons to human-hypothesized eigen-lengths: given a task, humans can identify related key
eigen-lengths (referred to as “ground truth” in the following), e.g., object height when putting them
on shelves. Comparing the learned eigen-lengths to these “ground truth” may provide important
insights. To achieve this, we need accessible ground truth eigen-lengths to begin with. Primitive
shapes like cylinders are ideal as they are parameterized by eigen-lengths like radius and height.
Task Specifications In all tasks, we aim to determine whether a placement/motion of the object
exists in a certain environment, specifically:
 (a) Tube passing. (Tube) Pass an object through a rectangular tube. A tube is a cuboid without the
      front and back faces. Width and height of the tube/object are the key eigen-lengths to compare.
 (b) Cylinder fitting. (Cylinder) Place an object into a cylindrical container. Bounding sphere
      radius of the object in XY plane and its height, as well as the radius and height of the cylinder
      container are the key eigen-lengths.
 (c) Sphere fitting. (Sphere) Place an object into a spherical container. Radius of the bounding
      sphere of the object and the container is the key eigen-length.
 (d) Container fitting. (Fit) Place an object into cavities in another ShapeNet container object.
      Example cavities include drawers or shelves (See Fig. 3d) of furniture. Most cavities have
      cuboid-like shapes. Thus, key eigen-lengths are width, length and height of cavities and objects.
 (e) Countertop placing. (Top) Place an object on top of another ShapeNet environment object,
      such that its projection along the gravity axis is fully enclosed by the environment countertop.
      Width and length of the countertop surface and the object are key eigen-lengths.
  (f) Mug hanging. (Mug) Hang a mug on a mug holder by its handle. The holder is a cylinder-
      shaped rod. Key eigen-lengths are the distance between sides of the mug handle and the diameter
      (or equivalently, the radius) of the mug holder rod.

Data Generation Details For objects to be fitted in tasks (a)-(e), we use ∼1200 common household
object models from 8 training and 4 testing categories in ShapeNet (Chang et al., 2015), following
Mo et al. (2021b). During data generation, we apply random scaling to the object model, then sample
N = 1024 points from the object surface. Note that we also apply a random rotation to the object.
In (d),(e), we use furniture and appliances from ShapeNet as the environment geometry, including
∼550 shapes from 7 object categories. In (f), we use ∼200 ShapeNet mugs. We randomly sample the
parameters of primitive shapes and the scaling factors of ShapeNet shapes, then sample M = 1024
points from their surfaces. For all tasks, we generated 75k training and 20k testing environment-object
pairs. Please refer to Appendix A.3 for more data generation details.

                                                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                            ı / HQY   / REM  ᵬ                                                                                                       2EM
               2EM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3URMHFWLRQ
                                                                            2EM (LJHQ /HQJWK                                                                                                                                                                        3RLQW                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2EM
              3RLQW                          2EM1HW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9HFWRU1HW                                                                                     9HFWRU Y
                                                                            / REM  / REM      /6REM                                                                                                                                                                 &ORXG                                                                                                                                                                            /HQJWK                                       (LJHQ /HQJWK
              &ORXG
                                                                                                                                            ı     / HQY   / REM  ᵬ                                           ᵎ                   3UHG
                                                                                                                                                                                                            $1'                  /DEHO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (QY
               (QY                                                          (QY (LJHQ /HQJWK                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :HLJKW1HW                     :HLJKW                                :HLJKWHG                    3RLQWV                            /   Y7 T   S                                         (QY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3RLQW
              3RLQW                          (QY1HW                         / HQY  / HQY      /6HQY                                                                                                                                                                 &ORXG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             'LVWUL                                  6XP                        S  T                                                                              (LJHQ /HQJWK
              &ORXG                                                                                                                         ı     /6HQY   /6REM  ᵬ


                                                                                                                            D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E


Figure 4: Network architectures. (a) A minimal eigen-length learning pipeline where we separately
encode environment and object into eigen-length values, perform pair-wise comparison, and take
the logical AND of results. (b) A geometry-grounded framework where we first predict vectors and
points as the geometry grounding, then compute eigen-lengths from them.
                                         5                                                                             5                                                                            5                                                                         5                                                                 5                                                                             5
3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3UHGLFWLRQ


                                             D  7XEH <                                                                      D  7XEH =                                                                 E  &\OLQGHU 5                                                          E  &\OLQGHU +                                                    F  6SKHUH 5                                                              I  0XJ +ROGHU 5
                                         5                                                                             5                                                                            5                                                                         5                                                                 5                                                                             5

3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                         3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3UHGLFWLRQ


                                        G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                        G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                            H  7RS  2EMHFW <                                                        H  7RS  2EMHFW ;

Figure 5: Correlation Analysis. Each plot shows the relationship between one learned eigen-length
(Y coord.) and its matching “ground truth” measurement (X coord.). Higher R2 values imply a
stronger correlation.

4.2                                A M INIMAL N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE
Intuitively, we can measure the object and the environment separately and see if the object is “smaller"
than the environment. Thus we come up with the minimal network architecture shown in Fig. 4 (a).
We separately map the object and environment geometries into two sets of eigen-lengths, perform
pairwise comparisons between them, and compose comparison results using logical AND.
Concretely, we encode object point cloud O and environment point cloud E using two Point-
Net (Qi et al., 2017) networks, ObjNet and EnvNet. Both networks output S-dim vectors
L⃗obj = (Lobj    obj          obj
            1 , L2 , . . . , LS ), L
                                     ⃗ = (Lenv , Lenv , . . . , Lenv ). We then compute task success
                                    env
                                               1     2            S
                VS
as T̂ (E, O) = s=1 [Ls (E) > Lobj
                        env
                                      s  (O)]. During  training,  we  use a differentiable approximation
             QS
T̃ (E, O) = s=1 σ((Lenv  s    (E) − L obj
                                      s   (O))/τ ), where  τ is a learnable parameter. We set S = 1 for
(c) Sphere, (f) Mug, S = 2 for (a) Tube, (b) Cylinder, S = 3 for (d) Fit, (e) Top.

4.3                                A NALYSIS OF L EARNED E IGEN -L ENGTHS
We analyze the eigen-lengths learned by the network by comparing them to “ground truth” eigen-
lengths as shown in Fig. 3. For each task, we randomly sample N = 512 test data points and
obtain the corresponding N eigen-length predictions {Lpred    s,i }i=0,...,N −1 for each of the S learned
                                     gt
eigen-lengths, as well as N values {Ls′ ,i }i=0,...,N −1 for each of the S ′ “ground truth” eigen-lengths.
For each pair of predicted and “ground truth” eigen-lengths (s, s′ ), we draw a scatter plot of points
(Lgt       pred                                                                                2
  s′ ,i , Ls′ ,i ) and perform least squares linear regression over them to get corresponding R -scores.
                                                                            2
We match the predictions and groundtruths by maximizing the sum of R -scores and show the scatter
plots of matched pairs in Fig. 5. Note that in (e) Top, since we predict S = 3 eigen-lengths while
there are only S ′ = 2 groundtruth eigen-lengths, we show the unmatched prediction with its most
correlated groundtruth. For complete S × S ′ plots, please refer to Appendix B.2.
Learned eigen-lengths are strongly correlated with human-hypothesized measurements. As
Fig. 5 shows, R2 values between predictions and “ground truths” are close to or greater than 0.9
except for the redundant prediction slot 3 in (e) Top. They also have clear one-to-one correspondences
with ground truth in tasks with multiple eigen-lengths, suggesting good disentanglement is learned.
Knowing the number of eigen-lengths beforehand is not a requirement for successful learning.
The number S of eigen-lengths to learn is a hyperparameter set before learning. However, it does


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


not have to be the exact number of relevant eigen-lengths. As shown in (e) Top, when we have more
slots for eigen-lengths than needed, “ground truth” eigen-lengths are still captured by the first two
predictions. The third prediction does not strongly correlate with any “ground truth”. A further probe
reveals that comparisons of this eigen-length almost never (only in 0.4% of the cases) contribute to the
final result, outputting True most of the time. The network learns a pair of degenerate eigen-lengths
as there is no more necessary information to capture.

5     C AN G EOMETRY G ROUNDINGS BE D ISCOVERED FOR E IGEN -L ENGTHS ?
While Fig. 5 shows strong correlation between learned eigen-lengths and “ground truth”, their
relationship is not always perfectly linear, as can be observed in (d) Fit and (e) Top with complex
geometries. Even in more linear cases, the scaling and offset make the raw eigen-length value hard
to understand, e.g., negative “length” values are less intuitive. As eigen-lengths can be seen as
measurements of the object, many of them have sparse supports or geometry groundings on the
objects, e.g., height is the distance between the base plane supporting the object and its highest
point. These geometry groundings anchor the corresponding eigen-length values, provide an intuitive
explanation of these values, and usually carry geometric/semantic importance themselves. We are
therefore interested in the following question: can we ground the eigen-lengths on geometry? From
a high level, instead of directly predicting eigen-length values, if we first predict some geometric
entities like points, vectors, and planes, then derive eigen-lengths from them, is it possible to learn
meaningful eigen-lengths and geometry groundings?

5.1    G ROUNDING E IGEN -L ENGTH P REDICTIONS ON G EOMETRIC P RIMITIVES



                                                                                                             v
                                vector v2
                                                      vector v2
                     len
                        gth                                                                    𝚷p = (v, p)
                                =L
                                                     len
                   vec                   rv0            gth
                      tor          c   to                      <L
                            v    ve                                 ?
                            1                                                                                𝚷q = (v, q)
                                                                                    height=H
                                               vec                             v0
                                                  tor                       or
                                                      v                   ct
                                                           1            ve


Figure 6: Eigen-Length Geometry Groundings. We ground each eigen-length L with a unit vector
v and two parallel planes Πp , Πq with normal v. L is computed as the distance between Πp , Πq .
Consider fitting tasks like (d) Container Fitting and (e) Countertop Placing where the spaces affording
the task can be roughly described by a set of parallel planes. 1 To compute the success label of
the task, say fitting an object into a nightstand, we can measure the size of the spaces of interest
in the environment (the drawer part) along important directions (its main axes) and comparing it
to the measurement of the object. Inspired by this, we ground a pair of eigen-lengths on a tuble of
unit vector and two planes (⃗v , Πp , Πq ) as illustrated in Fig. 6: we measure both the object and the
environment along ⃗v . We take the object measurement as the diameter of the projection of the object
point cloud O on the vector ⃗v , i.e. Lobj (O) = maxp∈O ⃗v T p − minp∈O ⃗v T p. For the environment, we
use a pair of parallel planes Πp , Πq with normal ⃗v to separate out a certain region relevant to the task
(the drawer), then measure the distance between the planes. In practice, we adopt the (point, normal)
plane representation and predict a point pair (p, q) that determines the plane pair. The environment
eigen-length is then computed as Lenv (E) = ⃗v T (q − p).
Figure 4 (b) illustrates our network architecture. In VectorNet, we employ a PointNet classification
backbone to extract global feature of the environment point cloud E ∈ RM ×3 , then use an MLP to
predict S 3D vectors {⃗vs }s=1,2,...,S . In WeightNet, we employ a PointNet segmentation backbone
to extract per-point features, then use S × 2 MLPs with to predict S pairs of probability distributions
Wsp , Wsq over the point cloud. The point coordinates of (ps , qs ) are then computed as the weighted
average of original point cloud coordinates, namely ps = Wsp T E, qs = Wsq T E.
    1
      Note that other tasks may require other inductive bias. We focus on this type of tasks to study the feasibility
of geometry-grounded eigen-length learning. We leave a more versatile system as future work.


                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.2                                   A NALYSIS OF L EARNED G EOMETRIC P RIMITIVES AND E IGEN -L ENGTH VALUES

                                                                                       )URQW 9LHZ  3UHG                                                                               7RS 9LHZ  3UHG                                                                     (QYLURQPHQW                                                              7RS 9LHZ  3UHG                                                            (QYLURQPHQW


                     D  7XEH 3DVVLQJ                                                                                                                                                 G  &RQWDLQHU )LWWLQJ                                                                                                                                                                 H  &RXQWHUWRS 3ODFLQJ



Figure 7: Geometry Grounding Visualizations. We plot the learned vectors (as arrows) and planes
(as disks) on top of input environment point clouds. We also show the object model next to point
clouds for clearer view of object structure. For (d) Fit, we visualize predictions in two views for
clarity. Please refer to Appendix B.1 for more visualizations.
                                        5                                                              5                                                                   5                                                              5                                                              5                                                             5

 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                           3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3UHGLFWLRQ


                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                         G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                              G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                        H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                         H  7RS  2EMHFW <                                        H  7RS  2EMHFW ;

Figure 8: Improved correlation after using geometry groundings. We show scatter plots of
predicted eigen-length (Y coord.) and their matching “ground truth” (X coord.) in (d) Fit and (e) Top.
We perform the same correlation analysis and visualize the results in Fig. 8. Compared to Fig. 5,
learned eigen-lengths are now almost equal to “groundtruth” thanks to the anchoring effect of the
geometry grounding. The extra predicted eigen-length in (e) Top also behaves differently, capturing
the same “ground truth” as another learned eigen-length. This suggests the regularization from
geometry grounding makes learned eigen-lengths more likely to be meaningful measurements. It
also reaffirms the fact that the number S of eigen-lengths we set in advance can be different from the
actual number of necessary eigen-lengths. Please see Appendix E.4 for detailed discussion.
We also visualize the learned geometry groundings in Fig. 7. The learned vectors align with the main
axes of object geometry. The learned planes overlap with tube surfaces in (a) Tube, surround the edge
of countertops in (e) Top, and separate out the region of interest in (d) Fit, e.g. the higher one out of
two storage spaces. These meaningful geometric entities provide a clear interpretation of learned
eigen-lengths, e.g. in (e) Top’s case, red and green predictions coincide with each other and both
capture the back-to-front length of the countertop.

5.3                                   A S TUDY ON THE ROBUSTNESS AND DATA E FFICIENCY OF G EOMETRY-G ROUNDED
                                      E IGEN -L ENGTHS

Geometry grounding of eigen-lengths can be seen as a form of regularization. We are therefore
curious how the introduction of geometry groundings may influence the robustness of models in
extreme test setups, as well as their data efficiency. We compared the performance of (1) Direct, a
no-eigen-length approach, where an MLP directly predicts the final label from the concatenation
of object and environment latent features. (2) Implicit, the minimal eigen-length-based pipeline
introduced previously; and (3) Grounded, the geometry-grounded version.
Table 1 shows test performances in extreme test conditions with low resolution point clouds or with
extraordinary object scalings. Eigen-length-based approaches exhibit much higher robustness.
Fig. 9 shows the trend of test performances as we change the size of training data. We also plot
the difference between “ground truth” eigen-length measurement directions (local up and right) and
predicted vectors as a way to quantify eigen-length quality. Results suggest that geometry-grounded
version is more data efficient if meaningful geometry groundings emerge. When the training data


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Performance on extreme test cases.
All methods are trained on size = 1024 point
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *URXQGHG
clouds with width w and height h sampled from


                                                                                                                                                                    $QJOH WR *7  
U ([0.4, 1.0]).


                                                                            $FFXUDF\


                             Direct       Implicit       Grounded
                                                                                                                                                 *URXQGHG
                                                                                                                                              'LUHFW
    Default                   99.00        99.15          99.65
    # Points = 64             76.80        93.50          96.17


    w, h ∼ U ([0.2, 0.4])     72.10        98.78          99.72                                                         7UDLQLQJ 6DPSOHV                                                                7UDLQLQJ 6DPSOHV
    w, h ∼ U ([2.0, 3.0])     82.44        98.82          99.63
                                                                       Figure 9: Trend of Left: test accuracy and Right: av-
                                                                       erage angle between learned vector groundings and
                                                                       “groud truth” directions w.r.t. # training samples.

is limited (< 3000 samples), however, the predicted directions of groundings are far from ground
truth measurement directions, suggesting that the model fails to learn meaningful groundings for
eigen-lengths, and thus the final accuracy is lower than Direct.


6      C AN E IGEN -L ENGTHS BE L EARNED IN M ULTI -TASK S ETTINGS AND
       A PPLIED TO N EW TASKS ?

As humans, we are able to develop a library of useful measurements/eigen-lengths like height
from past experience. Given a new task, instead of trying cluelessly, we would start with known
measurements and investigate their role in the task. In this section, we ask if learned eigen-lengths
can work in a similar way, i.e., given a set of training tasks, is it possible to learn a set of eigen-lengths
from them? Further, given a novel task, can we learn to select a subset of learned eigen-lengths that
are sufficient for it? In other words, can agents accumulate and transfer knowledge in the form of
eigen-lengths?

6.1      M ULTI -TASK T ESTBED
We design a set of tasks that share key eigen-lengths as the testbed for multi-task learning. As shown
in Fig.10(a), we consider box-fitting tasks where the box only has a subset of six faces. Each mode of
face existence corresponds to a different task with different geometric constraints. For example, to
be able to fit, an object has to be narrower than the box in task 2 and shorter than the box in task 3.
We set aside the box with all six faces present as the test task. We expect to learn width, height, and
length from the training task set, and learn to use all of them during testing. By boxes with partial
faces, we aim to mimic different types of cavities in the furniture, e.g., closed drawer as a box with
all faces, an open space on the shelf as a box without the front face, etc.

      Test Task      Train Task 1         Train Task 2       Train Task 3                                                                           σ((L1env - L1obj)/𝛕)✕
                                                                                                                    Obj Measure:
                                                                                                          L1obj, L2obj,..., LSobj
                                                                                                                                                    σ((L2env - L2obj)/𝛕)✕                                                                  𝚷                    Pred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (AND)                     Label

                                                                                                                    Env Measure:
                                                                                                         L1env, L2env,..., LSenv                     σ((LSenv - LSobj)/𝛕)✕

                            (a) Task Setting                                                                                             (b) Multi-Task Learning Framework



Figure 10: (a) Multi-Task Setting where each train task uses boxes with certain faces missing as the
environment geometry, and test task uses a complete box; and (b) Learning Framework, where we
use trainable masks to select eigen-length comparison results.

6.2      M ULTI -TASK L EARNING F RAMEWORK
Fig. 10(b) shows the multi-task learning framework we experiment with. From a high level, we
learn a set of S eigen-lengths and allow each task to select relevant ones from them. This selection
step is implemented as a learnable binary mask {mks }s=1,2,...,S over eigen-lengths for each task
Tk . We simply insert the mask in the AND-composition and compute the outcome for Tk as
QS       k        env        obj
   s=1 ms · σ((Ls (E) − Ls (O))/τ ).


                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Multi-Task learning, novel task adaptation results. We finetune eigen-length-based methods
on novel task for 1 epoch and compare them to the direct method trained from scratch for 1 and 100
epochs.
                        (Single Task) Direct    (Eigen-Length) Implicit   (Eigen-Length) Grounded
       Epoch              1              100              1                         1
       Test Accuracy    73.14           88.47            97.71                     99.48


During training, we optimize both the eigen-length prediction networks and a continuous version of
per-task masks m̃k ∈ [0, 1]. At test time, we freeze network weights and only learn a mask to choose
from eigen-lengths learned during training. Notably, we limit the size of test task data to 10 batches
(320 samples) to examine if learned eigen-lengths help in few-shot adaptation scenarios.

6.3   M ULTI -TASK L EARNING AND F EW-S HOT T EST TASK A DAPTATION
We experiment with both implicit and geometry-grounded eigen-length prediction networks. To
analyze the learned eigen-lengths and per-task masks, we visualize learned geometry groundings that
are selected (ms > 0.5) in each task in Fig. 11. Meaningful groundings are learned and correctly
selected for each task, including the test task.
To explore whether eigen-lengths learned during training help quicker adaptation to new tasks, we
compare the test task performance of Implicit, Grounded to Direct trained from scratch on the test task.
All methods are limited to 10 batches of test task samples. As shown in Table 2, within one epoch of
finetuning, methods based on the reuse of learned eigen-lengths already achieve high performance,
surpassing Direct trained from scratch by a large margin, even when the latter has been trained for
100 epochs.


                              Training Tasks                                            Test Task


Figure 11: Learned Geometry Grounding in Multi-Task Setting. We only show learned geometry
grounding (vectors as arrows, planes as disks) selected by the mask in each task.


7     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we formulate a novel learning problem of automatically discovering low-dimensional
geometric eigen-lengths crucial for fitting tasks. We set up a benchmark suite comprising a curated
set of fitting tasks and corresponding datasets, as well as metric and tools for analysis and evaluation.
We demonstrate the feasibility of learning meaningful eigen-lengths as sufficient geometry summary
only from binary task supervision. We show that proper geometry grounding of the eigen-lengths
contributes to their accuracy, interpretability, and robustness. We also make an initial attempt at
learning shared eigen-lengths in multi-task settings and applying them to novel tasks.
Our exploration suggests broad opportunities in this new research direction and reveals many chal-
lenges. For example, grounding eigen-length predictions on geometries requires reasonable choice of
geometric primitives, which relies on inductive bias of the specific tasks considered. It would be a
challenging future direction to build a universal framework that accommodates a wide range of tasks
by leveraging all kinds of geometric primitives and inductive biases. In many task instances, we may
have access to signals beyond binary success or failure, e.g., a possible placement position of the
object. How to leverage these task signals in eigen-length learning remains an open problem. As a
first-step attempt at defining and exploring the challenging problem of eigen-length learning, we do
hope our work can inspire more researchers to work on this important yet underexplored direction.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li,
  Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d
  model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
Boyuan Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and Deepak Pathak. Unsupervised learning of visual 3d keypoints for
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1539–1549. PMLR, 2021.
Nenglun Chen, Lingjie Liu, Zhiming Cui, Runnan Chen, Duygu Ceylan, Changhe Tu, and Wenping
  Wang. Unsupervised learning of intrinsic structural representation points. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9121–9130, 2020.
Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
  Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In
  Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  2180–2188, 2016.
Boyang Deng, Kyle Genova, Soroosh Yazdani, Sofien Bouaziz, Geoffrey Hinton, and Andrea
  Tagliasacchi. Cvxnet: Learnable convex decomposition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 31–44, 2020.
Shengheng Deng, Xun Xu, Chaozheng Wu, Ke Chen, and Kui Jia. 3d affordancenet: A benchmark for
  visual object affordance understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1778–1787, June 2021.
Kyle Genova, Forrester Cole, Daniel Vlasic, Aaron Sarna, William T Freeman, and Thomas
  Funkhouser. Learning shape templates with structured implicit functions. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7154–7164, 2019.
Kyle Genova, Forrester Cole, Avneesh Sud, Aaron Sarna, and Thomas Funkhouser. Local deep
  implicit functions for 3d shape. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4857–4866, 2020.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Xavier Glorot, Arka Pal, Benigno Uria, Charles Blundell, Shakir
   Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. Early visual concept learning with unsupervised deep learning.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05579, 2016.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2017.
Tomas Jakab, Richard Tucker, Ameesh Makadia, Jiajun Wu, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  Keypointdeformer: Unsupervised 3d keypoint discovery for shape control. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12783–12792, 2021.
David Inkyu Kim and Gaurav S Sukhatme. Semantic labeling of 3d point clouds with object
  affordance for robot manipulation. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
 Automation (ICRA), pp. 5578–5584. IEEE, 2014.
Lucas Manuelli, Wei Gao, Peter Florence, and Russ Tedrake. kpam: Keypoint affordances for
  category-level robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.06684, 2019.
Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani.
 Where2act: From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6813–6823, 2021a.
Kaichun Mo, Yuzhe Qin, Fanbo Xiang, Hao Su, and Leonidas Guibas. O2O-Afford: Annotation-free
  large-scale object-object affordance learning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021b.
Despoina Paschalidou, Ali Osman Ulusoy, and Andreas Geiger. Superquadrics revisited: Learning
  3d shape parsing beyond cuboids. In Proceedings IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Despoina Paschalidou, Luc van Gool, and Andreas Geiger. Learning unsupervised hierarchical part
  decomposition of 3d objects from a single rgb image. In Proceedings IEEE Conf. on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017.
Zengyi Qin, Kuan Fang, Yuke Zhu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. Keto: Learning keypoint
  representations for tool manipulation. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 7278–7285. IEEE, 2020.
Pradyumna Reddy, Michael Gharbi, Michal Lukac, and Niloy J Mitra. Im2vec: Synthesizing vector
  graphics without vector supervision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7342–7351, 2021.
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. Yolo9000: better, faster, stronger. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7263–7271, 2017.
Gopal Sharma, Difan Liu, Subhransu Maji, Evangelos Kalogerakis, Siddhartha Chaudhuri, and
  Radomír Měch. Parsenet: A parametric surface fitting network for 3d point clouds. In European
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 261–276. Springer, 2020.
Narayanaswamy Siddharth, Brooks Paige, Jan-Willem Van de Meent, Alban Desmaison, Noah D
  Goodman, Pushmeet Kohli, Frank Wood, and Philip HS Torr. Learning disentangled representations
  with semi-supervised deep generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00400, 2017.
Dmitriy Smirnov, Matthew Fisher, Vladimir G Kim, Richard Zhang, and Justin Solomon. Deep
 parametric shape predictions using distance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 561–570, 2020.
Chun-Yu Sun, Qian-Fang Zou, Xin Tong, and Yang Liu. Learning adaptive hierarchical cuboid
  abstractions of 3d shape collections. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(6):1–13, 2019.
Shubham Tulsiani, Hao Su, Leonidas J. Guibas, Alexei A. Efros, and Jitendra Malik. Learning shape
  abstractions by assembling volumetric primitives. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2017.
Dylan Turpin, Liquan Wang, Stavros Tsogkas, Sven Dickinson, and Animesh Garg. GIFT: Generaliz-
  able Interaction-aware Functional Tool Affordances without Labels. In Proceedings of Robotics:
  Science and Systems, Virtual, July 2021. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2021.XVII.060.
Jiayu Wang, Shize Lin, Chuxiong Hu, Yu Zhu, and Limin Zhu. Learning semantic keypoint
   representations for door opening manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(4):
   6980–6987, 2020.
Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao
  Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. SAPIEN: A
  simulated part-based interactive environment. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
Yanchao Yang, Yutong Chen, and Stefano Soatto. Learning to manipulate individual objects in an
  image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 6558–6567, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

The framework in Section 4 consists of a PointNet and an MLP output head that maps the PointNet
global feature to S scalar values. The architecture is outlined below, where the numbers in the
parenthesis refer to the number of channels in each layer. We use batch normalization and LeakyReLU
after all FC layers, except for the output layer.
                              
                              Per-Point MLP(3 → 64 → 128 → 1024)
                      PointNet ↓
                              
                                Max Pooling
                      ↓
                      MLP(1024 → 256 → S)
Output: S scalars.
The framework in Section 5 consists of VectorNet and WeightNet. VectorNet consists of a PointNet
classification backbone and an MLP output head, as outlined below.
                               
                               Per-Point MLP(3 → 64 → 128 → 1024)
                      PointNet ↓
                               
                                 Max Pooling
                      ↓
                      MLP(1024 → 256 → 3S)
Output: S vectors.
WeightNet consists of a PointNet segmentation backbone and 2S parallel MLP output heads, each
outputs a weight distribution over all points, as outlined below.
                     
                     Per-Point MLP(3 → 64[per-point feature] → 128 → 1024)
             PointNet ↓
                     
                      Max Pooling[global feature]
            Concat(per-point feature, global feature)
             ↓
            MLP((1024 + 64) → 512 → 256 → 128)
             ↓
            Output Weight MLPi (128 → 256 → 1), i = 1, 2, . . . , 2S
             ↓
            SoftMax
Output: 2S sets of per-point weights.
We use LeakyReLU and batch normalization after each FC layer except for the output layers.

A.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

All networks are implemented using PyTorch and optimized by the Adam optimizer, with a learning
rate starting at 10−3 and decay by half every 10 epochs. Each batch contains 32 data points; each
epoch contains around 1600 batches. We train models for ∼ 100 epochs on all tasks. The learnable
parameter τ is initialized with τ = 1. All experiments are run on a single NVIDIA TITAN X GPU.

A.3   DATASET D ETAILS

Table 3 and 4 summarizes the statistics of environment/object shapes used in our dataset. Each shape
is drawn with probability in inverse proportion to the number of shapes in its category, such that each
object category appears with similar frequency in the final dataset.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Table 3: Environment Shape Statistics.
           Box   Microwave     Refrigerator     Safe        Storage Furniture    Table     Washing Machine   Total
 Train      21             9              34         21                   272      70                  13     440
 Test        7             3               9          7                    73      25                   3     127


                                      Table 4: Object Shape Statistics.
                                                          Train
                 Basket   Bottle     Bowl      Box        Can     Pot    Mug    TrashCan     Total
                    77       16       128       17         65      16    134          25      478
                                                          Test
                          Bucket        Dispenser                  Jar            Kettle     Total
                             33                 9                 528                26       554


During data generation for the tasks where both the environment and the object are ShapeNet objects,
we apply random scaling s ∼ U ([0.9, 1.1]) to the environment objects, set all joints to closed state
and sample M = 1024 points from the object model. Given an object-environment pair, we randomly
sample T = 1000 candidate positions in the environment point cloud, and check whether placement
of the object at each candidate satisfy the task specification using SAPIEN (Xiang et al., 2020)
simulation. If all candidates fail, we label the pair as negative, otherwise as positive. Specifically, the
candidate positions are sampled from “applicable and possible regions" following Mo et al. (2021b)’s
definition. For example, we only consider points with upward facing normals, and for task (e) only
consider points with close to highest z coordinates. We generated around 75K training data and 20K
testing data for each task.

B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
B.1      G EOMETRIC G ROUNDING V ISUALIZATION AND FAILURE C ASE D ISCUSSION

Fig. 12 and 13 show more visualizations of the learned eigen-lengths in the three tasks from the main
paper. Our framework is able to learn reasonable eigen-lengths that measure along crucial directions.
These eigen-lengths are also grounded by planes that suggest the relevant part of object which
supports the task. In experiments with primitive shapes as environments, the learned planes almost
overlap with the box/tube faces. In experiments with ShapeNet container objects as environments,
especially task (d) (Fit, or container fitting) as shown in Fig. 13, locating the relevant part becomes
more challenging. As this usually involves finding cavities in a shape and selecting the largest one.
Fig. 13 shows examples of our learned eigen-lengths, most of which make sense, as shown in (a)-(o).
We are able to ignore irrelevant parts, e.g. the legs of tables, and find the part of object that affords
the "containment" task, e.g. the drawer in (b), the closet in (c). When there are many cavities that
afford the same task, the network picks the largest one, e.g. in (d) and (k).

Failure Cases. We also observe some failure cases where the learned eigen-lengths are inaccurate.
Fig. 13(p)-(t) shows the most representative ones. (p) shows a relatively complex shape, where the
network struggles to find the correct width of the drawer. (q) and (r) show cases where the network
finds the wrong cavity. According to our task definition, the object can only be placed in the drawer
part in (q). Instead, the network finds the part on top of the drawer. In (r), the network finds the second
largest cavity instead of the largest one at the bottom. (s) shows an extreme case where the height of
the pizza box is much smaller than the other two extents. As objects usually have correlated extents,
comparing height suffices most of the time. The network probably lacks the motivation to precisely
capture the width and the length of the pizza box, resulting in the underestimation of width and length
in (s). Finally, our formulation, i.e. the AND clause of three eigen-length comparisons, can not fully
and precisely describe the nature of this task. The washing machine in (t) has a cylinder-shaped
cavity, which our network tries to approximate by a cuboid, which is reasonable within the range
of its expressive power but not accurate. Also, there could be shapes that do not have a "largest"


                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


IURQW YLHZ


                                               D 7XEH 3DVVLQJ
WRS YLHZ
LQVWDQFH


                                             H  &RXQWHUWRS 3ODFLQJ


Figure 12: Additional qualitative results. We visualize the learned vectors and planes for (a) Tube
Passing and (e) Countertop Placing. We show all eigen-lengths in the front(a)/top(e) view. We also
show the underlying instances in task (e) countertop placing for a clearer understanding of the object
structure. Note that though some joints are "open" for visualization purpose, all instances in the
dataset are at their rest state.

cavity, e.g. some drawers in a closet may be designed for tall and narrow things, while others are
designed for flat things. To deal with arbitrary objects, the extents of both types of drawers are useful.
Introducing more complex and flexible formulations, e.g. in Section D, would help better capture the
complexity of the task.

B.2          C ORRELATION A NALYSIS R ESULTS

We show here the scatter plots and correlation R2 values between all prediction eigen-lengths and all
presumable geometric measurements. R2 value, or coefficient of determination, is a metric in [0, 1]
reflecting linear correlation between two variables. The closer R2 is to 1, the more linearly correlated
the two variables are. Given two set of samples xi , yi , where i = 1, 2, . . . , n, R2 is defined between
yi and the least squares linear regression of yi on xi , ỹ(xi ):
                                                P                  2
                                                   i (yi − ỹ(xi ))
                                     R2 = 1 − P                   2 ,
                                                      i (yi − ȳ)

where ȳ = n1 i yi is the mean value of yi .
               P

Results from Eigen-Length-Implicit are shown in Fig. 14. Results from Eigen-Length-Grounded
are shown in Fig. 15. We can clearly see the one-to-one correspondence between predictions and
presumable measurements. R2 is close to or greater than 0.9 where the prediction is the match for
the measurements, otherwise the value is much smaller. It is more apparent in the Eigen-Length-
Grounded variant, where R2 values are close to the theoretical bound 1 when it matches. The models
can learn a compact and appropriate set of eigen-lengths from binary task supervision. Also note
that the extraneous prediction slot in task (e) (Top, or countertop placing) become degenerate with
another prediction slot, as has mentioned before in main text.

C            A PPLYING R ANDOM ROTATIONS TO I NPUT E NVIRONMENT G EOMETRIES
C.1          F ORMULATION AND I MPLEMENTATION

While the object shape is randomly rotated in all experiments in the main paper, we take environment
geometry directly from ShapeNetChang et al. (2015) where shapes are axis-aligned. In this section,
we consider a more challenging setting where the environment geometry is also randomly rotated.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Specifically, we consider a “rotated” version of the Container Fitting task and Tube Passing task in
the main paper. For each original data point, i.e. a container/tube-object pair with a boolean label
((object point cloud Po , environment point cloud Pe ), success label L), we sample a random rotation
R and apply it to both the container and the object. We feed (RPo , RPe ) to the network described in
Section 5 and supervise the network with the same label L.

C.2    C ORRELATION A NALYSIS AND R ESULT V ISUALIZATION

We show the correlation analysis of learned eigen-lengths in Fig. 16. A strong, disentangled
correlation between learned eigen-lengths and human-hypothesized ones can still be observed.
We also visualize the learned geometry groundings in Fig. 17. The predicted planes roughly align
with the main cavities of the objects. From the results, we can see that the proposed problem setting
is still valid and the studied methods can still be applicable and produce reasonable results.

D     E XTENDING AND C LAUSES TO D ISJUNCTIVE N ORMAL F ORM (DNF)
D.1    F ORMULATION

We employ the AND clause formulation for all tasks shown in the main paper. Namely, after learning
a library of paired object/environment eigen-lengths {(Lenv  obj
                                                        s , Ls )}s , we compose them by
                                           ^
                             T̂ (E, O) =         [Lenv        obj
                                                   s (E) > Ls (O)],
                                          s=1,2,...,S

(selection mask m is omitted for clarity), approximated by
                                        Y
                       T̃ (E, O) =             σ((Lenv      obj
                                                   s (E) − Ls (O))/τ ).
                                      s=1,2,...,S


Here we show we can extend this formulation to the more general Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF),
where an OR connects multiple AND clauses. Each AND clause composes eigen-length comparison
results of a subset of eigen-lengths. The result of each AND clause is then aggregated by an OR
operator. More precisely,
                                        _ ^
                            T̂ (E, O) =           [Lenv       obj
                                                    s (E) > Ls (O)].
                                         Ua ∈U s∈Ua


U = {Ua }a specifies the subset Ua of eigen-lengths in each AND clause. We similarly use a
differentiable approximation during training:
                                   Y          Y
                   T̃ (E, O) = 1 −      (1 −    σ((Lenv      obj
                                                    s (E) − Ls (O))/τ )).
                                     Ua ∈U      s∈Ua


The introduction of two-level logic and the OR operator helps express more complex reasoning and
deal with a wider range of tasks. For example, many realistic tasks have multiple solutions. OR
captures the relationship that the task can be executed if any, not necessarily all, of the solutions work.

D.2    TASK AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

To demonstrate our framework’s compatibility with this new formulation, we experiment with the
Multi-Tube Passing task. This is a variant of task (a) (Tube, or tube passing) in the main paper, where
we have two tubes of random sizes placed next to each other. As long as the object can be translated
and passed through any of these tubes, the task is considered as successful.
Similar to tube passing, we randomly sample the extents of the tubes, the shape, scale, and rotation of
the object. The center of the two tubes are always at two fixed positions on the y-axis.
We set the number of eigen-lengths to learn as S = 4 and split them into two disjoint AND groups,
namely U = {{1, 2}, {3, 4}}. Ideally, the learned eigen-lengths should correspond to the height and
width of the tubes. Also, the height and width of the same tube should be in the same AND group.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3    R ESULT V ISUALIZATION

Fig. 18 visualizes the learned eigen-lengths, where green and yellow belong to one group, purple and
red belong to another group. We successfully learn eigen-lengths that measure along the height/width
directions of the tubes. We also learn them in correct groups, where width and height of the same
tube are paired together.


E     D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

E.1   D EFINITION OF E IGEN -L ENGTHS AND A PPLICATION S COPE OF THE E XPLORED
      F RAMEWORK

In our setting, an eigen-length is whatever scalar measurement (i.e., just a 1D scalar) the network
invents to best perform its stated downstream task. While this definition for eigen-dimensions is quite
general and could be applicable to any object as long as there exist certain 1D eigen-lengths that are
crucial and useful for checking the feasibility of accomplishing a downstream task, we are assuming
in our current experiments that having such sets of 1D eigen-lengths are sufficient for the tasks.
Therefore, our current setting would not apply to the tasks where having only such low-dimensional
eigen-lengths is not sufficient, such as the tasks of geometric contour matching and object collision
checking.

E.2   B ROADER I MPLICATION OF THE S TUDIED A PPROACH FOR AI AND ROBOTICS

We believe the general approach we suggest can have very general applicability in AI and robotics,
where the solution to downstream tasks suggests the emergence of generally useful geometric concepts
such as length, height, width, and radius in unsupervised ways. As we described in the introduction,
learning such compact useful geometric eigen-lengths is beneficial in the ways that 1) they are highly
interpretable, while most of the current learned representations in neural networks are opaque and
learned as black-box hidden features which may be unreliable or untrustworthy, 2) they could be
shared and reused across different tasks, enabling fast adaptation to novel test-time tasks, and 3) the
proposed learning formulation may discover novel yet crucial geometric eigen-lengths that are even
unknown to us humans given the new test-time tasks. Furthermore, there could be more geometric
concepts of great interest and importance that future work can explore in this direction. Examples can
be 1) symmetry, as a result of trying to complete 3D shapes, 2) regular object arrangements and poses
as a tool for efficient search, and 3) tracking, as an essential capability for predicting the outcome
of sports games. In other words, we want learning networks to invent the notions so symmetry,
regularity, or tracking. If such capabilities could emerge from purely unsupervised learning, we no
longer need to rely on black-box-like neural networks and human annotations for this geometric
information over 3D objects.

E.3   ROTATION OF O BJECTS D URING TASK E XECUTION

In our experiments, we are primarily concerned with translational motion during task execution. This
setting stems from practical concerns: in many robotic manipulation scenarios, the rotation of the
object is often given as the desired target to achieve by robot planners or unchangeable during robotic
grasping and manipulation. For example, the robot gripper may only be able to grasp, hold and move
the mug without spilling the content and with steady grasping in certain poses for a pick-and-place
task and the robot may not be able to freely rotate the object as the arm kinematics may not allow.
That being said, our cylinder fitting task does allow rotation along the up-axis for the object and
similarly, the sphere fitting task allows the full SO(3)-space rotation, while for other tasks, in the
case that multiple poses of the object are possible, we can simply pass the object in different poses
into the same network for multiple times to query the joint fitting feasibility.

E.4   D ETERMINING THE N UMBER OF E IGEN -L ENGTHS TO L EARN

The number of eigen-lengths to learn, i.e. S, is a hyperparameter of our learning framework and
has to be set in advance. However, it should be interpreted as the upper bound on the number of


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


eigen-lengths the system can learn, and does not have to be the “groundtruth” number of relevant
eigen-lengths. As shown in Sec. 4.3 and Sec. 5.2, when we set S = 3 for the countertop fitting task
where only two eigen-lengths matter, the extra “slot” either degenerates or coincides with other slots.
Such cases can be easily detected and filtered, and the actual number of relevant eigen-lengths can
be discovered. Setting a maximum number for an unknown number of targets is also a common
practice in problems like object detection Redmon & Farhadi (2017). That being said, a more flexible
mechanism that allows an arbitrary number of eigen-lengths would be desirable, especially for objects
with complex compositional structures like robotic arms or closets with many drawers. We leave this
as a future direction.

F    N EGATIVE S OCIAL I MPACT
Our work joins the initial efforts of eigen-length emergence in unsupervised learning settings with
many other works along this direction. There could be several bias in the data and training objectives,
but this is a general concern shared by most works in this field. Our work may also share the
controversial arguments with other works that the future AI agents may have the capability of
thinking by themselves causing threats for human beings. However, the results demonstrated in our
work are way far from that. Other than these potential issues mentioned above, we do not see any
other major concerns our work particularly introduces.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


IURQW YLHZ
WRS YLHZ
LQVWDQFH


             D                 E                    F                    G                   H
IURQW YLHZ
WRS YLHZ
LQVWDQFH


             I                 J                    K                    L                    M
IURQW YLHZ
WRS YLHZ
LQVWDQFH


             N                 O                    P                    Q                   R
IURQW YLHZ
WRS YLHZ
LQVWDQFH


             S                 T                       U                 V                    W



Figure 13: Additional qualitative results in Container Fitting. We show eigen-lengths in two
views together with the underlying object following Fig. 12 (d). (a)-(o) are successful cases where
the learned planes correctly separate out the largest cavity in the object. (p)-(t) show failure cases.

                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                         5                                                                                              5                                                                                               5                                                                                   5                                                                                        5

3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                             D  7XEH <                                                                                       D  7XEH =                                                                                    E  &\OLQGHU 5                                                                     E  &\OLQGHU +                                                                          F  6SKHUH 5
                                                         5                                                                                              5                                                                                               5                                                                                   5                                                                                        5

3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                             D  7XEH <                                                                                       D  7XEH =                                                                                    E  &\OLQGHU 5                                                                     E  &\OLQGHU +                                                                      I  0XJ +ROGHU 5
                                                         5                                                                                              5                                                                                               5                                                                                   5                                                                                        5

3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                             H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW <
                                                         5                                                                                              5                                                                                               5                                                                                   5                                                                                        5

        3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                  3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                             H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW <
                                                         5                                                                                              5                                                                                               5                                                                                   5                                                                                        5

3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                          3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                             H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW <


Figure 14: Full correlation plots and respective R2 values between ground truth measurements
and predicted eigen-lengths from Eigen-Length-Implicit.



                                                        5                                                                                               5                                                                                                5                                                                                   5                                                                                         5


3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                            3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                              H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW <
                                                        5                                                                                               5                                                                                                5                                                                                   5                                                                                         5


           3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                       3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                              H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW <
                                                        5                                                                                               5                                                                                                5                                                                                   5                                                                                         5

3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                            3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                       G  )LW  2EMHFW ;                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW <                                                                          G  )LW  2EMHFW =                                                              H  7RS  2EMHFW ;                                                                   H  7RS  2EMHFW <


Figure 15: Full correlation plots and respective R2 values between ground truth measurements
and predicted eigen-lengths from Eigen-Length-Grounded.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                           R2 = 0.0156                                                                                              R2 = 0.8859
                                           2.0                                                                                                    2.0

                                           1.8                                                                                                    1.8

                                           1.6                                                                                                    1.6

                                           1.4                                                                                                    1.4

                            Prediction 1


                                                                                                                                   Prediction 1
                                           1.2                                                                                                    1.2

                                           1.0                                                                                                    1.0

                                           0.8                                                                                                    0.8

                                           0.6                                                                                                    0.6

                                                    0.6     0.8      1.0         1.2            1.4           1.6   1.8                                  0.6         0.8   1.0              1.2        1.4   1.6    1.8
                                                                                 Tube Y                                                                                                    Tube Z
                                                                           R2 = 0.9852                                                                                              R2 = 0.0021
                                           2.0                                                                                                    2.0

                                           1.8                                                                                                    1.8

                                           1.6                                                                                                    1.6

                                           1.4                                                                                                    1.4
                            Prediction 2


                                                                                                                                   Prediction 2
                                           1.2                                                                                                    1.2

                                           1.0                                                                                                    1.0

                                           0.8                                                                                                    0.8

                                           0.6                                                                                                    0.6

                                           0.4                                                                                                    0.4
                                                    0.6     0.8      1.0         1.2            1.4           1.6   1.8                                  0.6         0.8   1.0              1.2        1.4   1.6    1.8
                                                                                 Tube Y                                                                                                    Tube Z

                                                  R2 = 0.5404                                                                   R2 = 0.8919                                                                    R2 = 0.4326
               1.75                                                                                   1.75                                                                                1.75
               1.50                                                                                   1.50                                                                                1.50
               1.25                                                                                   1.25                                                                                1.25
Prediction 1


                                                                                       Prediction 1


                                                                                                                                                                           Prediction 1


               1.00                                                                                   1.00                                                                                1.00
               0.75                                                                                   0.75                                                                                0.75
               0.50                                                                                   0.50                                                                                0.50
               0.25                                                                                   0.25                                                                                0.25
               0.00                                                                                   0.00                                                                                0.00
                      0.0                    0.5           1.0             1.5                               0.0          0.5                      1.0         1.5                               0.0         0.5          1.0     1.5
                                                 (d) Fit, Object X                                                              (d) Fit, Object Y                                                             (d) Fit, Object Z
                                                  R2 = 0.5033                                                                   R2 = 0.4208                                                                    R2 = 0.9963
               1.50                                                                                   1.50                                                                                1.50
               1.25                                                                                   1.25                                                                                1.25
Prediction 2


                                                                                       Prediction 2


                                                                                                                                                                           Prediction 2


               1.00                                                                                   1.00                                                                                1.00
               0.75                                                                                   0.75                                                                                0.75
               0.50                                                                                   0.50                                                                                0.50
               0.25                                                                                   0.25                                                                                0.25
               0.00                                                                                   0.00                                                                                0.00
                      0.0                    0.5           1.0             1.5                               0.0          0.5                      1.0         1.5                               0.0         0.5          1.0     1.5
                                                 (d) Fit, Object X                                                              (d) Fit, Object Y                                                             (d) Fit, Object Z
                                                  R2 = 0.8939                                                                   R2 = 0.5818                                                                    R2 = 0.5496
               1.75                                                                                   1.75                                                                                1.75
               1.50                                                                                   1.50                                                                                1.50
               1.25                                                                                   1.25                                                                                1.25
Prediction 3


                                                                                       Prediction 3


                                                                                                                                                                           Prediction 3


               1.00                                                                                   1.00                                                                                1.00
               0.75                                                                                   0.75                                                                                0.75
               0.50                                                                                   0.50                                                                                0.50
               0.25                                                                                   0.25                                                                                0.25
               0.00                                                                                   0.00                                                                                0.00
                      0.0                    0.5           1.0             1.5                               0.0          0.5                      1.0         1.5                               0.0         0.5          1.0     1.5
                                                 (d) Fit, Object X                                                              (d) Fit, Object Y                                                             (d) Fit, Object Z


Figure 16: Full correlation plots and respective R2 values between human-hypothesized measure-
ments and predicted eigen-lengths in rotated Tube Passing and rotated Container Fitting, respectively.
Correspondences between predicted eigen-lengths and human-hypothesized ones can be observed.


                                                                                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 17: Visualization of learned geometry groundings in rotated Tube Passing and rotated
Container Fitting, respectively. Vectors are visualized as arrows, and planes are visualized as disks.
For Container Fitting, we also show the underlying geometry (before rotation) for better reference.
The learned vectors and planes roughly align with the rotated object. Regions of interest like drawers
are also selected by planes.


Figure 18: Visualization of the eigen-lengths learned with OR-AND clauses. Green and yellow,
purple and red eigen-lengths belong to the same AND-group. It turns out that each group attends to
one of the tubes and captures its width and height.


                                                 21
