Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ETRO : M EMORY-E NHANCED T RANSFORMER FOR
R ETROSYNTHETIC P LANNING VIA R EACTION T REE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Retrosynthetic planning plays a critical role in drug discovery and organic chem-
         istry. Starting from a target molecule as the root node, it aims to find a complete
         reaction tree subject to the constraint that all leaf nodes belong to a set of starting
         materials. The multi-step reactions are crucial because they determine the flow chart
         in the production of the Organic Chemical Industry. However, existing datasets lack
         curation of tree-structured multi-step reactions, and fail to provide such reaction
         trees, limiting models’ understanding of organic molecule transformations. In this
         work, we first develop a benchmark curated for the retrosynthetic planning task,
         which consists of 124,869 reaction trees retrieved from the public USPTO-full
         dataset. On top of that, we propose Metro: Memory-Enhanced Transformer for
         RetrOsynthetic planning. Specifically, the dependency among molecules in the
         reaction tree is captured as context information for multi-step retrosynthesis predic-
         tions through transformers with a memory module. Extensive experiments show
         that Metro dramatically outperforms existing single-step retrosynthesis models
         by at least 10.7% in top-1 accuracy. The experiments demonstrate the superiority
         of exploiting context information in the retrosynthetic planning task. Moreover,
         the proposed model can be directly used for synthetic accessibility analysis, as
         it is trained on reaction trees with the shortest depths. Our work is the first step
         towards a brand new formulation for retrosynthetic planning in the aspects of data
         construction, model design, and evaluation.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Retrosynthetic planning is a fundamental problem in organic chemistry (Coley et al., 2018a; Genheden
et al., 2020). The goal of retrosynthetic planning is to find a series of starting molecules that go
through a sequence of reactions, which can also be represented as reaction tree, to synthesize the
target molecule. Retrosynthetic planning can be decomposed into multi-step retrosynthesis reactions
through which we find all starting molecules that meet the requirements. The multi-step reactions
outline the transformation direction of organic molecules and the transformation target. In the
production of the Organic Chemical Industry, it requires us to design efficient organic synthesis routes
to synthesize our desired target products at a low cost. Therefore, given a target molecule, predicting
reasonable and efficient reaction routes to synthesize this molecule is a very crucial problem in both
machine learning and organic chemistry (Segler et al., 2018).
To tackle this problem, past works, including MCTS (Segler et al., 2018), DFPN-E (Kishimoto
et al., 2019), Retro*(Chen et al., 2020), self-improved retrosynthetic planning (Kim et al., 2021),
RetroGraph (Xie et al., 2022), and Grasp (Yu et al., 2022), model the retrosynthetic planning as a
search problem (Xie et al., 2022). Specifically, they first utilize reactions to train a template-based
MLP retrosynthesis model (Segler et al., 2017) and then learn a search algorithm to perform a
backward search to transform the molecules through retrosynthesis predictions until all the reactants
are starting materials (Chen et al., 2020). The current benchmark for test evaluation of retrosynthetic
planning models consists of 189 test routes (Chen et al., 2020).
These approaches have the following limitations: 1) the training dataset of single-step reactions limits
the understanding of the transformation of organic molecules as a sequence of chaining chemical
reactions. 2) past works use single-step retrosynthesis models, which neglect the context information
in the reaction tree. 3) the test set is too small to comprehensively evaluate the performance. 4) the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


evaluation unit of existing benchmark is the reaction route which is one path from the root node to
the leaf node in the reaction tree.
In this work, we address these limitations by first constructing a new benchmark with 124,869
reaction trees retrieved from the public USPTO dataset and leverage the retrosynthesis transformer
with an additional memory module to capture reaction tree information for retrosynthetic planning.

Benchmark. SCScore (Coley et al., 2018b) concludes that the number of steps required to synthesize
a molecule is an accurate metric for estimating molecule synthetic accessibility. Based on this
observation and inspired by the prediction of synthesis accessibility with reaction knowledge graph (Li
& Chen, 2022), we construct a reaction graph from the existing reactions in the database. On the
reaction graph, directed edges represent retrosynthesis reactions where the starting point denotes the
product molecule and the ending point represents the reactant molecule to synthesize this product.
Given a target molecule, we can search the shortest routes to form an efficient reaction tree from
the reaction graph, while the ending points of these routes are the starting molecules that satisfy the
requirements. By constructing the reaction trees for target molecules, we can obtain a new benchmark
for our retrosynthetic planning task.

Metro. In this work, we propose Metro: Memory-Enhanced Transformer for RetrOsynthetic
planning by extending Transformer with an additional memory module. Our proposed Metro can
capture the dependency among the molecules on the reaction route as context information. By taking
the context information into consideration, we can control the search within a reasonable reaction
space specified for the reaction route. Extensive experimental results on retrosynthetic planning show
that Metro achieves up to 13.2%, 14.5%, 11.1%, 10.5%, and 10.0% over transformer on top-1, top-2,
top-3, top-4, and top-5 accuracy, which demonstrates the superiority of exploiting context information
for retrosynthetic planning task.

2    P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we formally define important terminologies used in the rest of the paper, including
SMILES representation, starting material, and reaction tree.

SMILES Representation. The simplified molecule-input line-entry system (SMILES) (Weininger,
1988) is a chemical specification for describing the structure of chemical compounds using strings.
Organic compounds can be denoted by SMILE representations like in Fig. 1, which is well suited
for machine learning models to process. We denote the SMILES representation of molecule x
as s(x), where s(x)i is the character at the i-th position of the string s(x). Given a reaction
r1 + r2 + . . . + rn → p, the SMILES representation of this reaction is as follows:
                                   s(r1 ).s(r2 ) . . . s(rn ) → s(p),                           (1)
where multiple reactants are concatenated by “.” in the SMILES representation.

Starting Material. We denote the space of all chemical molecules as M. The starting materials are
a special set of molecules, denoted as S ⊆ M. AiZynthFinder (Genheden et al., 2020) defines the
starting material as a commercially purchasable compound. ZINC (Sterling & Irwin, 2015) releases
the open source databases of purchasable compounds. We define this list of compounds in these
databases as our starting materials.

Reaction Tree and Reaction Routes. Given the above definitions, we can denote a reaction
tree (Shibukawa et al., 2020; Nguyen & Tsuda, 2021) as T = {T, R, I, τ }, where T ∈ M \ S is
the product molecule we desire to synthesize (A in Fig. 1), R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rn } ⊆ S is the set
of starting materials (E, F, G, H in Fig. 1) that go through a series of reactions τ to synthesize A,
and I = {m1 , m2 , . . . , mu } ⊆ M \ S is the set of intermediate products (B, C, D in Fig. 1) where
intermediate products are formed from reactants or intermediate products and then react further to
give the final product or produce intermediate products. A reaction tree consists of multiple reaction
routes. A reaction route is a path from the target molecule to a starting material in the reaction tree.
According to the definition, the number of reaction routes is equal to the number of starting materials.
We denote reaction route as l, the set of reaction routes as L = {l1 , l2 , . . . , ln }, and we have
                                      τ = τl1 ∪ τl2 ∪ · · · ∪ τln ,                                   (2)


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                         O=C(Cl)c1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1Cl>
                                         O=C(Cl)c1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1Cl                         Cl
                                                                                                         >O=C(O)c1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1Cl
                                                       C Cl                                          Cl

                                                                                                          OH   G
                                                                  Cl            Cl                                              c1ccc2c(c1)CNc1ccccc1C2
                                                                                                     O
                   O                Cl   Cl       Cl
                                                                       Cl
                                                                                           O              [O-][S+](Cl)Cl                      F
                               NH                                 O                        S         H                                            NH
                   N                                                                 Cl         Cl         O               O
                                                              O
                               O                                                     NH2                               N+
                                         Cl                   N                                            N               O-
                                                                                                                                                       O

                             A                                                                                                                         N+
                                                                                                                                                            O-
                                                                                                                                     Cl
               O=C(Nc1ccc(C(=O)N2Cc3ccccc3Cc              B                                               D
               3ccccc32)cc1)c1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1Cl                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                              E
                                               Nc1ccc(C(=O)N2Cc3cc                  O=C(c1ccc([N+](=O)[O-
                                               ccc3Cc3ccccc32)cc1                   ])cc1)N1Cc2ccccc2Cc2ccccc21                   O=C(Cl)c1ccc([N+](=O)
                                                                                                                                  [O-])cc1



Figure 1: Reaction tree. Given the definition in Eq. (3), the depth of this tree is 3, which means the
depth of the longest reaction route is 3. A is the desired product molecule to be synthesized. B, C,
and D are the intermediate product molecules. E, F, G, and H are the starting molecules.

where τli is the set of reactions accompanying this reaction route li . As illustrated in Fig. 1, A->B-
>D->E is one of the reaction routes in this tree. We denote the depth DT of a reaction tree as the
length of the longest reaction route in this tree, where
                                                         DT = max Dli .                                                                                          (3)
                                                                                i

The depth of a reaction tree is also the number of steps required to synthesize a molecule from a fixed
set of commercially purchasable compounds. Note that in this paper, the default order of the reaction
route is the retrosynthesis order.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION OF R ETROSYNTHETIC P LANNING
In this section, we formally give the problem formulation and the goal of retrosynthetic planning.

Single-Step Retrosynthesis. Given a target product molecule T ∈ M, the goal of retrosynthesis
is to predict a set of reactants R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rn } ⊆ M that can react to synthesize this product,
which can be formulated as:
                                                   T → R.

Retrosynthetic Planning. Given a target molecule T ∈ M, the goal of retrosynthetic planning is to
search for the starting materials R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rn } ⊆ S that can synthesize the target molecule
through a set of chemical reactions τ = {R1 , R2 , . . . , Rm }, which can be formulated as follows:
                                                          T → I → R,                                                                                             (4)
where I ⊆ M \ S is the set of intermediate product molecules.

The Goal of Retrosynthetic Planning. Our goal of retrosynthetic planning is to find the reaction
tree with minimum depth to synthesize the target molecule. The reaction routes for retrosynthetic
planning we construct follow the principle of finding starting materials as early as possible. This
principle guides the transformation direction of the molecules, thus enabling our machine learning
models to make predictions on the best retrosynthesis direction. Moreover, what needs to be declared
is that molecule synthesis accessibility is a part of our work due to the construction of the dataset. By
predicting the reaction tree with minimum depth, we can also make a prediction of the number of
steps needed to synthesize a target molecule.

4    N EW B ENCHMARK BASED ON R EACTION T REES
In this section, we describe the details of how to construct the new benchmark. Current bench-
mark (Chen et al., 2020) has the two limitations: 1) the test size is too small to evaluate the
performance of models, 2) the dataset is based on reaction route instead of reaction tree. Therefore,
we build a new benchmark based on reaction trees. The benchmark construction consists of three
steps: reaction graph construction, reaction tree traversal, and dataset split.


                                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        A        O
                                   NH
                                           Cl          Cl
                                                                       ^O=C(Nc1ccc(C(=O)N2Cc3c
                 N
                                   O                                   cccc3Cc3ccccc32)cc1)c1cc(Cl
                                                                       )cc(Cl)c1Cl$
                                                       Cl


        B
                           O


                           N
                                                     NH2
                                                                       ^Nc1ccc(C(=O)N2Cc3cccc        Encoder          Memory
                                                                       c3Cc3ccccc32)cc1$
                                                                                                     Module           Module
                           O                           O
                                                                       ^O=C(c1ccc([N+](=O)[O-
            D
                                                     N+
                           N                           O-
                                                                       ])cc1)N1Cc2ccccc2Cc2ccccc
                                                                       21$
                                                                                                     Concatenated
                                                                            Output (right shift)      Embedding       Output (left shift)          B                            C
                                                      C                                                                                                                         Cl

                                                                        ^O=C(Cl)c1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1
                                                                                                                                                   O

                                                                                                                    O=C(Cl)c1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1
        O                                       Cl


 B
                                                                                                                                                            NH2                      Cl

                                                                                                                                                                  +
                     NH2                               Cl
                                                                                                                                                   N

                       +                                                Cl.Nc1ccc(C(=O)N2Cc3cc
        N

                                Cl
                                                             Cl
                                                                                                                    Cl.Nc1ccc(C(=O)N2Cc3c                             Cl
                                                                                                                                                                                          Cl



                                                                        ccc3Cc3ccccc32)cc1
                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                       O
                                                                                                                    cccc3Cc3ccccc32)cc1$
                               O                             O
                                                            N+
                                                                        ^O=C(c1ccc([N+](=O)[O-       Decoder         O=C(c1ccc([N+](=O)[O-
                                                                                                                                                   O


                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                            N+
                                                                                                                                                             O-
                                                                                                                                                                      D
                D                                                       ])cc1)N1Cc2ccccc2Cc2cccc                     ])cc1)N1Cc2ccccc2Cc2cc
                                                                                                     Module
                               N                             O-



                                                                        c21                                          ccc21$
                                                                   F                                                c1ccc2c(c1)CNc1ccccc1C2.   E                  F        O
                                                            O
                                                                        ^c1ccc2c(c1)CNc1ccccc1C                                                    NH
                                                                                                                                                                           N+
                                                                                                                                                                                O-


    E                                                                                                                                                   +
            NH
                                                                                                                    O=C(Cl)c1ccc([N+](=O)[O
                                                            N+


                           +
                                                                  O-
                                                                        2.O=C(Cl)c1ccc([N+](=O)[
                                                                                                                                                            Cl
                               Cl

                                       O
                                                                        O-])cc1                                     -])cc1$                                       O


Figure 2: Model overview. Our model consists of three modules: encoder, memory module, and
decoder. The three styles of → mean the three different retrosynthesis reactions on the reaction route.

Reaction Graph Construction. We extract all the reactions from USPTO-all dataset (Lowe, 2012)
and build a directed reaction graph. This is partially inspired by the construction of the reaction
knowledge graph in (Li & Chen, 2022), which is used to identify the minimum steps needed to
synthesize molecules for synthesis accessibility analysis. Let G = {V, E} denote the directed graph,
where V is set of nodes {v1 , v2 , · · · , vN } with |V| = N and E is the set of edges. On this graph G, vi
is the molecule that exists in the reaction database and (vi , vj )(vi → vj ) is the directed edge which
means vi and vj exists in the same retrosynthesis reaction where vi is the product molecule and vj is
one of the reactants. One molecule can be a product or reactant on the graph.

Reaction Tree Traversal. We perform reaction tree traversal after reaction graph construction. We
treat the nodes whose in-degree is 0 as our desired product molecules, which can be represented as
Vp . Given one node v ∈ Vp , we perform dynamic programming and backtracking to find all the
                  (1)  (2)          (s)
reaction trees {Tv , Tv , · · · , Tv } where the leaf nodes are starting materials for v. For two trees
which have different retrosynthesis reactions for the same product, we think these are different trees.

Dataset Split. We first build the reaction graph based on all the reactions in the database, in order
to identify reaction trees with smaller depth (Chen et al., 2020). We then split the reaction trees
into training/validation/test datasets. This procedure aligns with the scenario in real-world organic
chemical production, where we have access to a huge database of reactions and we can find the
reaction tree with the shortest depth with our dataset construction method. Although the reaction tree
of the training and test datasets will have overlapping reactions, we only select the target molecule
that does not exist in the training dataset in the testing phase and do not provide any information
about the reaction tree of this target molecule to avoid information leakage. Moreover, many organic
synthesis routes share basic chemical reactions. Therefore, it is reasonable that the reaction trees in
the training and test datasets have overlapping reactions. Note that there may be several reactions to
synthesize a target molecule, leading to multiple reaction trees. We extract the reaction trees with the
minimum depth as our dataset according to the synthetic accessibility criteria (Li & Chen, 2022).


5       M ETRO

In this section, we describe the details of our proposed Metro. Our model is based on single-step
retrosynthesis transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017; Karpov et al., 2019). We further propose a memory
module that can capture the dependencies between molecules on the retrosynthesis route as context
information. We don’t rely on a template to formulate the reaction pattern or labeling number (Lin
et al., 2022) to extract the reaction center. The training and inference can be done in an end-to-end
manner. Fig. 2 outlines the sketch of our model.


                                                                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.1     OVERVIEW OF M ETRO

5.1.1    A RCHITECTURE
As shown in Fig .2, our model consists of three components: encoder, memory module, and decoder.
The input for the encoder is the SMILES representations of the product molecules (A, B, D) on the
same reaction route. The SMILES representations of molecules have been processed. We add the
start symbol ∧ and the end symbol $ for the input. We also put the output in the decoder. But there
is a difference between the output SMILES fed into the decoder and the output SMILES predicted
by the decoder. We add the start symbol ∧ (right shift) on the former output SMILES and the end
symbol $ (left shift) on the later output SMILES. So there is not any leakage problem with the
supervised information. The encoder transforms the embedding matrices of product molecules into
latent representations (matrices), which is also called the encoder output. We take the encoder output
as input to obtain the context information (memory output) through the memory module. After that,
we concatenate the encoder output and memory output and feed it into the decoder.

5.1.2    S EQUENCE G ENERATION
Metro models the prediction of reaction route as a sequence of molecule generation. Given the
SMILES representations of (A, B, D) from the same reaction route as input, the output of our model
is the SMILES representations of (B+C, D, E+F). When we predict B+C, the input is A and we will
not consider the information of (B, D). When we complete the prediction of (B, C), we add B to
the reaction route and use (A, B) as input to predict D. At the same time, we also add C to another
reaction route as input to predict (G, H) as shown in Fig. 1. We repeat this step until all reactants are
starting materials. So during the training stage, we do not consider the information of later molecules
when making the current prediction. The attention mechanism ensures that our predictions of all
reactions along the same route are parallelized at the training stage. This can be implemented by
masking the input of later molecules.

5.2     M EMORY M ODULE

In this section, we will describe the details of the memory module. We employ attention mech-
anism (Vaswani et al., 2017) and memory network (Weston et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015;
Ramsauer et al., 2020) to build our memory layer to capture the context information on the reaction
route. We formally describe the blocking components of one memory layer as follows. Our memory
module takes a series of encoder output X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn as input, where n is the depth of the reaction
route. Each of Xi ∈ Rl×d is the latent embedding matrix corresponding to the i-th molecule of the
encoder input (A, B, and D in our illustrated case). We first use the Linear Projection of Flattened
Patches employed in ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) to transform matrices X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn into
vectors v1 , v2 , . . . , vn as follows:
                                             vi = Xi Wp ,                                               (5)
where Wp ∈ R(l·d)×d , and l is the length of SMILES. We then use vi to compute the query and key
and use Xi to compute the value as follows:
                                     Q = [v1 , v2 , · · · , vn ]T W Q
                                     K = [v1 , v2 , · · · , vn ]T W K                                  (6)
                                                                 T      V
                                     V = [X1 , X2 , · · · , Xn ] W
where W Q ∈ Rd×dk is the query matrix, W K ∈ Rd×dk is the key matrix, and W V ∈ Rd×dk is the
value matrix. Then we compute the memory embedding matrices as follows:
                                                         QK T

                         Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √         V                       (7)
                                                            dk
The output Attention(Q, K, V ) is computed as a weighted sum of the values V , where the weight
assigned to each value is the attention score between two molecules.

Retrosynthetic-Planning Architecture Design. The difference between our attention mechanism
in our memory layer with that of standard transformers is that we compute the attention scores of


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the two embedding matrices instead of vectors due to the embedding matrix representation of the
molecules. We also utilize multi-head attention to jointly compute the context information from
different subspaces and then we use residual connection (He et al., 2016) and fully connected layer
(FFN) to get the memory output M1 , M2 , . . . , Mn . We treat the memory output [M1 , M2 , · · · , Mn ]T
as context information. Mi captures the dependencies between Xi and X1 , X2 , . . . , Xi−1 . After
getting the embedding matrices of context information, we concatenate them with the encoder output
to feed the decoder.

5.3   W HY C ONTEXT I NFORMATION

The intuition of exploiting the reaction tree (context information) instead of single-step prediction
is that we can better prune the reaction search space. The single-step retrosynthesis reaction model
searches the entire chemical reaction space of a molecule, but some candidates, although valid, do
not align with the synthesis goal of the current synthetic route and should be discarded when taking
the entire reaction tree into account. Experimental results show that our proposed Metro improves by
a large margin over Transformer.

5.4   I NFERENCE

In the inference stage, we start from the target
                                                        Algorithm 1 Inference of the reaction tree given a
molecule T , and perform backward chaining
                                                        target molecule
to do a series of one-step retrosynthesis predic-
tions until the reactants are all starting materials.    1: Input: Target molecule T , starting material
This backward method is also adopted by Chen                set S
et al. (2020). After getting the predicted reac-         2: Initialize reactant set R = {}, reaction route
tant molecules for the retrosynthesis reaction at           set L = {}
each step, we refer to the set of starting mate-         3: Put the initial route [T ] into L
rials to check whether the reactant molecules            4: while L is not a empty set do
are starting materials. If they are starting materi-     5:     Take an route l from L
als, we add them into the prediction reactant set.       6:     Predict the reactants rl given l
                                                                                 (i)
Otherwise, we get a new reaction route and pre-          7:     for reactant rl in rl do
dict the next step’s output. Once we obtain the                          (i)
                                                         8:          if rl ∈ S then
predicted reactant set, we compare it with the                                  (i)
ground truth reactant set and get the inference          9:               Put rl into R
accuracy. The inference process is outlined in          10:          else
                                                                                                         (i)
the Algorithm 1. Note that we perform a Depth           11:               Generate a new rote l′ = l + [rl ]
                                                                               ′
First Search (DFS) for all models in our paper.         12:               Put l into L
                                                            return predicted reactant set R

6     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the performance of different base models on our proposed benchmark for
the retrosynthetic planning task.

6.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Dataset. We utilize the public dataset USPTO-full to construct the benchmark for the retrosynthetic
planning task. The USPTO-full dataset consists of 1,808,937 reactions. After removing invalid and
duplicate reactions, we obtain 906,164 reactions. Based on these reactions, we construct a reaction
graph. We treat the molecules whose out-degree is 0 as our desired target molecules. And we use
dynamic programming and backtracking to find all the reaction trees for each target molecule. There
are 124,869 molecules for which we can find the reaction trees where the leaf nodes are all starting
materials. We extract molecules with shortest depths greater than 1 and split these molecules into
training, validation, and test datasets. For those molecules with shortest depths between 2 and 10,
they are randomly split into training/validation/test datasets following 80%/10%/10% proportions.
For those molecules with shortest depths larger than 10, we put them into the test dataset to evaluate
the performance of models on the molecules which need too many steps to synthesize. The number


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Table 1: Top-k exact match accuracy.

                                                                   Top-k accuracy %
              Methods
                                                         1     2          3           4    5
                        Template-based
              R ETROSIM (Coley et al., 2017)         23.2    27.2        28.9    30.0     30.5
              N EURALSYM (Segler & Waller, 2017)     26.8    32.2        34.1    35.2     35.8
              GLN (Dai et al., 2019)                 25.9    32.7        35.0    36.5     37.2
                      Semi-template-based
              G2G S (Shi et al., 2020)                4.0     6.1        7.2      8.2     8.8
              G RAPH R ETRO (Somnath et al., 2021)   14.4      -          -        -       -
                         Template-free
              T RANSFORMER (Karpov et al., 2019)     24.3    33.1        37.2    39.7     41.2
              M EGAN (Sacha et al., 2021)            20.1    29.5        34.9    38.3     40.4
              M ETRO (Ours)                          37.5    47.6        48.3    50.2     51.2

of samples in training/validation/test datasets are 46,458, 5,803, and 5,838 respectively. The dataset
statistics can be found in Appendix A.

Evaluation Protocol. Inspired by the evaluation metric of single-step retrosynthesis reaction, we
decide whether a prediction is accurate by comparing our predicted starting material set with the
ground truth starting material set is an exact match. Note that for a specific target molecule, there
may be multiple reaction trees in the test set. It is an accurate match when the predicted starting
material set can hit one of the multiple ground truths. Besides, we perform a pruning search, when
the length of the reaction route predicted by the model exceeds the depth of the ground truth reaction
tree, we stop the search. By using our evaluation metric, we can obtain the test accuracy of the our
model and the baselines, laying a benchmark for future works and enabling intuitive comparison.

Baselines. We focus on the evaluation of base models on the retrosynthetic planning task, and adopt
the DFS algorithm to perform the search to demonstrate the immediate gain of our model. One future
work is to combine and compare with other retrosynthetic planning search algorithms. We evaluate
our proposed method against existing single-step retrosynthesis models, which can be classified into
three categories: template-based, template-free, and semi-template-Based. All single-step methods
are trained on the single-step retrosynthesis reactions independently in the training dataset. When
training is completed, we perform DFS to search the reactants as in Algorithm 1. Note that the single-
step models only rely on the last product molecule on the reaction route l to make the prediction. For
the baselines, we follow their experimental setup such as hyper-parameter and data processing in
their paper and conduct the experiments with their released codes except for T RANSFORMER1 .

 Template-Based: R ETROSIM (Coley et al., 2017) computes similarity between the fingerprints of
   product and reactants in the training dataset to rank the templates for a given target molecule.
   N EURAL S YM (Segler & Waller, 2017) trains a MLP to model the template selection as a
   classification problem. GLN (Dai et al., 2019) exploits a conditional graphical model to build the
   connection between probabilistic models and reaction templates.
 Template-Free: T RANSFORMER (Karpov et al., 2019) models the retrosynthesis prediction as a
   sequence-to-sequence problem based on Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). M EGAN (Sacha
   et al., 2021) models the retrosynthesis as a sequence of graph edits.
 Semi-Template-Based: G2G S (Shi et al., 2020) and G RAPH R ETRO (Somnath et al., 2021) are
   two-stage models, which first identify the reaction center, break the products into synthons, and
   then expand the synthons into reactants. G2G S model the expansion of synthons to reactants as a
   sequential generation of atoms and bonds. G RAPH R ETRO exploits the leaving groups extracted
   from dataset to model the expansion as a classification problem.

Implementation Details. Based on the vanilla T RANSFORMER (Karpov et al., 2019), we only
introduce additional 3 memory layers and do not touch other components. For the hyper-parameters,
   1
       We implement T RANSFORMER using Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019).


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Top-1                                                   Top-3                                                   Top-5
                                           Retrosim                                                Retrosim                                                Retrosim
            0.4                            Neuralsym                0.5                            Neuralsym                                               Neuralsym
                                           GLN                                                     GLN                      0.5                            GLN
                                           G2Gs                                                    G2Gs                                                    G2Gs
                                           Transformer              0.4                            Transformer                                             Transformer
            0.3                            Megan                                                   Megan                    0.4                            Megan
                                           Metro                                                   Metro                                                   Metro



 Accuracy


                                                         Accuracy


                                                                                                                 Accuracy
                                           GraphRetro               0.3                                                     0.3
            0.2
                                                                    0.2                                                     0.2
            0.1
                                                                    0.1                                                     0.1

            0.0                                                     0.0                                                     0.0
                  2   4   6      8    10     12                           2   4   6       8   10     12                           2   4   6      8    10     12
                              Depth                                                   Depth                                                   Depth



Figure 3: The top-1, top-3, and top-5 test accuracy in terms of depth (the minimum steps required
to synthesize a target molecule). There is no beam search for G RAPH R ETRO because of missing
probabilities of each answer in their released codes. The cases whose depth is 10 have too few data
points for the results to be convincing, although there is a jump at depth 10 for N EURALSYM.

we directly followed the reported setting in their released codes, and did not perform additional
hyperparameter tuning. We still achieve a dramatic improvement for the planning task, which well
demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed method. The details of hyper-parameters can also be
found in Appendix B.1. M ETRO is trained on 2 NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs.

6.2               R ESULTS

Main Results. Table 1 reports the main results. From the table, we observe that our proposed
M ETRO achieves the best performance and outperforms the baselines by at least 10.7% of top-1 test
accuracy. Besides, the results demonstrate that our proposed model achieves a better performance
against T RANSFORMER. More specifically, we can improve upon T RANSFORMER by a margin
of 13.2%, 14.5%, 11.1%, 10.5%, and 10.0% on top-1, top-2, top-3, top-4, and top-5 accuracy
respectively. It demonstrates that the context information on the reaction route captured by our
introduced memory module enables our model to search the reactants for single-step retrosynthesis
reaction in a reasonable reaction space specified for this reaction route. Context information also
preventing us searching through the whole reaction space, thus avoiding some wrong answers.
Moreover, the results of baselines on our retrosynthetic planning task do not match well with
single-step retrosynthesis prediction. Existing semi-template-based models outperform or match
the template-based and template-free models on the single-step retrosynthesis prediction but have
poor performance on our task. A reasonable reason is that approximately 95% of the reactions in the
USPTO-50K dataset used for single-step retrosynthesis reactions have only one reaction center. But
in our constructed dataset, approximately 30% of reactions have multiple reaction centers. G2G S
only can handle cases with one reaction center, and so perform badly on our task. Template-free
models, which do not need to extract templates or find the reaction center using the labeling number,
model the retrosynthesis as a sequence-to-sequence problem or a sequence of graph edits, which has
better scalability and perform better on retrosynthetic planning tasks.

Synthetic Accessibility Analysis. We group by the length of the reaction tree of the target molecules
and report the top1, top3, and top5 test accuracy for each group. We report the results in Fig 3. The
results show that the more steps required to synthesize a target molecule, the lower the accuracy of all
models’ predictions. When the number of steps required is greater than 9, our model cannot predict
the starting materials to synthesize the target molecule. This result is also consistent with molecule
synthetic accessibility. The molecules are hard to synthesize when the number of reaction steps
required is larger in Li & Chen (2022). Our results further support this view. From Fig 3, we can
observe that our model still performs better than all baselines when predicting the starting materials
of the target molecules which need 2-7 reaction steps to synthesize. When testing on the 49 cases
which need 8-10 steps, only GLN and N EURALSYM outperform or match our model. When testing
on cases that need more than 10 steps, all models can not make an accurate prediction. One future
work is to add the template information to our model to improve the performance of the cases which
need too many steps to synthesize.

6.3               C ASE S TUDY

In Fig. 4, we visualize the predictions from M ETRO and T RANSFORMER. The top of Fig. 4 are the
correct predictions from M ETRO, and the bottom are the wrong predictions from T RANSFORMER.


                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                HO         HO                                                                                         O
                                                  N                  HO                    HO                                       HO
           1                                                    +
                                     N
                                                                                       2
                          OH                                                       O                         Cl                OH
                                         HO                                                              O
                                N                 N        OH
                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                +
                                     O

                                                                                                OH                        HO
                      HO                                                  OH
           3                                           Br       +                      4                              +

                                                                                                                      O
                HO         HO                     N                  HO
            1                                                   +
                                     N                                                     HO                Cl                OH   HO
                                                                                       2
                          OH                                                       O
                                         HO                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                         O
                                N                 N        OH
                                     O


                                                                                                                  O

                                                                                                                          +
                     HO

            3                                         Br    +                  O
                                                                                       4             O
                                                                                                                                     OH


                                                  O    OH
                                              O          O
           5                             HO                     OH
                                                      OH
                                OH


Figure 4: Case Study. We split the predicted reaction tree into retrosynthesis reactions. On the top
is the correct reaction tree predicted by M ETRO, and on the bottom is the predicted reaction tree
predicted by T RANSFORMER.

From Figure 4, we can observe that T RANSFORMER makes a wrong prediction on the third-step
retrosynthesis reaction. Since the whole reaction space on which T RANSFORMER searches is too
large to get correct predictions. Due to the dependency of molecules on the reaction route as context
information, our M ETRO can search the reactants on a reasonable space. So our model can make
correct predictions.

7    R ELATED W ORK
Retrosynthesis Model. Existing machine learning models for retrosynthesis prediction can be
classified into Template-based, Semi-template-based, and Template-free models. Template-based
retrosynthetic algorithms (Chen et al., 2020; Coley et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019; Segler & Waller,
2017; Chen & Jung, 2021; Seidl et al., 2021) extract patterns from the training data which encode
how atoms and bonds change during the reaction. Semi-template-based models (Shi et al., 2020;
Yan et al., 2020; Somnath et al., 2021) predict reactants via two stages: reaction center identification
and reactants generation. Template-free algorithms (Liu et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2019; Karpov et al., 2019) model the retrosynthesis as a sequence-to-sequence problem. Our work is
closely related to the single-step retrosynthesis transformer. To capture the context information of the
reaction route, we introduce the memory module (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015).

Retrosynthetic Planning Search Algorithm. Existing Retrosynthetic Planning Search Algorithms
model the retrosynthetic planning as a search problem. MCTS (Segler et al., 2018) employs Monte
Carlo tree search, DFPN-E (Kishimoto et al., 2019) combines Depth-First Proof-Number (DFPN) with
Heuristic Edge Initialization, Retro* (Chen et al., 2020) proposes a neural-based A*-like algorithm,
and RetroGraph (Xie et al., 2022) proposes a graph-based search policy. Our solution focuses on the
base model which differs greatly from search algorithms.

Synthetic Accessibility Some machine learning models have been proposed for the estimation of
the synthetic difficulty of molecules, such as SAscore (Ertl & Schuffenhauer, 2009), PGFS (Gottipati
et al., 2020), SCScore (Coley et al., 2018b), SYBA (Voršilák et al., 2020), RAscore (Thakkar et al.,
2021), and knowledge graph (Li & Chen, 2022). These approaches divide drug molecules into easy
and hard-to-synthesize categories, where hard-to-synthesize molecules require longer reaction routes
to synthesize.

8    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we build a reaction-tree-based benchmark. We also propose a new retrosynthetic
planning base model by extending the single-step retrosynthesis transformer with an additional
memory module. Our memory module can capture the context information of the reaction route,
enabling us to make a better prediction for the retrosynthesis reaction on this route.


                                                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Benson Chen, Tianxiao Shen, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Learning to make generaliz-
  able and diverse predictions for retrosynthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09688, 2019.

Binghong Chen, Chengtao Li, Hanjun Dai, and Le Song. Retro*: learning retrosynthetic planning
  with neural guided a* search. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Shuan Chen and Yousung Jung. Deep retrosynthetic reaction prediction using local reactivity and
  global attention. JACS Au, 1(10):1612–1620, 2021.

Connor W Coley, Luke Rogers, William H Green, and Klavs F Jensen. Computer-assisted retrosyn-
  thesis based on molecular similarity. ACS Central Science, 3(12):1237–1245, 2017.

Connor W Coley, William H Green, and Klavs F Jensen. Machine learning in computer-aided
  synthesis planning. Accounts of Chemical Research, 51(5):1281–1289, 2018a.

Connor W Coley, Luke Rogers, William H Green, and Klavs F Jensen. Scscore: synthetic complexity
  learned from a reaction corpus. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 58(2):252–261,
  2018b.

Hanjun Dai, Chengtao Li, Connor Coley, Bo Dai, and Le Song. Retrosynthesis prediction with
  conditional graph logic network. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Peter Ertl and Ansgar Schuffenhauer. Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug-like
  molecules based on molecular complexity and fragment contributions. Journal of Cheminformatics,
  1(1):1–11, 2009.

Samuel Genheden and Esben Bjerrum. Paroutes: towards a framework for benchmarking retrosyn-
  thesis route predictions. Digital Discovery, 1(4):527–539, 2022.

Samuel Genheden, Amol Thakkar, Veronika Chadimová, Jean-Louis Reymond, Ola Engkvist, and
  Esben Bjerrum. Aizynthfinder: a fast, robust and flexible open-source software for retrosynthetic
  planning. Journal of Cheminformatics, 12(1):1–9, 2020.

Sai Krishna Gottipati, Boris Sattarov, Sufeng Niu, Yashaswi Pathak, Haoran Wei, Shengchao Liu,
  Simon Blackburn, Karam Thomas, Connor Coley, Jian Tang, et al. Learning to navigate the
  synthetically accessible chemical space using reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2016.

Pavel Karpov, Guillaume Godin, and Igor V Tetko. A transformer model for retrosynthesis. In
  International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, 2019.

Junsu Kim, Sungsoo Ahn, Hankook Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Self-improved retrosynthetic planning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Akihiro Kishimoto, Beat Buesser, Bei Chen, and Adi Botea. Depth-first proof-number search
 with heuristic edge cost and application to chemical synthesis planning. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Baiqing Li and Hongming Chen. Prediction of compound synthesis accessibility based on reaction
  knowledge graph. Molecules, 27(3):1039, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arkadii Lin, Natalia Dyubankova, Timur I Madzhidov, Ramil I Nugmanov, Jonas Verhoeven, Timur R
  Gimadiev, Valentina A Afonina, Zarina Ibragimova, Assima Rakhimbekova, Pavel Sidorov, et al.
  Atom-to-atom mapping: A benchmarking study of popular mapping algorithms and consensus
  strategies. Molecular Informatics, 41(4):2100138, 2022.
Bowen Liu, Bharath Ramsundar, Prasad Kawthekar, Jade Shi, Joseph Gomes, Quang Luu Nguyen,
  Stephen Ho, Jack Sloane, Paul Wender, and Vijay Pande. Retrosynthetic reaction prediction using
  neural sequence-to-sequence models. ACS Central Science, 3(10):1103–1113, 2017.
Daniel Mark Lowe. Extraction of chemical structures and reactions from the literature. PhD thesis,
  University of Cambridge, 2012.
Dai Hai Nguyen and Koji Tsuda. A generative model for molecule generation based on chemical
  reaction trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03394, 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Hubert Ramsauer, Bernhard Schäfl, Johannes Lehner, Philipp Seidl, Michael Widrich, Thomas Adler,
  Lukas Gruber, Markus Holzleitner, Milena Pavlović, Geir Kjetil Sandve, et al. Hopfield networks
  is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02217, 2020.
Mikołaj Sacha, Mikołaj Błaz, Piotr Byrski, Paweł Dabrowski-Tumanski, Mikołaj Chrominski, Rafał
 Loska, Paweł Włodarczyk-Pruszynski, and Stanisław Jastrzebski. Molecule edit graph atten-
 tion network: modeling chemical reactions as sequences of graph edits. Journal of Chemical
 Information and Modeling, 61(7):3273–3284, 2021.
Marwin Segler, Mike Preuß, and Mark P Waller. Towards" alphachem": Chemical synthesis planning
 with tree search and deep neural network policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.00020, 2017.
Marwin HS Segler and Mark P Waller. Neural-symbolic machine learning for retrosynthesis and
 reaction prediction. Chemistry–A European Journal, 23(25):5966–5971, 2017.
Marwin HS Segler, Mike Preuss, and Mark P Waller. Planning chemical syntheses with deep neural
 networks and symbolic ai. Nature, 555(7698):604, 2018.
Philipp Seidl, Philipp Renz, Natalia Dyubankova, Paulo Neves, Jonas Verhoeven, Jörg K Wegner,
  Sepp Hochreiter, and Günter Klambauer. Modern hopfield networks for few-and zero-shot reaction
  prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03279, 2021.
Chence Shi, Minkai Xu, Hongyu Guo, Ming Zhang, and Jian Tang. A graph to graphs framework for
  retrosynthesis prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Ryosuke Shibukawa, Shoichi Ishida, Kazuki Yoshizoe, Kunihiro Wasa, Kiyosei Takasu, Yasushi
  Okuno, Kei Terayama, and Koji Tsuda. Compret: a comprehensive recommendation framework
  for chemical synthesis planning with algorithmic enumeration. Journal of Cheminformatics, 12(1):
 1–14, 2020.
Vignesh Ram Somnath, Charlotte Bunne, Connor Coley, Andreas Krause, and Regina Barzilay.
  Learning graph models for retrosynthesis prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.
Teague Sterling and John J Irwin. Zinc 15–ligand discovery for everyone. Journal of Chemical
  Information and Modeling, 55(11):2324–2337, 2015.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al. End-to-end memory networks. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
Amol Thakkar, Veronika Chadimová, Esben Jannik Bjerrum, Ola Engkvist, and Jean-Louis Reymond.
 Retrosynthetic accessibility score (rascore)–rapid machine learned synthesizability classification
 from ai driven retrosynthetic planning. Chemical Science, 12(9):3339–3349, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.

Milan Voršilák, Michal Kolář, Ivan Čmelo, and Daniel Svozil. Syba: Bayesian estimation of synthetic
 accessibility of organic compounds. Journal of Cheminformatics, 12(1):1–13, 2020.
David Weininger. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. Journal of Chemical
  Information and Computer Sciences, 1988.
Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. Memory networks. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2015.
Shufang Xie, Rui Yan, Peng Han, Yingce Xia, Lijun Wu, Chenjuan Guo, Bin Yang, and Tao Qin.
  Retrograph: Retrosynthetic planning with graph search. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2022.
Chaochao Yan, Qianggang Ding, Peilin Zhao, Shuangjia Zheng, Jinyu Yang, Yang Yu, and Junzhou
  Huang. Retroxpert: Decompose retrosynthesis prediction like a chemist. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Yemin Yu, Ying Wei, Kun Kuang, Zhengxing Huang, Huaxiu Yao, and Fei Wu. Grasp: Navigating
  retrosynthetic planning with goal-driven policy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
Shuangjia Zheng, Jiahua Rao, Zhongyue Zhang, Jun Xu, and Yuedong Yang. Predicting retrosynthetic
  reactions using self-corrected transformer neural networks. Journal of Chemical Information and
  Modeling, 60(1):47–55, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A       DATASETS D ETAILS


Table 2: The number of target molecules in training/validation/test datasets in term of the shortest
depths to synthesize the target molecules.

    #Molecules          Depth
                                    2         3        4        5   6   7    8   9   10 11 12 13
    Dataset
    Training                     22,903 12,004 5,849 3,268 1,432 594 276 107 25 0 0           0
    Validation                    2,862 1,500 731 408 179 74 34 13 2 0 0                      0
    Test                          2,862 1,500 731 408 179 74 34 13 2 32 2                     1



B       R EPRODUCIBILITY

B.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) to implement Metro. The codes of baselines are implemented
referring to the implementation of R ETROSIM2 , N EURALSYM3 , GLN4 , G2G S5 , G RAPH R ETRO6 ,
T RANSFORMER7 , and M EGAN8 . All the experiments in this work are conducted on a single NVIDIA
Tesla V100 with 32GB memory size. The software that we use for experiments are Python 3.6.8,
pytorch 1.9.0, pytorch-scatter 2.0.9, pytorch-sparse 0.6.12, numpy 1.19.2, torchvision 0.10.0, CUDA
10.2.89, CUDNN 7.6.5, einops 0.4.1, and torchdrug 0.1.3.

B.2     H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS


                                  Table 3: The hyper-parameters for Metro.

                                             max length       200
                                             embedding size 64
                                             encoder layers    3
                                             decoder layers    3
                                             memory layers 3
                                             attention heads 10
                                             FFN hidden       512
                                             dropout          0.1
                                             epochs          4000
                                             batch size       64
                                             warmup         16000
                                             lr factor        20



C       D ETAILS OF S YNTHETIC ACCESSIBILITY A NALYSIS


    2
      https://github.com/connorcoley/retrosim
    3
      https://github.com/linminhtoo/neuralsym
    4
      https://github.com/Hanjun-Dai/GLN
    5
      https://torchdrug.ai/docs/tutorials/retrosynthesis
    6
      https://github.com/vsomnath/graphretro
    7
      https://github.com/bigchem/synthesis
    8
      https://github.com/molecule-one/megan


                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Table 4: Top-k exact match accuracy of R ETROSIM in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                                Top-k accuracy (%)
      Depth
                           1              2              3               4              5
      2                  28.3            33.2           35.3           36.7            37.4
      3                  21.0            24.5           26.1           27.1            27.7
      4                  18.9            22.0           22.8           23.9            23.9
      5                  14.5            17.2           19.1           19.1            19.1
      6                  12.3            14.0           14.0           14.5            14.5
      7                  10.8            13.5           13.5           14.9            14.9
      8                  11.8            11.8           14.7           17.6            17.6
      9                   0               0              0              0               0
      10                  0               0              0              0               0
      11                  0               0              0              0               0
      12                  0               0              0              0               0
      13                  0               0              0              0               0



     Table 5: Top-k exact match accuracy of N EURALSYM in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                                Top-k accuracy (%)
      Depth
                           1              2              3               4              5
      2                  32.4            39.0           41.2           42.5            43.4
      3                  24.7            30.1           31.7           33.0            33.7
      4                  20.5            24.4           26.0           26.7            27.2
      5                  18.9            22.5           23.8           24.0            24.0
      6                  14.5            15.1           16.2           16.8            16.8
      7                  9.5             10.8           12.2           12.2            12.2
      8                  23.5            23.5           23.5           23.5            23.5
      9                   0               0              0              0               0
      10                  0               0              0              0               0
      11                  0               0              0              0               0
      12                  0               0              0              0               0
      13                  0               0              0              0               0



           Table 6: Top-k exact match accuracy of GLN in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                                Top-k accuracy (%)
      Depth
                           1              2              3               4              5
      2                  33.2            41.1           43.7           45.1            45.8
      3                  22.1            29.7           31.7           33.7            34.6
      4                  18.1            23.1           26.1           26.9            27.6
      5                  16.4            20.8           21.8           23.0            23.3
      6                  9.5             12.8           15.6           16.8            17.3
      7                  8.1              8.1            8.1            8.1             9.5
      8                  8.8              8.8            8.8            8.8             8.8
      9                  15.4            15.4           15.4           15.4            15.4
      10                  0                0              0              0               0
      11                  0                0              0              0               0
      12                  0                0              0              0               0
      13                  0                0              0              0               0



                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Table 7: Top-k exact match accuracy of G2G S in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                                 Top-k accuracy (%)
       Depth
                        1              2                3              4               5
       2                6.5           10.1             11.9           13.5            14.4
       3                2.7           3.9               4.6            5.1             5.8
       4                1.0           1.1               1.5            1.8             1.8
       5                0.2           0.5               0.5            0.5             0.5
       6                 0             0                 0              0               0
       7                 0             0                 0              0               0
       8                 0             0                 0              0               0
       9                 0             0                 0              0               0
       10                0             0                 0              0               0
       11                0             0                 0              0               0
       12                0             0                 0              0               0
       13                0             0                 0              0               0



    Table 8: Top-k exact match accuracy of G RAPH R ETRO in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                                 Top-k accuracy (%)
              Depth
                               1             2               3        4           5
              2               21.3           -               -        -           -
              3               11.6           -               -        -           -
              4               6.0            -               -        -           -
              5               3.7            -               -        -           -
              6                0             -               -        -           -
              7                0             -               -        -           -
              8                0             -               -        -           -
              9                0             -               -        -           -
              10               0             -               -        -           -
              11               0             -               -        -           -
              12               0             -               -        -           -
              13               0             -               -        -           -



       Table 9: Top-k exact match accuracy of M EGAN in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                                 Top-k accuracy (%)
      Depth
                        1               2                3                4             5
      2                26.2           37.8              44.5          48.6            51.0
      3                18.4           27.3              32.6          35.3            37.5
      4                13.0           20.0              23.1          26.1            27.4
      5                8.6            14.5              18.1          19.9            21.1
      6                10.6           14.5              18.4          21.8            24.0
      7                1.4             1.4               2.7           5.4             5.4
      8                 0               0                 0             0              2.9
      9                 0               0                 0             0               0
      10                0               0                 0             0               0
      11                0               0                 0             0               0
      12                0               0                 0             0               0
      13                0               0                 0             0               0



                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Table 10: Top-k exact match accuracy of T RANSFORMER in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                              Top-k accuracy (%)
      Depth
                         1              2              3               4              5
      2                33.2           44.4            49.1           51.6            53.0
      3                22.1           30.8            35.1           38.4            40.0
      4                13.4           17.9            21.3           23.3            24.9
      5                6.9            10.3            12.5           13.5            14.2
      6                7.3            14.5            19.0           22.3            24.0
      7                 0              0               0              1.4             1.4
      8                 0              0               0              2.9             5.9
      9                 0              0               0               0               0
      10                0              0               0               0               0
      11                0              0               0               0               0
      12                0              0               0               0               0
      13                0              0               0               0               0


       Table 11: Top-k exact match accuracy of M ETRO in terms of depth of reaction tree.
                                              Top-k accuracy (%)
      Depth
                         1              2              3               4              5
      2                42.5           50.2            53.6           55.9            57.0
      3                37.5           45.2            48.4           50.0            50.9
      4                28.5           36.5            39.4           40.8            42.0
      5                28.2           35.5            39.5           40.4            41.1
      6                33.0           39.1            40.2           43.6            44.7
      7                28.4           32.4            35.1           39.2            39.2
      8                14.7           17.6            23.5           23.5            26.5
      9                7.7             7.7             7.7            7.7             7.7
      10                0               0               0              0               0
      11                0               0               0              0               0
      12                0               0               0              0               0
      13                0               0               0              0               0


                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                             Output (left shift)
                                                                                                                                         Cl
                                                                                                                                                  Cl
                                                                                                                                                       Cl
                                                                                                                                   Cl
                                                                                                                                         + O
                                                                                                                                              O                          O         O                                    O
                                                                                                                                                            NH2                   N+                                       N+


                                                                                           Embedding Matrix                                                              N         O-            NH                             O-
                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                        + Cl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O


                                                                                                                                        O=C(Cl)c1cc(              O=C(c1ccc([N          c1ccc2c(c1)CN
 Embedding Matrix                                                                                                                       Cl)cc(Cl)c1Cl.            +](=O)[O-             c1ccccc1C2.O
                                                                                                                                        Nc1ccc(C(=O)              ])cc1)N1Cc2c          =C(Cl)c1ccc([
                                                                                                                                        N2Cc3ccccc3C              cccc2Cc2cccc          N+](=O)[O-                                   Add & Norm
                                                                                                                                        c3ccccc32)cc1$            c21$                  ])cc1$

      Add & Norm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FFN
                                               Encoder Layer                                  Memory Layer                                                  Decoder Layer
          FFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Add & Norm


      Add & Norm                               Encoder Layer                                  Memory Layer                                                  Decoder Layer                                                            Multi-head Mutual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Attention


     Multi-head Self Att
                                               Encoder Layer                                  Memory Layer                                                  Decoder Layer                                                            Add & Norm


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Multi-head Self Att
                                         +             +               +                                                                                +                    +               +
                                                                                                       Add & Norm

    Positional                                                                                             FFN
                                                                                                                                        ^O=C(Cl)c1cc(             ^O=C(c1ccc([          ^c1ccc2c(c1)C
    Encoding                   ^O=C(Nc1ccc(C(
                               =O)N2Cc3ccccc3
                                                    ^Nc1ccc(C(
                                                    =O)N2Cc3c
                                                                  ^O=C(c1ccc([N+]
                                                                  (=O)[O-
                                                                                                                                        Cl)cc(Cl)c1Cl.            N+](=O)[O-            Nc1ccccc1C2.
                                                                                                       Add & Norm                       Nc1ccc(C(=O)              ])cc1)N1Cc2c          O=C(Cl)c1ccc(
                               Cc3ccccc32)cc1)c     cccc3Cc3cc    ])cc1)N1Cc2ccccc                                                      N2Cc3ccccc3C                                    [N+](=O)[O-
                                                                                                                                                                  cccc2Cc2cccc
                               1cc(Cl)cc(Cl)c1C     ccc32)cc1$    2Cc2ccccc21$                                                          c3ccccc32)cc1                                   ])cc1
                                                                                                                                                                  c21
                               l$                                                                   Embedding Matrix
                                                                                                                                        Cl
                                                                                                                                              Cl
                           O             Cl   Cl
                                                       O                   O          O         Attention Score Computation                        Cl
                                    NH
                                                                 NH2                 N+                                            Cl
                           N
                                                       N                   N          O-                                                + O
                                    O                                                                                                         O                      O            O                                    O
                                              Cl                                                                                                            NH2                  N+                                    N+
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NH                         O-
                                                                                           Linear Projection of Embedding Matrix              N                      N            O-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        + Cl
                                                                                                                                                                                                               O


                                                   Input                                                                                                Output (right shift)

                                   Figure 5: The details of encoder, decoder, and memory module.

D    D ETAILS OF A RCHITECTURE


Fig. 5 outlines the details of three modules: encoder, decoder, and memory module. The encoder and
decoder consist of several stacked attention layers. Each attention layer comprises multi-attention
heads and a feed-forward layer. The attention heads of each attention layer perform attention
mechanism in parallel and then are concatenated and projected into the final embedding. Specifically,
an attention head (Scaled Dot-Product Attention) consists of three matrices: the quires Q, the keys
K, and the values V . We get the attention scores by multiplying Q and K, and then get the output by
multiplying the attention scores and V . The computation process can be written as
                                                                 QK T

                              Attention (Q, K, V ) = softmax      √       V,                          (8)
                                                                    dk
       √
where dk is the scaling factor. As illustrated in Fig. 5, we use the self attention layers in the encoder
to transform the embeddings of input SMILES into the latent representations, e.g. encoder output.
The Q, K, and V are the same hidden states from the previous layer in the encoder. But for the
attention layer in the decoder, P corresponds the embeddings or the hidden states of the output
SMILES (right shift), while Q and V correspond the concatenation of the outputs of the encoder and
the memory module. RetroXpert Yan et al. (2020) calls this type of attention as encoder-decoder
attention. This type of attention enables the decoder to combine the information of the input SMILES
and output SMILES to capture the relationship between the product molecule and reactant molecules.
By encoding the information of the relationship, we can model the retrosynthesis reaction and make
reasonable predictions. Note that the input SMILES given to the decoder are different from the output
SMILES predicted by the decoder. The former is the right shift of the output SMILES. In addition,
masked attention is used to avoid information leakage during training.



E    C OMPARISON OF DATASETS
We compare our proposed benchmark with Retro* (Chen et al., 2020) and PaRoutes (Genheden &
Bjerrum, 2022). As we have discussed in the Introduction, the benchmark of Retro* only consists


                                                                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of 189 routes in the test set, which is too small to comprehensively evaluate the performance. The
test set of our benchmark consists of 5838 reaction trees, which can comprehensively evaluate
the performance. PaRoutes does not use the purchasable compounds in eMolecule/ZINC as stop
condition. But in our opinion, we think using purchasable compounds in eMolecule/ZINC as stop
condition is a better solution with the following reason: If we use the reactions of other patents to
build routes, the stock molecules which are constructed with the method proposed in PaRoutes may
be different, which is inconsistent and tricky for the evaluation of machine learning models. Using the
purchasable compounds in the eMolecule/ZINC databases as the stop condition has better scalability.
We can train the machine learning model in one dataset and can apply this model for inference on
other datasets directly.


                                                 18
