Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EVERAGING I MPORTANCE W EIGHTS IN S UBSET S E -
LECTION

 Gui Citovsky1 , Giulia DeSalvo1 , Sanjiv Kumar1 , Srikumar Ramalingam1 ,
 Afshin Rostamizadeh1 , Yunjuan Wang2∗
 1
   Google Research, New York, NY, 10011
 2
   Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21218
 {gcitovsky,giuliad,sanjivk,rostami,rsrikumar}@google.com
 ywang509@jhu.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             We present a subset selection algorithm designed to work with arbitrary model
             families in a practical batch setting. In such a setting, an algorithm can sample
             examples one at a time but, in order to limit overhead costs, is only able to update
             its state (i.e. further train model weights) once a large enough batch of examples
             is selected. Our algorithm, IWeS, selects examples by importance sampling where
             the sampling probability assigned to each example is based on the entropy of mod-
             els trained on previously selected batches. IWeS admits significant performance
             improvement compared to other subset selection algorithms for seven publicly
             available datasets. Additionally, it is competitive in an active learning setting,
             where the label information is not available at selection time. We also provide an
             initial theoretical analysis to support our importance weighting approach, proving
             generalization and sampling rate bounds.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have shown remarkable success in several domains such as computer vision
and natural language processing. In many tasks, this is achieved by heavily relying on extremely
large labeled datasets. In addition to the storage costs and potential security/privacy concerns that
come along with large datasets, training modern deep neural networks on such datasets also incur
high computational costs. With the growing size of datasets in various domains, algorithm scalability
is a real and imminent challenge that needs to be addressed. One promising way to solve this
problem is with data subset selection, where the learner aims to find the most informative subset
from a large number of training samples to approximate (or even improve upon) training with the
entire training set. Such ideas have been extensively studied in k-means and k-median clustering
(Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004), subspace approximation (Feldman et al., 2010), computational
geometry (Agarwal et al., 2005), density estimation (Turner et al., 2021), to name a few.
One particular approach for solving data subsampling involves the computation of coresets, which
are weighted subsets of a dataset that can act as the proxy for the whole dataset to solve some op-
timization task. Coreset algorithms are primarily motivated with theoretical guarantees that bound
the difference between the training loss (or other such objective) over the coreset and that over
the full dataset under different assumptions on the losses and hypothesis classes (Mai et al., 2021;
Munteanu et al., 2018; Curtin et al., 2019; Karnin & Liberty, 2019). However, in practice, most
competitive subset selection algorithms, that are designed for general loss functions and arbitrary
function classes, focus only on selecting informative subsets of the data and typically do not assign
weights to the selected examples. These methods are, for example, based on some notion of model
uncertainty (Scheffer et al., 2001), information gain (Argamon-Engelson & Dagan, 1999), loss gra-
dients (Paul et al., 2021; Ash et al., 2019), or diversity (Sener & Savarese, 2018). Counter to this
trend, we show that weighting the selected samples can be very beneficial.
In this work, we present a subset selection algorithm called IWeS that is designed for general loss
functions and hypothesis classes and that selects examples by importance sampling, a theoretically
    ∗
        This work was done when the author was interning at Google.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


motivated and unbiased sampling technique. Importance sampling is conducted according to a spe-
cially crafted probability distribution and, importantly, each sampled example is weighted inversely
proportional to its sampling probability when computing the training loss. We develop two types of
sampling probability for different practical requirements (e.g. computational constraints and label
availability), but in both cases, the sampling probability is based on the example’s entropy-based
score computed using a previously trained model. We note, the IWeS algorithm is similar to the
IWAL active learning algorithm of Beygelzimer et al. (2009) as both are based on importance sam-
pling. However, in contrast to IWAL, IWeS uses a different sampling probability definition with a
focus on providing a practical method that is amenable to large deep networks and complex hypoth-
esis classes.
Through extensive experiments, we find that the IWeS algorithm is competitive for deep neural
networks over several datasets. We compare our algorithm against four types of baselines whose
sampling strategies leverage: the model’s uncertainty over examples, diversity of selected examples,
gradient information, and random sampling. Finally, we analyze a closely related albeit less practical
algorithm that inspires the design of IWeS, called IWeS-V, proving it admits generalization and
sampling rate guarantees that hold for general loss functions and hypothesis classes.
The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
1. We present the Importance Weighted Subset Selection (IWeS) algorithm that selects examples by
   importance sampling with a sampling probability based on a model’s entropy, which is applicable
   to (and practical for) arbitrary model families including modern deep networks. In addition to the
   subset selection framework, IWeS also works in the active learning setting where the examples
   are unlabeled at selection time.
2. We demonstrate that IWeS achieves significant improvement over several baselines (Ran-
   dom, Margin, Least-Confident, Entropy, Coreset, BADGE) using VGG16 model for six com-
   mon multi-class datasets (CIFAR10, CIFAR10-corrupted, CIFAR100, SVHN, Eurosat, Fashion
   MNIST), and using ResNet101 model for the large-scale multi-label OpenImages dataset.
3. We provide
          √ a theoretical analysis for a closely related algorithm, IWeS-V, in Section 4. We prove
   a O(1/ T ) generalization bound, which depends on the full training dataset size T . We further
   give a new definition of disagreement coefficient and prove a sampling rate bound by leverag-
   ing label information, which is tighter compared with the label complexity bound provided by
   Beygelzimer et al. (2009) that does not use label information.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK
Uncertainty. Uncertainty sampling, which selects examples that the model is least confident on, is
favored by practitioners (Mussmann & Liang, 2018) and rather competitive among many recent al-
gorithms (Yang & Loog, 2018). Uncertainty can be measured through entropy (Argamon-Engelson
& Dagan, 1999), least confidence (Culotta & McCallum, 2005), and most popular is the margin
between the most likely and the second most likely labels (Scheffer et al., 2001). More recent
works measure the model uncertainty indirectly, such as selecting examples based on an estimated
loss (Yoo & Kweon, 2019) as well as leveraging variational autoencoders and adversarial networks
to find points not well represented by the current labeled data (Sinha et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021).
Beygelzimer et al. (2009) makes use of a disagreement-based notion of uncertainty and constructs an
importance weighted predictor with theoretical guarantees called IWAL, which is further enhanced
by Cortes et al. (2019). However, IWAL is not directly suitable for use with complex hypothesis
spaces, such as deep networks, since it requires solving a non-trivial optimization over a subset of
the hypothesis class, the so-called version space, in order to compute sampling probabilities. We
further discuss these difficulties in Section 4.
Diversity. In another line of research, subsets are selected by enforcing diversity such as in the FASS
(Wei et al., 2015) and Coreset (Sener & Savarese, 2018) algorithms. Wei et al. (2015) introduces a
submodular sampling objective that trades off between uncertainty and diversity by finding a diverse
set of samples from amongst those that the current trained model is most uncertain about. It was
further explored by Kaushal et al. (2019) who designed a unified framework for data subset selection
with facility location and dispersion-based diversity functions. Sener & Savarese (2018) show that
the task of identifying a coreset in an active learning setting can be mapped to solving the k-center
problem. Further recent works related to coreset idea are Mirzasoleiman et al. (2020); Killamsetty


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al. (2021), where the algorithms select representative subsets of the training data to minimize the
estimation error between the weighted gradient of selected subset and the full gradient.
Loss Gradient. Another class of algorithms selects a subset by leveraging the loss gradients. For
example, the GRAND score (Paul et al., 2021), or closely related EL2N score, leverages the aver-
age gradient across several different independent models to measure the importance of each sample.
However, as such, it requires training several neural networks, which is computationally expensive.
BADGE (Ash et al., 2019) is a sampling strategy for deep neural networks that uses k-MEANS++
on the gradient embedding of the networks to balance between uncertainty and diversity. ISAL (Liu
et al., 2021) measures the potential impact of each example by leveraging the loss gradient and Hes-
sian. Finally, for the sake of completeness, we note that importance weighting type approaches have
also been used for the selection of examples within an SGD minibatch (Katharopoulos & Fleuret,
2018; Johnson & Guestrin, 2018), which can be thought of a change to the training procedure itself.
In contrast, the problem setting we consider in this work requires explicitly producing a (weighted)
subset of the training data and treats the training procedure itself as a black-box.
These are a sampling of data subset selection algorithms, and we refer the reader to (Guo et al.,
2022) for a more detailed survey. In this work, we choose at least one algorithm from each of
the categories mentioned above, in particular, Margin (Scheffer et al., 2001), BADGE (Ash et al.,
2019), and Coreset (Sener & Savarese, 2018) to compare against empirically in Section 3. However,
before that, we first formally define the IWeS algorithm in the following section.

2   T HE IW E S A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Importance Weighted Subset Selection (IWeS)
Require: Labeled pool P, seed set size k0 , subset batch size k, number of iterations R, weight cap
    parameter u.
 1: Initialize the subset S = ∅.
 2: S0 ← Draw k0 examples from P uniformly at random.
 3: Set S = {(x, y, 1) : (x, y) ∈ S0 } and P = P\S0
 4: for r = 1, 2, . . . , R do
 5:    Set Sr = ∅.
 6:    Train fr , gr on S using the weighted loss and independent random initializations.
 7:    while |Sr | < k do
 8:       Select (x, y) uniformly at random from P.
 9:       Set p(x, y) using entropy-based disagreement or entropy criteria shown in Eq (1) and (2).
10:       Q ∼ Bernoulli(p(x, y)).
11:       if Q = 1 then n                            o
                                            1
12:          Set Sr = Sr ∪ x, y, min p(x,y)     ,u      and P = P\ {(x, y)}.
13:       end if
14:    end while
15:    S = S ∪ Sr .
16: end for
17: Train fR+1 on S using the weighted loss.
18: return S, fR+1


We consider a practical batch streaming setting, where an algorithm processes one example at a time
without updating its state until a batch of examples is selected. That is, like in standard streaming
settings, the algorithm receives a labeled example, and decides whether to include it in the selected
subset or not. Yet, the algorithm is only allowed to update its state after a fixed batch of examples
have been selected in order to limit the overhead costs (e.g. this typically can include retraining
models and extracting gradients). Unlike the pool-based setting where the algorithm receives the
entire labeled pool beforehand, a batch streaming setting can be more appropriate when facing a
vast training data pool since the algorithm can only process a subset of the pool without iterating
over the whole pool. Note that any batch streaming algorithm can also be used in a pool-based
setting, by simply streaming through the pool in a uniformly random fashion. At a high level, the
IWeS algorithm selects examples by importance sampling where the sampling probability is based
on the entropy of models trained on previously selected data. We define two sampling probabilities


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that allow us to trade-off between performance and the computational cost, as well as label-aware or
an active learning setting leading to less label annotation costs. As we will subsequently see, these
sampling definitions are both easy to use and work well in practice.
To define the algorithm in more detail, we let X ∈ Rd and Y = {1, . . . , c} denote the input space
and the multi-class label space, respectively. We assume the data (x, y) is drawn from an unknown
joint distribution D on X ×Y. Let H = {h : X → Z} be the hypothesis class consisting of functions
mapping from X to some prediction space Z ⊂ RY and let ` : Z × Y → R denote the loss.
The pseudocode of IWeS is shown in Algorithm 1. Initially, a seed set S0 (|S0 | = k0 ) is se-
lected uniformly at random from the labeled pool P. Then the algorithm proceeds in rounds
r ∈ [1, . . . , R] and it consists of two main components: training and sampling. At the train-
               P r, the model(s) are trained using the importance-weighted loss, namely fr =
ing step at round
arg minh∈H (x,y,w)∈S w · `(h(x), y) on the subset S, selected so far, in the previous r − 1 rounds.
Depending on the sampling strategy, we may need to randomly initialize two models fr , gr in which
case they are trained independently on the same selected subset S, but with different random ini-
tializations. At the sampling step at round r, the IWeS algorithm calculates a sampling probably for
example (x, y) ∈ S based on one of the following definitions:
• Entropy-based Disagreement. We define the sampling probability based on the disagreement
  on two functions with respect to entropy restricted to the labeled example (x, y). That is,
                       p(x, y) = |Pfr (y|x) log2 Pfr (y|x) − Pgr (y|x) log2 Pgr (y|x)|                     (1)
  where Pfr (y|x) is the probability of class y with model fr given example x. If the two functions,
  fr , gr , disagree on the labeled example (x, y), then p(x, y) will be small and the example will
  be less likely to be selected. This definition is the closest to the IWeS-V algorithm analyzed in
  Section 4 and achieves the best performance when the computational cost of training two models
  is not an issue. In Appendix A, we show an efficient version of entropy-based disagreement that
  utilizes only one model and achieves similar performance.
• Entropy. We define the sampling probability by the normalized entropy of the model fr trained
  on past selected examples:           X
                           p(x, ·) = −     Pfr (y 0 |x) log2 Pfr (y 0 |x)/ log2 |Y|.             (2)
                                         y 0 ∈Y

  The sampling probability p(x, ·) is high whenever the model class probability Pfr (y 0 |x) is close
  to 1/|Y|, which is when the model is not confident about its prediction as it effectively randomly
  selects a label from Y. This definition does not use the label y and thus it can be used in an active
  learning setting where the algorithm can only access the unlabeled examples. Another advantage
  is that it only requires training one model, thereby saving some computational cost.
We note that entropy-based sampling has been used in algorithms such as uncertainty sampling as
discussed in the related works section, but using entropy to define importance weights has not been
done in past literature.
Based on one of these definitions, the IWeS algorithm then decides whether to include the example
into the selected subset S by flipping a coin Q with chosen sampling probability p(x, y). If the ex-
                                                                       1
ample is selected, the example’s corresponding weight w is set to p(x,y)  , and the example is removed
from the labeled pool P = P\ {(x, y)}. This process is repeated until k examples have been se-
lected. Below we use IWeS-dis as an abbreviation for IWeS algorithm with Entropy-based Disagree-
ment sampling probability and IWeS-ent for IWeS algorithm with Entropy sampling probability.
                                                               1
                                                                 P          Qi
The weighted loss used to train the model can be written as |P|     i∈P p(xi ,yi ) `(f (xi ), yi ) and it is an
unbiased estimator of the population risk E(x,y)∼D [`(f (x), y)]. Yet such estimator can have a large
variance when the model is highly confident in its prediction, that is whenever Pfr (y|x) is large, then
p(x, y) is small. This may lead to training instability and one pragmatic approach to addressing this
issue is by “clipping” the importance sampling weights (Ionides, 2008; Swaminathan & Joachims,
2015). Thus in our algorithm, we let u be the upper bound on the weight of the selected example.
Although this clipping strategy introduces an additional parameter, we find it is not too sensitive
and, as mentioned in the empirical section, set it to a fixed constant throughout our evaluation.
The primary computational cost of the algorithm, at each sampling round r, comes from (1) training
the model and (2) the inference cost associated with computing the sampling probabilities on a


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


constant fraction of the unlabeled pool of examples. As described in the next section, besides for
random sampling, all compared sampling algorithms incur similar re-training and model scoring
costs at each sampling round.

3     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
We compare IWeS with state-of-the-art baselines on several image classification benchmarks.
Specifically, we consider six multi-class datasets (CIFAR10, CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky & Hin-
ton, 2009), SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011), EUROSAT (Helber et al., 2019), CIFAR10 Corrupted
(Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019), Fashion MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) and one large-scale multi-label
OpenImages dataset (Krasin et al., 2017). In the multi-class setting, each image is associated with
only one label. On the other hand, the multi-label OpenImages dataset consists of 19,957 classes
over 9M images, where each image contains binary labels for a small subset of the classes (on av-
erage 6 labels per image). Further details of each dataset can be found in Table 1 and Table 2 in the
appendix.
For all experiments, we consider a diverse set of standard baselines from both subset selection and
active learning literature (discussed in Section 1.1).
• Uncertainty Sampling selects top k examples on which the current model admits the high-
  est uncertainty. There are three popular ways of defining model uncertainty s(x) of an ex-
  ample x, namely margin sampling, entropy sampling, and least confident sampling, and all
  are based on Pf [ŷ|x], the probability of class ŷ given example x according to the model f .
  Margin sampling defines the model uncertainty of an example x as s(x) = 1 − (Pf [ŷ1 |x] −
  Pf [ŷ2 |x]) where ŷ1 = argmaxy∈Y Pf [y|x], ŷ2 = argmaxy∈Y\y1 Pf [y|x] are the first and sec-
                  P classes for model f . For entropy sampling, model uncertainty is defined
  ond most probable
  as s(x) = − y∈Y Pf (ŷ|x) log(Pf (ŷ|x)) while for least confidence sampling, it is defined as
  s(x) = 1 − maxy∈Y Pf (ŷ|x).
• BADGE of Ash et al. (2019) selects k examples by using the k-MEANS++ seeding algorithm
  using the gradient vectors, computed with respect to the penultimate layer using the most likely
  labels given by the latest model checkpoint.
• Coreset (k-Center) of Sener & Savarese (2018) selects a subset of examples using their embed-
  dings derived from the penultimate layer using the latest model checkpoint. In particular, the k
  examples are chosen using a greedy 2-approximation algorithm for the k-center problem.
• Random Sampling selects k examples uniformly at random.

3.1   M ULTI - CLASS E XPERIMENTS
Here, we compare the IWeS algorithm against the baselines on the six multi-class image datasets. We
use the VGG16 architecture with weights that were pre-trained using ImageNet as well as add two
fully-connected 4096 dimensional layers and a final prediction layer. Xavier uniform initialization
is used for the final layers. For each dataset, we tune the learning rate by choosing the rate from
the set {0.001, 0.002, 0.005, 0.01, 0.1} that achieves best model performance on the seed set. We
use batch SGD with the selected learning rate and fix SGD’s batch size to 100. At each sampling
round r, the model is trained to convergence on all past selected examples for at least 20 epochs.
For IWeS, we set the weight capping parameter to 2 for all datasets except for CIFAR10 which we
decreased to 1.5 in order to reduce training instability.
The embedding layer for BADGE and Coreset is extracted from the penultimate layer having a di-
mension of 4096. The effective dimension of the gradient vector in BADGE grows with the number
of labels, which is problematic for CIFAR100 as it has 100 classes. More specifically, the runtime
of BADGE is given by O (dkT ), which can be large for CIFAR100 since the dimension of the gra-
dient vector from the penultimate layer is d = 4096 × 100, the size of the labeled pool is T =50K,
and the number of examples selected in each round is k=5K. In order to solve this inefficiency for
CIFAR100, we split the labeled pool randomly into 100 partitions and ran separate instances of the
algorithm in each partition with batch size k/100.
Each algorithm is initialized with a seed set that is sampled uniformly at random from the pool. Af-
ter that, sampling then proceeds in a series of rounds r where the model is frozen until a batch k of
examples is selected. The seed set size and sampling batch size k are set to 1K for CIFAR10, SVHN,


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Accuracy of VGG16 when trained on examples selected by IWeS-dis and baseline algo-
rithms.


Figure 2: Accuracy of VGG16 when trained on examples selected by IWeS-ent, IWeS-dis, margin
sampling and random sampling.
EUROSAT, CIFAR10 Corrupted, Fashion MNIST, and to 5K for CIFAR100. The initial seed set size
allows at least 50 initial examples per class on average. The experiment was repeated for 5 trials.
Any trial that encountered divergent training, i.e. the resulting model accuracy is more than three
times below the standard error of model’s accuracy on seed set, was dropped. We note that this hap-
pened infrequently (less than 3% of the time) and all reported averaged results have at least 3 trials.
Figure 1 shows the mean and standard error of VGG16 model’s accuracy on a held out test set com-
paring IWeS-dis to the baseline methods. The IWeS-dis algorithm either outperforms or matches
the performance of the baseline algorithms for all datasets. We also find that margin sampling con-
sistently performs well against the remaining baseline algorithms and that BADGE either matches
the performance of margin sampling or slightly underperforms on some datasets (Eurosat, Fashion
MNIST, CIFAR100). Coreset admits a similar and at times slightly poorer performance compared
to random sampling.
Next, Figure 2 compares the two variants of our algorithm: IWeS-dis and IWeS-ent. We find that
the IWeS-dis performs slightly better than IWeS-ent on most of the datasets. This is not surprising
since the IWeS-dis sampling probability leverages label information and more computational power,
i.e. trains two models. As explained in Section 4, it also better fits our theoretical motivation.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that IWeS-ent, without the label information, still consistently
outperforms or matches the performance of the baselines for all the datasets.

3.2   M ULTI - LABEL O PEN I MAGES E XPERIMENTS
Here, we evaluate the performance of the IWeS algorithm on OpenImages v6. We train a ResNet101
model implemented using tf-slim on 64 Cloud two core TPU v4 acceleration, and apply batch SGD
with batchsize of 6144 and an initial learning rate of 10−4 with decay logarithmically every 5 × 108


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


examples. We add a global pooling layer with a fully connected layer of 128 dimensions as the
final layers of the networks, which is needed by BADGE and Coreset. The model is initialized with
weights that were pre-trained on the validation split using 150K SGD steps, and at each sampling
round, the model is trained on all past selected examples with an additional 15K SGD steps.
In the previous section, our results show that the IWeS-
dis algorithm only slightly outperforms the IWeS-ent
algorithm on a few datasets. Also, since the IWeS-dis
requires training two neural networks, which is com-
putationally expensive in this scenario, we only test the
performance of IWeS-ent. Since IWeS-ent does not use
the label information, we can also measure the perfor-
mance of the algorithm in an active learning setting.
Since OpenImages is a multi-label dataset, the sam-
pling algorithms must not only select the image, but
also the class. That is, each example selected by an
algorithm consists of an image-class pair with a cor- Figure 3: Pooled Average Precision of
responding binary label indicating whether the corre- ResNet101 trained on examples selected
sponding class is present in the image or not. In order by IWeS-ent and the baseline algorithms.
to adapt IWeS-ent to the multi-label setting, the entropy
sampling probability for each image-class pair is defined as p(x, ·) = −Pfr (y|x) log2 Pfr (y|x) −
(1 − Pfr (y|x)) log2 (1 − Pfr (y|x)), where Pfr (y|x) is the model class probability of a positive label
at round r. A seed set of size 300K is sampled uniformly at random from the pool, and at each
sampling round r, the algorithms select 100K examples. Similarly to the previous section, in order
to run BADGE on OpenImages, we divide the pool into 100 partitions and run separate instances of
the algorithm in each partition. For IWeS, the weight capping parameter is set to 10.
Figure 3 shows the mean and standard error across 5 trials of the pooled average precision (Pooled
AP) metric for each algorithm. As the number of selected examples increases, IWeS-ent outperforms
all other baselines methods on the OpenImages dataset. We also find that BADGE performs similarly
or even slightly worse than the uncertainty-based sampling algorithms when the number of selected
examples is smaller than 800K, and then outperforms all uncertainty-based sampling as the number
of selected examples increases. Coreset initially performs better than random sampling, but at later
sampling rounds, it admits a similar performance to random sampling.

4    T HEORETICAL M OTIVATION
In order to theoretically motivate the IWeS algorithm, we analyze a closely related algorithm which
we call IWeS-V, adapted from the IWAL algorithm of Beygelzimer et al. (2009). We prove that
IWeS-V admits generalization bounds that scale with the dataset size T and sampling rate bounds
that are in terms of a new disagreement coefficient tailored to the subset selection framework.
Below, we let L(h) = E(x,y)∼D [`(h(x), y)] denote the expected loss of hypothesis h ∈ H, and h∗ =
argminh∈H L(h) be the best-in-class hypothesis. Without loss of generality, we consider a bounded
loss ` : Z × Y → [0, 1] mapping to the interval [0, 1]. Such a loss can be achieved by any bounded
loss after normalization. For simplicity, we assume H is a finite set, but our results can be easily
extended by standard covering arguments to more general hypothesis sets such as finite VC-classes.
The IWeS-V algorithm operates on an i.i.d. example (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xT , yT ) drawn from D
sequentially. It maintains a version space Ht at any time t, with H1 = H. At time t, IWeS-V flips a
coin Qt ∈ {0, 1} with bias pt defined as
                                 pt = max `(f (xt ), yt ) − `(g(xt ), yt )                               (3)
                                       f,g∈Ht
             n                 Pt                                            Pt Qs                           o
where Ht = h ∈ Ht−1 : 1t s=1 Q          ps `(h(xs ), ys ) ≤ minh ∈Ht−1 t
                                          s
                                                                 0
                                                                           1              0
                                                                               s=1 ps `(h (xs ), ys ) + ∆t−1
                q
                  8 log(2T (T +1)|H|2 /δ)
with ∆t−1 =                 t−1           . The example is selected if Qt = 1 and otherwise it is dis-
carded. The main idea behind this algorithm is thus to define a sampling probability that is in terms
of the disagreement between two hypothesisPf, g that are not too far from the best model trained
                                                     t
on the past selected data, i.e. minh∈Ht−1 1t s=1 Q        ps `(h(xs ), ys ). The formal IWeS-V algorithm
                                                           s


pseudo-code (Algorithm 2) and all the theorem proofs can be found in Appendix B.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For general, e.g. non-linear, hypothesis classes it is computationally infeasible to find two hypothe-
ses f, g ∈ Ht that maximize the expression in equation (3). This main impracticality of IWeS-V is
reason why we developed the IWeS algorithm of the previous section. This drawback is also shared
by the IWAL algorithm of Beygelzimer et al. (2009), which computes a sampling probability very
similar to that of equation (3), but with an additional maximization over the choice of y ∈ Y in the
definition of the sampling probability pt .
Before continuing we explain how our practical algorithm IWeS-dis, specifically using sampling
probability in equation (1), is closely related to the IWeS-V algorithm. Recall that the IWeS al-
gorithm trains two models f and g each minimizing the importance-weighted loss using the data
sampled so far. Therefore, each model exhibits reasonable training loss, i.e. they are expected to be
included in the version space Ht of good hypothesis, while the different random initializations (in
the case of non-convex neural network hypotheses) results in models that still differ in certain re-
gions of the feature space. Thus, the difference in equation (1) can be thought of as a less aggressive
version of the difference found in the maximization of equation (3).
Another dissimilarity between the two is that the IWeS-dis algorithm is defined for the batch stream-
ing setting while the IWeS-dis algorithm and its analysis is developed for the streaming setting. Said
differently, the IWeS-V algorithm can be seen as a special case of the IWeS-dis algorithm with target
subset size of 1. To extend the theoretical guarantees of IWeS-V to the batch streaming setting, we
can follow a similar analysis developed by Amin et al. (2020) to also find that the effects of delayed
feedback in the batch streaming setting are in fact mild as compared to the streaming setting.

4.1   G ENERALIZATION BOUND
Next, we turn to the topic of generalization guarantees and we review an existing bound for core-
set based algorithms. The guarantees of coreset algorithms are generally focused on showing that
a model’s training loss on the selected subset is close to the same model’s training loss on the
whole dataset. That is, given dataset P = {(xi , yi )}Ti=1 ∼ DT , the learner seek to select a sub-
set m < T of examples S = {(x0i , yi0 )}m  i=1 along with a corresponding set of weights w1 , . . . , wm
such that for some small   > 0 and for all h ∈ H, the additive error coreset guarantee holds
 Pm             0     0
                            PT
    i=1 wi `(h(xi ), yi ) −  i=1 `(h(xi ), yi ) ≤  T . The following proposition, which is a minor
extension of Fact 8 of Karnin & Liberty (2019), allows us to convert a coreset guarantee into a
generalization guarantee.
                                               Pm
Proposition 4.1. Let h0 = argminh∈H i=1 wi `(h(x0i ), yi0 ), and let the additive error coreset
guarantee hold for any  p> 0, then for any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that
L(h0 ) ≤ L(h∗ ) + 2  + 2 ln(4/δ)/2T .

As shown above, the generalization guarantee depends linearly on   which in turn depends on the
size of the subset m. To give a few examples, Karnin & Liberty (2019) show that for hypotheses that
are defined as analytic functions of dot products (e.g. generalized linear models) this dependence on
m is   = O(1/m),
              √      while for more complex Kernel Density Estimator type models the dependence
is   = O(1/ m). See Mai et al. (2021), Table 1, for examples on the dependency between   and
m under different data distributions assumptions (e.g. uniform, deterministic, `1 Lewis) and for
specific loss functions (e.g. log loss, hinge loss).
We now provide a generalization guarantee for the IWeS-V algorithm, which depends on the size of
the labeled pool size T . The proof follows from that in Beygelzimer et al. (2009).
Theorem 4.2. Let h∗ ∈ H be the minimizer of the expected loss function h∗ = argminh∈H L(h).
For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, for any t ≥ 1 with t ∈ {1, 2 . . . , T }, we have that
h∗ ∈ Ht and that L(f ) − L(g) ≤ 2∆t−1 for any   p f, g ∈ Ht .  In particular, if hT is the output of
                             ∗
IWeS-V, then L(hT ) − L(h ) ≤ 2∆T −1 = O log(T /δ)/T .

Unlike the distribution-specific and loss-specific theoretical guarantees proposed in the coreset lit-
erature, Theorem 4.2 holds for any bounded loss function and general hypothesis classes. If we
ignore log terms and consider the more complex Kernel Density Estimator class of hypotheses, the
coreset method of√ Karnin & Liberty (2019) requires m = O(T ) coreset samples in order to achieve
an overall O(1/ T ) generalization bound. As we will see in the next section, the required IWeS
sampling rate can also be as high as O(T ), but critically is scaled by the best-in-class loss, which in
favorable cases is significantly smaller than one.

                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   S AMPLING R ATE BOUNDS
Hanneke (2007) proves that the expected number of labeled examples needed to train a model in an
active learning setting can be characterized in terms of the disagreement coefficient of the learning
problem. Later, Beygelzimer et al. (2009) generalizes this notion to arbitrary loss functions, and in
this work, we further generalize this for the subset selection setting.
Recall that the disagreement coefficient θAL in Beygelzimer et al. (2009) for the active learning
setting is defined as
                          Ex∼X maxh∈BAL (h∗ ,r) maxy∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|

               θAL = sup                                                             ,
                      r≥0                           r
where BAL (h∗ , r) = {h ∈ H : ρAL (h, h∗ ) ≤ r} with ρAL (f, g) = Ex∼X [supy∈Y |`(f (x), y) −
`(g(x), y)|]. Informally, this coefficient quantifies how much disagreement there is among a set of
classifiers that is close to the best-in-class hypothesis. In the subset selection setting, labels are
available at sample time and, thus, we are able to define the following disagreement coefficient:
Definition 4.1. Let ρS (f, g) = E(x,y)∈D [|`(f (x), y) − `(g(x), y)|] and BS (h∗ , r) = {h ∈ H :
ρS (h, h∗ ) ≤ r} for r ≥ 0. The disagreement    coefficient in the subset selection setting is defined as
                              E(x,y)∼D maxh∈BS (h∗ ,r) |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|

                    θS = sup                                                           .
                         r≥0                             r
The main difference between the above coefficient and that of Beygelzimer et al. (2009) is that there
is no supremum over all label y ∈ Y both in the definition of the distance ρ and the coefficient’s
numerator. Instead, the supremum is replaced with an expectation over the label space.
The following theorem leverages θS to derive an upper bound on the expected number of selected
examples for the IWeS-V algorithm. Below, let Ft = {(xi , yi , Qi )}ti=1 be the observations of the
algorithm up to time t.
Theorem 4.3. For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1  − δ, the expected sampling      rate of the
                      PT                                        ∗
                                                                        p
IWeS-V algorithm is: t=1 E(xt ,yt )∼D pt Ft−1 = O θS L(h )T + T log(T /δ) .

Suppressing lower order terms, the above expected sampling rate bound is small whenever the prod-
uct of the disagreement coefficient and the expected loss of the best-in-class is small. In such cases,
by combining the above theorem with the generalization guarantee, it holds that IWeS-V returns a
hypothesis trained on a only fraction of the points that generalizes as well as a hypothesis trained
on the full dataset of size T . Theorem 4.3 can be further improved by adapting the ideas found in
Cortes et al. (2019) to the IWeS-V algorithm. See Appendix B.4 for this enhanced analysis.
The form of this sampling rate bound is similar to that of Beygelzimer et al. (2009). More con-
cretely, under the assumption that a loss function has bounded slope asymmetry, that is K` =
           maxy∈Y |`(z,y)−`(z 0 ,y)|
supz,z0 ∈Z miny∈Y  |`(z,y)−`(z 0 ,y)| is bounded, with probability at least 1 − δ, the expected number
                                                                                       p
of examples selected by the IWAL algorithm is given by O θAL K` L(h∗ )T + T log(T /δ) .
Thus, the main difference between the sampling rate bound of the IWAL algorithm and the IWeS-V
algorithm are the factors that depends on the two disagreement coefficients: θAL K` and θS . Since θS
leverages the label information we may expect it to provide a tighter bound, compared to using the
label-independent disagreement θAL . Theorem 4.4 shows that this is indeed the case.
Theorem 4.4. If the loss function has a bounded slope asymmetry K` , then θS ≤ θAL K` .

The above theorem in conjunction with the sampling rate guarantees thus proves that the sampling
rate bound of IWeS of Theorem 4.3 is tighter than the sampling rate bound of the IWAL algorithm.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper we have introduced a subset selection algorithm, IWeS that is designed for arbitrary
hypothesis classes including deep networks. We have shown that the IWeS algorithm outperforms
several natural and important baselines across multiple datasets. In addition, we have developed an
initial theoretical motivation for our approach based on the importance weighted sampling mecha-
nism. A natural next step is enforcing a notion of diversity as it will likely provide improved perfor-
mance in the large-batch sampling setting and thus, we plan to adapt the diversity-based method in
Citovsky et al. (2021) by replacing the uncertainty sampling component with the IWeS algorithm.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Pankaj K Agarwal, Sariel Har-Peled, Kasturi R Varadarajan, et al. Geometric approximation via
  coresets. Combinatorial and computational geometry, 2005.
Kareem Amin, Corinna Cortes, Giulia DeSalvo, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Understanding the ef-
  fects of batching in online active learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, 2020.
Shlomo Argamon-Engelson and Ido Dagan. Committee-based sample selection for probabilistic
  classifiers. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 1999.
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal. Deep
  batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.
Alina Beygelzimer, Sanjoy Dasgupta, and John Langford. Importance weighted active learning. In
  International conference on machine learning, 2009.
Gui Citovsky, Giulia DeSalvo, Claudio Gentile, Lazaros Karydas, Anand Rajagopalan, Afshin Ros-
  tamizadeh, and Sanjiv Kumar. Batch active learning at scale. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Corinna Cortes, Giulia DeSalvo, Claudio Gentile, Mehryar Mohri, and Ningshan Zhang. Region-
  based active learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.
Aron Culotta and Andrew McCallum. Reducing labeling effort for structured prediction tasks. In
  Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2005.
Ryan R Curtin, Sungjin Im, Ben Moseley, Kirk Pruhs, and Alireza Samadian. On coresets for
  regularized loss minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10845, 2019.
Dan Feldman, Morteza Monemizadeh, Christian Sohler, and David P Woodruff. Coresets and
  sketches for high dimensional subspace approximation problems. In Proceedings of the twenty-
  first annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete Algorithms, 2010.
Chengcheng Guo, Bo Zhao, and Yanbing Bai. Deepcore: A comprehensive library for coreset
  selection in deep learning. Database and Expert Systems Applications, 2022.
Steve Hanneke. A bound on the label complexity of agnostic active learning. In International
  conference on machine learning, 2007.
Sariel Har-Peled and Soham Mazumdar. On coresets for k-means and k-median clustering. In
  Proceedings of the thirty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 2004.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common cor-
  ruptions and perturbations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Edward L Ionides. Truncated importance sampling. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statis-
  tics, 2008.
Tyler B Johnson and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep models faster with robust, approximate impor-
  tance sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Zohar Karnin and Edo Liberty. Discrepancy, coresets, and sketches in machine learning. In Confer-
  ence on Learning Theory, 2019.
Angelos Katharopoulos and François Fleuret. Not all samples are created equal: Deep learning with
  importance sampling. In International conference on machine learning, 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vishal Kaushal, Rishabh Iyer, Suraj Kothawade, Rohan Mahadev, Khoshrav Doctor, and Ganesh
  Ramakrishnan. Learning from less data: A unified data subset selection and active learning
  framework for computer vision. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision (WACV), 2019.
Krishnateja Killamsetty, S Durga, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Abir De, and Rishabh Iyer. Grad-match:
  Gradient matching based data subset selection for efficient deep model training. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Kwanyoung Kim, Dongwon Park, Kwang In Kim, and Se Young Chun. Task-aware variational
 adversarial active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Ivan Krasin, Tom Duerig, Neil Alldrin, Vittorio Ferrari, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Alina Kuznetsova,
  Hassan Rom, Jasper Uijlings, Stefan Popov, Andreas Veit, et al. Openimages: A public dataset
  for large-scale multi-label and multi-class image classification, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Tech-
  nical report, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 2009.
Zhuoming Liu, Hao Ding, Huaping Zhong, Weijia Li, Jifeng Dai, and Conghui He. Influence selec-
  tion for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2021.
Tung Mai, Cameron Musco, and Anup Rao. Coresets for classification–simplified and strengthened.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efficient training of
  machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Alexander Munteanu, Chris Schwiegelshohn, Christian Sohler, and David P. Woodruff. On coresets
  for logistic regression. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Stephen Mussmann and Percy S Liang. Uncertainty sampling is preconditioned stochastic gradient
  descent on zero-one loss. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet:
 Finding important examples early in training. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 2021.
Tobias Scheffer, Christian Decomain, and Stefan Wrobel. Active hidden markov models for infor-
  mation extraction. In International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis, 2001.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Samarth Sinha, Sayna Ebrahimi, and Trevor Darrell. Variational adversarial active learning. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Counterfactual risk minimization: Learning from
  logged bandit feedback. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Paxton Turner, Jingbo Liu, and Philippe Rigollet. A statistical perspective on coreset density esti-
  mation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2021.
Kai Wei, Rishabh Iyer, and Jeff Bilmes. Submodularity in data subset selection and active learning.
  In International conference on machine learning, 2015.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yazhou Yang and Marco Loog. A benchmark and comparison of active learning for logistic regres-
  sion. Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Donggeun Yoo and In So Kweon. Learning loss for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  Supplementary Material
A     E XTENDED A LGORITHMIC AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
A.1   DATASET D ETAILS

Table 1 and Table 2 provide further details of the six multi-class classification datasets and the multi-
label Open Images dataset, respectively.

                Train Test # ClassesImage Size                  Description
   CIFAR10     50,00010,000 10       32×32×3         classify the object in the image
    SVHN       73,25726,032 10       32×32×3        classify street view house number
CIFAR Corrupted 7,614 2,386   10     32×32×3 classify the corrupted object in the image
    Eurosat     8,000 5,000   10     64×64×3 classify land use and land cover satelite image
Fashion MNIST 60,00010,000 10        32×32×3            classify the type of clothes
   CIFAR100    50,00010,000 100 32×32×3              classify the object in the image

                        Table 1: Multi-class Classification Datasets statistics

                                        Images Positives Negatives
                               Train 9,011,21919,856,086 37,668,266
                             Validation 41,620 367,263 228,076
                                Test    125,436 1,110,124 689,759

                       Table 2: Open Images Dataset v6 statistics by data split


A.2   M ORE E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND R ESULTS

When running IWeS, at each iteration, we pass over the labeled pool sequentially in a uniform
random order, removing each selected example from the pool. If we exhaust the entire pool before
selecting k examples, we start again at the beginning of the sequence and iterate over the remaining
examples. In order to reduce the number of passes required for the smaller datasets, we scale the
                                                                  j
sampling probabilities of the remaining points uniformly by 1 + 10  , where j is the number of passes
so far.
Figure 4 compares IWeS-dis and IWeS-ent for additional three datasets that we omit in Section 3.


Figure 4: Accuracy of VGG16 trained on examples selected by IWeS-ent, IWeS-dis, margin sam-
pling and random sampling.

A.3   E FFICIENT VERSION OF ENTROPY- BASED DISAGREEMENT

Here we develop an efficient version of entropy-based disagreement which we call IWeS-loss by
defining the sampling probability to be proportional to the model’s entropy restricted to the labeled
examples (x, y) as follows:
                                p(x, y) = −Pfr (y|x) log Pfr (y|x).                               (4)


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where Pfr (y|x) is the probability of class y with model fr given example x. As Pfr (y|x) increase
from 0 to 1, this sampling probability first increase then decrease. Thus the sampling probability
is high whenever the model is not confident about the model prediction. Unlike IWeS-dis, this
definition only requires training one model, thereby saving some computational cost.
Figure 5 compares the two variants IWeS-dis and IWeS-loss. We find that the performance are
similar across all datasets, with IWeS-loss behave slightly better than IWeS-dis at the first two sample
iterations (i.e. Fashion MNIST, CIFAR10, Eurosat), and IWeS-dis slightly outperform IWeS-loss as
the number of sample iteration increases (i.e. SVHN, Eurosat).


      Figure 5: Accuracy of VGG16 trained on examples selected by IWeS-loss and IWeS-dis


B     P ROOFS OF T HEORETICAL G UARANTEE

B.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1
                                        Pm
Proposition 4.1. Let h0 = argminh∈H i=1 wi `(h(x0i ), yi0 ), and let the additive error coreset
guarantee hold for any  p> 0, then for any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that
L(h0 ) ≤ L(h∗ ) + 2  + 2 ln(4/δ)/2T .

Proof of Proposition 4.1.
             L(h0 ) = E(x,y)∼D [`(h0 (x), y)]
                            T
                                                 r
                      1X                            ln(4/δ)
                    ≤       `(h0 (xi ), yi ) +                                  (Hoeffding inequality)
                      T i=1                           2T
                          m
                                                        r
                      1X           0 0        0           ln(4/δ)
                    ≤        wi `(h (xi ), yi ) +   +                                   (0 ≤ `(·) ≤ 1)
                      T i=1                                  2T
                          m
                                                        r
                      1X                                   ln(4/δ)
                    ≤        wi `(h∗ (x0i ), yi ) +   +                       (By the definition of h0 )
                      T i=1                                   2T
                          T
                                                       r
                      1X                                 ln(4/δ)
                    ≤        `(h∗ (xi ), yi ) + 2  +
                      T i=1                                 2T
                                                          r
                                                             ln(4/δ)
                    ≤ E(x,y)∼D [`(h∗ (x), y)] + 2  + 2                          (Hoeffding inequality)
                                                               2T

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                         r
                            ∗                ln(4/δ)
                     = L(h ) + 2  + 2
                                               2T



B.2    P ROOFS FOR STATEMENTS IN S ECTION 4.1

Algorithm 2 contains a detailed pseudocode of the IWeS-V algorithm referred to in the main body
of the paper.

Algorithm 2 IWeS-V
Require: Labeled Pool P.
 1: Initialize: S0 = ∅, H0 = H.
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 3:    Sample (xt , yt ) uniformly at random from P.
 4:    Update:
              (                       t−1                                 t−1
                                                                                                      )
                                  1 X Qi                              1 X Qi
       Ht = h ∈ Ht−1 :                       `(h(xi ), yi ) ≤ min               `(h(xi ), yi ) + ∆t−1
                                t − 1 i=1 pi                 h∈Ht−1 t − 1     p
                                                                          i=1 i
                           q
                                       +1)|H|2 /δ)
       where ∆t−1 = 8 log(2T (Tt−1                 .
 5:    Set pt = maxf,g∈Ht `(f (xt ), yt ) − `(g(xt ), yt ).
 6:    Qt ∼ Bernoulli(pt ).
 7:    if Qt = 1 then          n            o
 8:       Set St = St−1 ∪ xt , yt , p1t
 9:    else
10:       St = St−1 .
11:    end if                P
12:    ht = arg minh∈H (x,y,w)∈St w · `(h(x), y).
13: end for
14: return hT


In order to prove Theorem 4.2, we first present the following Lemma.
                                                                             P
                                                              1                 t−1 Qi
Lemma B.1. Define the weighted empirical loss as Lt−1 (f ) = t−1                i=1 pi `(f (xi ), yi )   . For
all δ > 0 with probability at least 1 − δ, for all t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, and for all f, g ∈ Ht−1 , we have
                           |Lt−1 (f ) − Lt−1 (g) − L(f ) + L(g)| ≤ ∆t−1 .

Proof of Lemma B.1. Fix any t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. For any f, g ∈ Ht−1 , define
                                 Qi
                           Zi =      (`(f (xi ), yi ) − `(g(xi ), yi )) − (L(f ) − L(g))
                                 pi
for i ∈ {1, . . . , t − 1} . The sequence Zi is a martingale difference since

                                  Qi
   E [Zi |Z1 , . . . Zi−1 ] = E      (`(f (xi ), yi ) − `(g(xi ), yi ) − (L(f ) − L(g))|Z1 , . . . Zi−1 = 0.
                                  pi
Due to the fact that
                                 1
                        |Zi | ≤ |`(f (xi ), yi ) − `(g(xi ), yi )| + |L(f ) − L(g)| ≤ 2
                                pi
as pi ≥ |`(f (xi ), yi ) − `(g(xi ), yi )| for f, g ∈ Ht−1 . Thus, we can apply Azuma’s inequality,
                              Pr[|Lt−1 (f ) − Lt−1 (g) − L(f ) + L(g)| ≥ ∆t−1 ]
                                                                          δ
                              ≤ 2 exp(−(t − 1)∆2t−1 /8) =                         ,
                                                                  T (T + 1)|H|2
where we used the fact that (xt , yt ) is i.i.d. Since Ht−1 is a random subset of H, we take the union
bound over f, g ∈ H and t − 1. Then we take another union bound over T to finish the proof.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next we provide the proof of Theorem 4.2.
Theorem 4.2. Let h∗ ∈ H be the minimizer of the expected loss function h∗ = argminh∈H L(h).
For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, for any t ≥ 1 with t ∈ {1, 2 . . . , T }, we have that
h∗ ∈ Ht and that L(f ) − L(g) ≤ 2∆t−1 for any  p f, g ∈ Ht .  In particular, if hT is the output of
IWeS-V, then L(hT ) − L(h∗ ) ≤ 2∆T −1 = O log(T /δ)/T .

Proof of Theorem 4.2. We show that h∗ ∈ Ht by induction. Base case holds as h∗ ∈ H1 = H.
Now assuming that h∗ ∈ Ht−1 holds, we show that h∗ ∈ Ht . Let h0 = argminf ∈Ht−1 Lt−1 (f ).
By Lemma B.1,
                                             0
                     Lt−1 (h∗ ) − Lt−1 (h ) ≤ L(h∗ ) − L(h0 ) + ∆t−1 ≤ ∆t−1
                                                                                       0
since L(h∗ ) − L(h0 ) ≤ 0 by definition of h∗ . Thus, Lt−1 (h∗ ) ≤ Lt−1 (h ) + ∆t−1 which means
that h∗ ∈ Ht by definition of Ht .
Since Ht ⊆ Ht−1 , Lemma B.1 implies that for any f, g ∈ Ht ,
                        L(f ) − L(g) ≤ Lt−1 (f ) − Lt−1 (g) + ∆t−1
                         ≤ Lt−1 (h0 ) + ∆t−1 − Lt−1 (h0 ) + ∆t−1 ≤ 2∆t−1 .
Noting that h∗ , ht ∈ Ht completes the proof.

B.3   P ROOFS FOR STATEMENTS IN S ECTION 4.2

Theorem 4.3. For any δ > 0, with probability at least
                                                    1 − δ, the expected sampling
                                                                                  rate of the
                    PT                                     ∗
                                                                  p
IWeS-V algorithm is: t=1 E(xt ,yt )∼D pt Ft−1 = O θS L(h )T + T log(T /δ) .


Proof of Theorem 4.3. By Theorem 4.2, Ht ⊂ {h ∈ H : L(h) ≤ L(h∗ ) + 2∆t−1 }. Using this fact
and that h∗ is the best in class, it holds that
      ρS (h, h∗ ) = E(x,y)∈D |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)| ≤ L(h) + L(h∗ ) ≤ 2L(h∗ ) + 2∆t−1 .

Thus, letting r = 2L(h∗ ) + 2∆t−1 , it holds that Ht ⊂ BS (h∗ , r). Then,
           E(xt ,yt )∈D [pt |Ft−1 ] = E(xt ,yt )∈D [ sup |`(f (xt ), yt ) − `(g(xt ), yt )||Ft−1 ]
                                                  f,g∈Ht

                                  ≤ 2E(xt ,yt )∈D [ sup |`(h(xt ), yt ) − `(h∗ (xt ), yt )||Ft−1 ]
                                                   h∈Ht
                                  ≤ 2E(xt ,yt )∈D [    sup        |`(h(xt ), yt ) − `(h∗ (xt ), yt )|]
                                                   h∈BS (h∗ ,r)
                                                       ∗
                                  ≤ 2θS r = 4θS (L(h ) + ∆t−1 )

By summing the above over t ∈ [T ], the sample complexity bound of IWeS-V is then given by
                 √
O θS L(h∗ )T + θS T , which completes the proof.

Theorem 4.4. If the loss function has a bounded slope asymmetry K` , then θS ≤ θAL K` .

Proof of Theorem 4.4. We first prove
                            BIWAL (h∗ , r) ⊆ BS (h∗ , r) ⊆ BIWAL (h∗ , K` r).                            (5)
The left hand side follows directly from the definition. For the right hand side, assume h ∈
BS (h∗ , r), then by the definition of K` , we have
                                                                  1                                         1
r ≥ ρS (h, h∗ ) = E(x,y)∈D [|`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|] ≥           Ex∈X sup |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)| =    ρIWAL (h, h∗ )
                                                                  K`      y∈Y                               K`


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the second inequality comes from
                                            maxy∈Y |`(z, y) − `(z 0 , y)|
                           K` = sup                              0
                                   z,z 0 ∈Z miny∈Y |`(z, y) − `(z , y)|
                                      maxy∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
                                ≥ sup                            ∗
                                  x∼X miny∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h (x), y)|
                                       maxy∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
                                ≥ Ex∼X
                                        miny∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
                                  Ex∼X maxy∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
                                ≥
                                   Ex∼X miny∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
                                  Ex∼X maxy∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
                                ≥
                                     E(x,y)∼D |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|
which follows by basic properties of expectations. As a result, we have
               E(x,y)∼D maxh∈BS (h∗ ,r) |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|

    θS = sup                                                                   (By definition of θS )
           r≥0                          r
               E(x,y)∼D maxh∈BIWAL (h∗ ,K` r) |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|

       ≤ sup                                                                     (Use equation (5))
           r≥0                             r
                  E(x,y)∼D maxh∈BIWAL (h∗ ,r) |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|

       = K` sup                                                                (Redefine K` r as r)
              r≥0                             r
                  Ex∈X maxh∈BIWAL (h∗ ,r) supy∈Y |`(h(x), y) − `(h∗ (x), y)|

       ≤ K` sup
              r≥0                                r
        = K` θIWAL .
which concludes the proof.

B.4    T HE E NHANCED -IW E S-V A LGORITHM

Here we analyze a modified algorithm, which we called the Enhanced-IWeS-V , that uses new slack
term defined as
                         v
                         u T
             EIWeS   2 u
                           X         p                    p
           ∆t      =     t     pt + 6 log ((3 + t)t2 /δ) · log (8T 2 |H|2 log(T )/δ)
                     t     t=1

to define the version space in the IWeS-V algorithm. The theorem below proves that the Enhanced-
IWeS-V admits improved sampling rate bound that is smaller than the bound in Theorem 4.3 since
the square root term also scales with L(h ∗ ). In particular, under realizable setting where L(h∗ ) = 0,
                                    3
the sampling
        p rate bound   is O log (T ) , which depends poly-logarithmic in T and is smaller than
the O      T log (T ) bound from Theorem 4.3.
Theorem B.2. For all δ > 0, for all T ≥ 3, with probably at least 1 − δ, the expected sampling rate
of the Enhanced-IWeS-V algorithm is:
      T
      X                                                p
            E(xt ,yt )∼D [pt |Ft−1 ] ≤ θS L(h∗ )T + O    L(h∗ )T log(T /δ) + O log3 (T /δ) .

      t=1


Proof of Theorem B.2. The proof follows from that of Lemma 6 in Cortes et al. (2019). From The-
orem 4.3, for t ≥ 3,
                          T
                          X
                                E(xt ,yt )∼D pt Ft−1 = 4θS (L(h∗ ) + ∆t−1 ) .

                          t=1



                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Plugging in the expression of ∆EIWeS   into ∆t−1 , and applying a concentration inequality to relate
PT           PT                  t−1
  t=1 pt to    t=1 E(xt ,yt )∼D pt Ft−1 , we end up with a recursion on E(xt ,yt )∼D [pt |Ft−1 ]:
                                             v
                                             u t−1
                                  ∗   4θS c1 u X                                   log ((t − 1)|H|/δ)
E(xt ,yt )∼D pt Ft−1 ≤ 4θS L(h ) +           t     E(xt ,yt )∼D [ps |Fs−1 ] + c2                        .
                                       t − 1 s=1                                          t−1
             r
                       2   2
where c1 = 2 log 8T |H|δ log(T ) , and c2 is a constant. Then we show for all t ≥ 3, for constant
        p
           log (T |H|/δ) and c4 = O log2 (T |H|/δ) , we have

c3 = O
                                                              r
                                                                  L(h∗ )    c4
                     E(xt ,yt )∼D pt Ft−1 ≤ 4θS L(h∗ ) + c3

                                                                         +
                                                                  t−1      t−1
The above can be proved by induction as in Cortes et al. (2019). By summing the above over t ∈ [T ]
gives us the result. We absorb the dependency on |H| inside the big-O notation.


                                                  18
