Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


SMART: S ELF - SUPERVISED M ULTI - TASK PRETR A IN -
ING WITH CONT ROL T RANSFORMERS

    Yanchao Sun† , Shuang Ma‡ , Ratnesh Madaan‡ , Rogerio Bonatti‡ ,
    Furong Huang† and Ashish Kapoor‡
 †
     University of Maryland, College Park. {ycs,furongh}@umd.edu
 ‡
     Microsoft Redmond, WA. {shuama,ratnesh.madaan,rbonatti,akapoor}@microsoft.com



                                             A BSTRACT

          Self-supervised pretraining has been extensively studied in language and vision
          domains, where a unified model can be easily adapted to various downstream
          tasks by pretraining representations without explicit labels. When it comes to
          sequential decision-making tasks, however, it is difficult to properly design such
          a pretraining approach that can cope with both high-dimensional perceptual in-
          formation and the complexity of sequential control over long interaction hori-
          zons. The challenge becomes combinatorially more complex if we want to pre-
          train representations amenable to a large variety of tasks. To tackle this problem,
          in this work, we formulate a general pretraining-finetuning pipeline for sequen-
          tial decision making, under which we propose a generic pretraining framework
          Self-supervised Multi-task pretrAining with contRol Transformer (SMART). By
          systematically investigating pretraining regimes, we carefully design a Control
          Transformer (CT) coupled with a novel control-centric pretraining objective in
          a self-supervised manner. SMART encourages the representation to capture the
          common essential information relevant to short-term control and long-term con-
          trol, which is transferrable across tasks. We show by extensive experiments in
          DeepMind Control Suite that SMART significantly improves the learning effi-
          ciency among seen and unseen downstream tasks and domains under different
          learning scenarios including Imitation Learning (IL) and Reinforcement Learning
          (RL). Benefiting from the proposed control-centric objective, SMART is resilient
          to distribution shift between pretraining and finetuning, and even works well with
          low-quality pretraining datasets that are randomly collected. Our codebase, pre-
          trained models and datasets are provided at https://github.com/microsoft/smart.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Self-supervised pretraining has been successful in a wide range of language and vision problems.
Examples include BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT (Brown et al., 2020), MoCo (He et al., 2020),
and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). These works demonstrate that one single pretrained model can
be easily finetuned to perform many downstream tasks, resulting in a simple, effective, and data-
efficient paradigm. When it comes to sequential decision making, however, it is not clear yet whether
the successes of pretraining approaches can be easily replicated.
There are research efforts that investigate application of pretrained vision models to facilitate control
tasks (Parisi et al., 2022; Radosavovic et al.). However, there are challenges unique to sequential
decision making and beyond the considerations of existing vision and language pretraining. We
highlight these challenges below: (1) Data distribution shift: Training data for decision making tasks
is usually composed of trajectories generated under some specific behavior policies. As a result, data
distributions during pretraining, downstream task finetuning and even during deployment can be
drastically different, resulting in a suboptimal performance (Lee et al., 2021). (2) Large discrepancy
between tasks: In contrast to language and vision where the underlying semantic information is
often shared across tasks, decision making tasks span a large variety of task-specific configurations,
transition functions, rewards, as well as action and state spaces. Consequently, it is hard to obtain a
generic representation for multiple decision making tasks. (3) Long-term reward maximization: The
general goal of sequential decision making is to learn a policy that maximizes long-term reward.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, a good representation for downstream policy learning should capture information relevant
for both immediate and long-term planning, which is usually hard in tasks with long horizons,
partial observability and continuous control. (4) Lack of supervision and high-quality data: Success
in representation learning often depends on the availability of high quality expert demonstrations
and ground-truth rewards (Lee et al., 2022; Stooke et al., 2021). However, for most real-world
sequential decision making tasks, high-quality data and/or supervisory signals are either non-existent
or prohibitively expensive to obtain.
Under these challenges, we strive for pretrained representations for control tasks that are
(1) Versatile so as to handle a wide variety of downstream control tasks and variable downstream
learning methods such as imitation and reinforcement learning (IL, RL) etc,
(2) Generalizable to unseen tasks and domains spanning multiple rewards and agent dynamics, and
(3) Resilient and robust to varying-quality pretraining data without supervision.
We propose a general pretraining framework named Self-supervised Multi-task pretrAining with
contRol Transformer (SMART), which aims to satisfy the above listed properties. We introduce
Control Transformer (CT) which models state-action interactions from high-dimensional observa-
tions through causal attention mechanism. Different from the recent transformer-based models for
sequential decision making Chen et al. (2021) which directly learn reward-based policies, CT is de-
signed to learn reward-agnostic representations, which enables it as a unified model to fit different
learning methods (e.g. IL and RL) and various tasks. Built upon CT, we propose a control-centric
pretraining objective that consists of three terms: forward dynamics prediction, inverse dynamics
prediction and random masked hindsight control. These terms focus on policy-independent transi-
tion probabilities, and encourage CT to capture dynamics information of both short-term and long-
term temporal granularities. In contrast with prior pretrained vision models (Oord et al., 2018;
Parisi et al., 2022) that primarily focus on learning object-centric semantics, SMART captures the
essential control-relevant information which is empirically shown to be more suitable for interactive
decision making. SMART produces superior performance than training from scratch and state-of-
the-art (SOTA) pretraining approaches on a large variety of tasks under both IL and RL. Our main
contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We propose SMART, a generic pretraining framework for multi-task sequential decision making.
2. We introduce the Control Transformer model and a control-centric pretraining objective to learn
   representation from offline interaction data, capturing both perceptual and dynamics information
   with multiple temporal granularities.
3. We conduct extensive experiments on DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018). By evalu-
   ating SMART on a large variety of tasks under both IL and RL regimes, SMART demonstrates
   its versatile usages for downstream applications. When adapting to unseen tasks and unseen do-
   mains, SMART shows superior generalizability. SMART can even produce compelling results
   when pretrained on low-quality data that is randomly collected, validating its resilience property.

2   R ELATED WORKS
Offline Pretraining of Representation for Control. Many recent works investigate pretraining rep-
resentations and finetuning policies for the same task. Yang & Nachum (2021) investigate several
pretraining objectives on MuJoCo with vector state inputs. They find that many existing repre-
sentation learning objectives fail to improve the downstream task, while contrastive self-prediction
obtains the best results among all tested methods. Schwarzer et al. (2021) pretrain a convolutional
encoder with a combination of several self-supervised objectives, achieving superior performance
on the Atari 100K. However, these works just demonstrated the single-task pretraining scenario, it is
not clear yet whether the methods can be extended to multi-task control. Stooke et al. (2021) propose
ATC, a contrastive learning method with temporal augmentation. By pretraining an encoder on ex-
pert demonstrations from one or multiple tasks, ATC outperforms prior unsupervised representation
learning methods in downstream online RL tasks, even in tasks unseen during pretraining.
Pretrained Visual Representations for Control Tasks. Recent studies reveals that visual represen-
tations pretrained on control-free datasets can be transferred to control tasks. Shah & Kumar (2021)
show that that a ResNet encoder pretrained on ImageNet is effective for learning manipulation tasks.
Some recent papers also show that encoders pretrained with control-free datasets can generalize well
to RL settings (Nair et al., 2022; Seo et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022). However, the generalizability
of the visual encoder can be task-dependent. Kadavath et al. (2021) point out that ResNet pretrained
on ImageNet does not help in DMC (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020) environments.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Architecture of Control Transformer. In the pretraining phase, we use the control-centric objective
introduced in Section 5.2 to train representation over multiple tasks; in the finetuning phase where a specific
task is given, we learn a policy based on the pretrained representation (pretrained weights are shown in grey
blocks). The construction of the policy head can vary for different downstream datasets or learning methods.

Unsupervised RL. Unsupervised RL (URL) focuses on learning exploration policies (Pathak et al.,
2017; Liu & Abbeel, 2021), goal-conditioned policies (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Mendonca et al.,
2021) or diverse skills (Eysenbach et al., 2019) in a task without external rewards, and finetuning the
policy later when reward is specified. The unsupervised learning phase of URL is usually interactive
and prolonged. Our goal, in contrast, is to train representations of states and actions from fixed
offline datasets, with a focus on capturing essential and important information from raw inputs.
Sequential Decision Making with Transformers. There is a growing body of work that uses Trans-
former (Vaswani et al., 2017) architectures to model and learn sequential decision making problems.
Chen et al. (2021) propose Decision Transformer (DT) for offline RL, which takes a sequence of
returns, observations and actions, and outputs action predictions. Trajectory Transformer (Janner
et al., 2021) also models the trajectory as a sequence of states, actions and rewards, while dis-
cretizing each dimension of state/actions. Bonatti et al. (2022) propose a pretraining scheme for
state-action representations in navigation scenarios using a causal transformer, which can then be
finetuned with imitation learning towards different tasks for the same robot. Furuta et al. (2022)
propose Generalized DT that unifies a family of algorithms for future information matching with
transformers. Zheng et al. (2022) extend DT to online learning by blending offline pretraining and
online finetuning. Transformers can also be used as world models for model-based RL (Chen et al.,
2022; Micheli et al., 2022). Recent studies show that transformer-based models can be scaled up
with diverse multi-task datasets to produce generalist agents (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022).
Our proposed method has a similar structure that regards RL trajectories as sequential inputs. How-
ever, differently from most existing transformer models that learn policy from returns, our SMART
focuses on learning control-relevant representations with self-supervised pretraining.

3    P RELIMINARIES
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process. We model control tasks and environments as
a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) M = ⟨S, A, O, P, R, E⟩, which is a
generalization of Markov decision process (MDP). Here, S is the underlying state space, A is the
action space, O is the observation space, P is the transition kernal, R is the reward function, and
E is the observation emission function with E(o|s) being the probability of observing o given state
s. In practice, the observation space can be high dimensional. For example, for a mobile robot
navigating with camera sensors, the images are observations and its odometry (location, orientation,
and associated velocities) and the ground-truth obstacle locations form the underlying state.
Learning Agent and Controlling Policy. At every step t, the agent receives an observation ot
based on the underlying state st (hidden from the agent), takes action at , and obtains a reward rt
and the environment proceeds to the next state st+1 . Given a history of observation-action pairs
of length L and the current observation, ht = (ot−L , at−L , ot−L+1 , at−L+1 , · · · , ot ), the agent
executes action at according to policy π: at = π(ht ). P
                                                       The agent’s goal is to learn an optimal policy
                                                        ∞
π ∗ that maximizes the agent’s cumulative reward EP [ t=1 γ t rt ].
Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Imitation Learning (IL). RL (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is the
process where an agent seeks to maximize its policy returns. RL agents can learn in an online man-
ner by interacting with the environment, or learn from offline data with pre-collected interactions.
Differently from supervised learning, the training data for RL stems from policy-dependent inter-


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


actions with the environment, rendering a non-i.i.d. training regime. Another effective method for
learning control policies is IL (Hussein et al., 2017; Osa et al., 2018), where an agent obtains su-
pervision from expert demonstrations. For both RL and IL, there could be a discrepancy between
training and deployment data distributions due to the different distribution of states induced by the
imperfect policy and environment uncertainty.

4       P ROBLEM S ETUP : P RETRAINING AND F INETUNING P IPELINE
Multi-Task Control with Shared Representation. We consider a set of multiple tasks T with the
same dimensionality in observation space. In this work we select T from different environment in
DeepMind Control Suite (DMC) (Tassa et al., 2018), in which the agent observes an RGB image
of the current state. Tasks in T can have entirely different state spaces S, different action spaces A
and different environment dynamics (P, R, E). We also define the concept of domain to differentiate
tasks that have different state/action spaces. For example, in DMC, “hopper” and “walker” belong to
different domains because they posses distinct action spaces, while “walker-walk” and “walker-run”
are different tasks within the same domain. In this paper we use the term multi-task to refer tasks
spanning potentially multiple domains.
                                                    Table 1: A comparison between pretraining and finetuning.
Pretraining-Finetuning Pipeline. Al-            Pretraining phase             Finetuning phase
though pretraining methods are widely           Learn generic representation Learn policy
applied in many areas, it is not yet clear      Offline                       Offline or online
what role pretraining should play in se-        Multiple tasks                One task, seen or unseen
quential decision making tasks, espe-           Reward    or expert demon-    Has reward supervision or
cially when considering the multi-task          stration may be absent        expert demonstration
setup. In this work, we follow ideas es-        More   samples                Fewer samples
tablished in vision and language community to explicitly define our pretraining and finetuning
pipeline, which we summarize in Table 1. Specifically, during the pretraining phase we train repre-
sentations with a possibly large offline dataset collected from a set of training tasks Tpre = {Mi }ni=1 .
Then, given a specific downstream task M which may or may not be contained in Tpre , we attach a
simple policy head on top of the pretrained representation1 and train it with IL or with RL. The cen-
tral tenet of pretraining is to learn generic representations which allow downstream task finetuning
to be simple, effective and efficient, even under low-data regimes.
This pretraining-finetuning pipeline is a general extension of many prior settings of pretraining for
decision making. For example, Stooke et al. (2021) pretrain an encoder on one or multiple tasks, then
learn an RL policy in downstream tasks. Their pretraining dataset is composed of expert demon-
stration, and the finetuning process focuses on online RL. In addition, Schwarzer et al. (2021) learn
representations with offline datasets, but perform pretraining and finetuning within the same task.

5       O UR P RETRAINING M ODEL AND A PPROACH
We propose Self-supervised Multi-task pretrAining with contRol Transformer (SMART), a general
pretraining approach for multi-task sequential decision making. We first give an overview of the
proposed Control Transformer (CT) and illustrate how it fits in our pretraining-finetuning pipeline
in Section 5.1. Then, we introduce our control-centric pretraining objective in Section 5.2.

5.1       A PPROACH OVERVIEW AND M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
Model Architecture of Control Transformer. Inspired by the recent success of transformer models
in sequential modeling (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021), we propose a Control Transformer
(CT). The input to the model is a control sequence of length 2L composed of observations and ac-
tions: (ot , at , ot+1 , at+1 , · · · , ot+L , at+L ). Different from Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al.,
2021), we purposefully do not include the reward signal in the control sequence to keep our repre-
sentations reward-agnostic, as explained in the end of Section 5.1. Each element of the sequence is
embedded into a d-dimensional token, with a modality-specific tokenizer jointly trained with Trans-
former blocks. We also learn an additional positional embedding and sum it with each token. The
outputs of CT correspond to token embeddings representing each observation and action, and are
represented by ϕ(ot ) and ϕ(at ), respectively.2 Figure 1 depicts the CT architecture.
    1
        The pretrained encoder can be either frozen or finetuned with the policy, depending on the task.
    2
        The implementation details are provided in Appendix A.3.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: The three terms of our proposed pretraining objective. The red shaded areas denote the attention
span, while the grey regions are masked.
Pretraining of SMART. We generate an offline dataset for pretraining which contains control tra-
jectories generated by some behavior policies for a set of diverse tasks Tpre spanning multiple do-
mains. During pretraining, we append several prediction heads to the transformer output, and train
the entire model by minimizing the control-centric pretraining objective introduced in Section 5.2.
These prediction heads are used to learn desired representations, will be dropped in finetuning.
Downstream Finetuning of SMART. As discussed in Section 4, the pretrained representation can
be used to learn policies for different tasks. To do so, we append a policy head π to the observa-
tion representation, such that π(ϕ(ot )) predicts the proper action for observation ot . We can train
the policy head using both IL and RL. For our IL experiments we use behavior cloning with ex-
pert demonstrations, where we feed ϕ(ot ) into a policy head to get action predictions. For RL we
use a return-to-go (RTG)-conditioned policy with trajectories that contain reward values. We feed
ϕ(ot ) along with an RTG embedding to get the policy head’s action predictions. Online RL with
transformer-based models is still a novel field and is not the focus of this work. But we show advan-
tages of our pretraining method for online RL finetuning, following the same settings as online DT
presented by Zheng et al. (2022). See Appendix B.4 for more discussion and results.
Comparison with Prior Decision-making Transformers. Recent works leverage transformer ar-
chitectures for modeling sequential decision making problems (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021;
Lee et al., 2022) as summarized in Section 2. Most of these models use reward information in the
input sequence, as their goal is to directly learn a policy for a specific task. In contrast, our goal is
to pretrain representations for various downstream tasks, and thus our CT uses reward-free control
sequence as the model input; rewards are only used for downstream task when needed. There are
several benefits of making representation agnostic to reward during pretraining. (1) A pretrained
model requiring reward input does not flexibly fit some downstream learning scenarios such as be-
havior cloning, while CT can be a unified model for various learning methods. A user can easily
learn a policy under different learning methods (IL or RL) without modifying transformer blocks.
(2) Reward distribution can be significantly different when the task or policy changes, making a
reward-dependent representation less resilient to distribution shift. We show in Section 6.3 that
utilizing reward during pretraining may hurt the overall downstream performance.
5.2 C ONTROL - CENTRIC S ELF - SUPERVISED P RETRAINING O BJECTIVES
Our pretraining objective employs three terms: forward dynamics prediction, inverse dynamics pre-
diction, and random masked hindsight control. The first two terms focus on local and short-term
dynamics, while the third term is designed to capture more global and long-term temporal depen-
dence. As motivated in Section 5.1, these terms are based on control sequences and are reward-free,
such that they can be used for multiple tasks. Figure 2 illustrates each objective.
I. Forward Dynamics Prediction. For each observation-action pair (ot , at ) in a control sequence,
we aim to predict the next immediate latent state. Let g be the observation tokenizer being trained.
We maintain a momentum encoder ḡ as the exponential moving average of g, to generate the target
latent state from the next observation ot+1 , i.e., ŝt+1 := ḡ(ot+1 ). The idea of momentum encoder is
widely used when the target value is not fixed (He et al., 2020; Mnih et al., 2015), in order to make
training more stable. Then, we train a linear head to predict ŝt+1 based on (ϕ(ot ), ϕ(at )). This
forward prediction captures the local transition information in the embedding space.
II. Inverse Dynamics Prediction. For each consecutive observation pair (ot , ot+1 ), we learn to
recover the action that leads ot to ot+1 Note that in a causal transformer, at is visible to the model


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


when generating representation of ot+1 which can lead to trivial solutions, so we modify the original
causal mask and mask out at from the attention of ot+1 . Therefore, the observation representation
is forced to contain information for relevant actions and transitions.
Both forward and inverse predictions focus on local dynamics induced by the transition kernel P .
However, fitting local dynamics only may result in collapsed representation, i.e., the model learns the
same representation for two semantically different observations (Rakelly et al., 2021). To perform
well in downstream tasks, long-term temporal dependence should also be captured in the represen-
tation. We achieve this by a novel random masked hindsight control term in pretraining.
III. Random Masked Hindsight Control. Given a control sequence h = (ot , at , · · · , ot+L , at+L ),
we randomly mask k actions and k ′ observations, and recover the masked actions based on the re-
maining incomplete sequence. This idea of masked token prediction is related to BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019) for language modeling, but note that we only predict the masked actions for the purpose
of control. More rationale behind the selection of k and k ′ is explained in Appendix A.1. This
objective is akin to asking the question “what actions should I take to generate such a trajectory?”
Therefore, we replace the causal attention mask with a non-causal one, to temporarily allow the
model “see the future”, as shown in Figure 2(right). As a result, we encourage the model to learn
controllable representations and global temporal relations, and to attend to the most essential repre-
sentations for multi-step control. The idea of our random masked hindsight control is also related to
the multi-step inverse prediction proposed by a concurrent work (Lamb et al., 2022), which predicts
at given st and st+l for a random interger l and theoretically shows the effectiveness of this method
in discovering controllable states. Our random masked hindsight control is different as it predicts
multiple actions altogether from randomly masked sequences with a transformer model, which can
efficiently learn the control information in large-scale tasks, and avoid ambiguity caused by different
paths between states. An empirical comparison between our formulation and the multi-step inverse
prediction (Lamb et al., 2022) is provided in Appendix B.5.2.
Finally, our pretraining objective is the summation of the above three terms with equal weights,
which in experiments renders good performance. The mathematical formulations and implementa-
tion details of the objective are explained in Appendix A.1.

6     E XPERIMENTS
We provide empirical results to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed pretraining method,
while aiming to answer the following questions: (1) Can SMART effectively improve learning effi-
ciency and performance in a variety of downstream tasks under different learning methods? (2) How
well can SMART generalize to out-of-distribution tasks? (3) Is SMART resistant to low-quality pre-
training data? (4) How does SMART compare to state-of-the-art pretraining techniques? (5) How
do different pretraining objectives affect the downstream performance?
6.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We evaluate SMART on the DeepMind Control (DMC) suite (Tassa et al., 2018), which contains a
series of continuous control tasks with RGB image observations. There are multiple domains (phys-
ical models with different state and action spaces) and multiple tasks (associated with a particular
MDP) within each domain, which creates diverse scenarios for evaluating pretrained representa-
tions. Our experiments use 10 different tasks spanning over 6 domains. In pretraining, we use an
offline dataset collected over 5 tasks, while the other 5 tasks (with 2 unseen domains) are held out
to test the generalizability of SMART. A full list of tested domains and tasks is in Appendix A.2.
Pretraining Tasks and Datasets. We pretrain SMART on 5 tasks: cartpole-swingup, hopper-hop,
cheetah-run, walker-stand and walker-run. For each task, we adopt/train behavior policies to collect
the following two types of offline datasets. (Details of dataset collection are in Appendix A.2.)
• Random: Trajectories with random environment interactions, with 400K timesteps per task.
• Exploratory: Trajectories generated in the exploratory stage of multiple RL agents with dif-
  ferent random seeds, with 400K timesteps per task.
Downstream Tasks, Learning Methods and Datasets. We evaluate the pretrained models in the
5 seen tasks and another 5 unseen tasks: cartpole-balance, hopper-stand, walker-walk, pendulum-
swingup and finger-spin (the last two tasks are from unseen domains with different state-action
spaces). We consider two learning methods: return-to-go-conditioned policy learning (RTG) and
behavior cloning (BC). For RTG, we use the Sampled Replay dataset containing randomly sam-


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


pled trajectories from the full replay buffer collected by learning agent. For BC, we use the Expert
trajectories with the highest returns from the full replay buffer of learning agents. The downstream
dataset for every task only has 100K timesteps, making it challenging to learn from scratch.
Implementation Details. Our implementation of CT is based on a GPT model (Radford et al., 2018)
with 8 layers and 8 attention heads. We use context length L = 30 and embedding size d = 256. As
explained in Appendix A.1, k and k ′ are linearly increased from 1 to L and L/2, respectively.
The observation tokenizer is a standard 3-layer CNN. Action tokenizer, return tokenizer, and all
single-layer linear prediction heads. We found that freezing the pretrained weights in downstream
tasks works well in relatively simple environments, but fails in harder ones. Therefore, we finetune
the entire model including transformer blocks for all downstream tasks. Since actions in different
domains have different dimensions and physical meanings, we project the raw actions into a larger
common action space to train the action tokenizer. When there is a novel downstream task with
a different action space, we simply re-initialize the action tokenizer and finetune it. Please see
Appendix A.3 for more implementation and hyperparameter details.
Baselines. We compare SMART with the following transformer-based pretraining baselines:
• Scratch trains a policy with randomly initialized CT representation weights.
• ACL (Yang & Nachum, 2021) is a modified BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) that randomly masks and
  predicts tokens with a contrastive loss, pretrained on the same dataset as SMART.
• DT (Chen et al., 2021) pretrained on the same dataset as ours but uses extra reward supervision.
• CT-single is a variant of SMART, which pretrains CT with a single-task dataset containing
  trajectories from the downstream environment.
For fair comparisons, we use the same network architecture for the baseline models (except for DT
where we keep their original network structure with RTG as transformer inputs) and train them with
the same configurations. We also compare SMART with other state-of-the-art pretraining works,
such as CPC (Oord et al., 2018) and ATC (Stooke et al., 2021), using the same pretraining-finetuning
pipeline. However, as these approaches are built upon ResNet backbones, a direct comparison of a
Transformer against a ResNet could be not straightforward. Hence we refer readers to Appendix B.3
for more discussions and results.
Evaluation Metrics. To evaluate the quality of pretrained representations we report the average
cumulative reward obtained in downstream tasks after finetuning. We deploy the trained policies in
each environment for 50 episodes and report average returns. For evaluation of the RTG-conditioned
policies, we use the expert score of each task as the initial RTG, as done in DT (Chen et al., 2021).
Detailed evaluation settings as described in Appendix A.4.

6.2      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We first evaluate the versatility of SMART: 1) whether a single pretrained model can be finetuned
with different downstream learning methods (i.e. RTG and BC); and 2) whether the pretrained model
can adapt towards various downstream tasks. Figure 3 compares the the reward curve of SMART
with Scratch and CT-Single, where models are pretrained with Exploratory dataset3 . To
avoid overlapping of curves, comparison with ACL and DT is shown and discussed later in Fig-
ure 5. It can be seen that pretrained CT from both single-task dataset (CT-single) and multi-task
dataset (SMART) can achieve much better results than training from scratch. In general, under both
RTG and BC finetuning, pretrained models have a warm start, a faster convergence rate, and a rel-
atively better asymptotic performance in a variety of downstream tasks. In most cases, pretraining
CT from multi-task dataset (SMART) yields better results than pretraining with only in-task data
(CT-single), although it is harder to accommodate multiple different tasks with the same model
capacity, which suggests that SMART can extract common knowledge from diverse tasks.
Next, we show the generalizability of SMART. Figure 4 shows the performance of SMART pre-
trained on Exploratory dataset3 , compared to Scratch and CT-single on 5 unseen tasks.
We can see that SMART is able to generalize to unseen tasks and even unseen domains, whose dis-
tributions have a larger discrepancy as compared to the pretraining dataset. Surprisingly, SMART
achieves better performance than CT-single in most tasks, even though CT-single has already
seen the downstream environments. This suggests that good generalization ability can be obtained
from learning underlying information which might be shared among multiple tasks and domains,
   3
       Models pretrained with Random dataset show similar results, as can be seen in Appendix B.1


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                        Cheetah Run: RTG-based Policy Learning                         Hopper Hop: RTG-based Policy Learning                                             Walker Stand: RTG-based Policy Learning                                 Walker Run: RTG-based Policy Learning
                                     Cartpole Swingup: RTG-based Policy Learning

                                                                        Scratch                                                       Scratch                60           Scratch                                                                                                                                                                             Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                          CT-Single                                                                                                                              500
                                                                        CT-Single                                                     CT-Single                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT-Single
                                                                        SMART                 600                                     SMART                               SMART                                                         800                                                                                                                   SMART
                             600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                             40
RTG


                                                                                                                                                    Reward
                                                                                     Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        600


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reward
                    Reward
                             400                                                              400                                                                                                                                                                                                                300


                                                                                                                                                             20                                                                         400                                                                      200
                             200                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CT-Single                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SMART
                               0                                                                0                                                             0                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     0             5         10         15                          0            5        10         15                            0           5          10                    15                                   0               5      10         15                                    0             5       10         15
                                                           Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                                             Epoch                                                                  Epoch
                                              Cartpole Swingup: Behavior Clone                               Cheetah Run: Behavior Clone                                    Hopper Hop: Behavior Clone                                                       Walker Stand: Behavior Clone                                           Walker Run: Behavior Clone

                                                                        Scratch                                                      Scratch                 100                                                                                                                                            400                                              Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                          Scratch                                                                          Scratch
                                                                        CT-Single             600                                    CT-Single                            CT-Single                                                                        CT-Single                                                                                         CT-Single
                                                                        SMART                                                        SMART                    80          SMART                                                                            SMART                                                                                             SMART
                             400                                                                                                                                                                                                     250                                                                    300

                                                                                                                                                              60
                    Reward


                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                  Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Reward
                                                                                              400
BC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                             200                                                                                                                              40                                                                     200
                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                              20                                                                                                                                            100

                               0                                                                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                               0                                                               0
                                     0             5         10         15                          0            5        10         15                            0           5          10                 15                                  0               5         10        15                                  0             5         10         15
                                                           Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                                            Epoch                                                                 Epoch

Figure 3: Downstream learning rewards of SMART (red) compared with pretraining CT with single-task data
(blue) and training from scratch (gray). Results are averaged over 3 random seeds.
                                      Cartpole Balance: RTG-based Policy Learning                       Hopper Stand: RTG-based Policy Learning                        Walker Walk: RTG-based Policy Learning                                    Pendulum Swingup: RTG-based Policy Learning                                     Finger Spin: RTG-based Policy Learning

                                                                                              150                                                            800
                             1,000                                                                                                    Scratch                                                                                                                                         Scratch
                                               Scratch
                                                                                                                                      CT-Single                                                                                                                                       CT-Single
                                               CT-Single                                                                                                                                                                                400                                                                      600
                                                                                                                                      SMART                                                                                                                                           SMART
                                               SMART                                                                                                         600
                              800                                                             100                                                                                                                                       300
RTG


                                                                                     Reward


                                                                                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reward
                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                             400
                              600                                                                                                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                             200                                                Scratch                 100                                                                                                                   Scratch
                              400                                                                                                                                                                               CT-Single                                                                                                                                     CT-Single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SMART                                                                                                                                         SMART
                                                                                                0                                                              0                                                                             0                                                                       0
                                          0            5      10         15                         0            5        10         15                            0            5         10                     15                                  0            5         10        15                                     0             5       10         15
                                                            Epoch                                                       Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                                             Epoch                                                                  Epoch
                                              Cartpole Balance: Behavior Clone                               Hopper Stand: Behavior Clone                                   Walker Walk: Behavior Clone                                                   Pendulum Swingup: Behavior Clone                                          Finger Spin: Behavior Clone
                                                                                                                                                             200                                                                     100                                                                    800
                                              Scratch                                                                                Scratch                                                                  Scratch                                                                Scratch
                             900              CT-Single                                                                              CT-Single                                                                CT-Single                                                              CT-Single
                                                                                              300                                                                                                                                       80
                                              SMART                                                                                  SMART                                                                    SMART                                                                  SMART
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            600
                                                                                                                                                             150
                             800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                    Reward


                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                  Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Reward
                                                                                              200
BC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            400
                             700                                                                                                                             100                                                                        40

                             600                                                              100                                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20                                                                                                                  Scratch
                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT-Single
                             500                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                                                   SMART
                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                      0             5        10         15                          0            5        10         15                            0           5          10                 15                                  0               5         10        15                                  0             5         10         15
                                                           Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                                            Epoch                                                                 Epoch

Figure 4: Downstream learning rewards in unseen tasks and domains of SMART (red) compared with pre-
training CT with single-task data (blue) and training from scratch (gray). Results are averaged over 3 seeds.

spanning a diverse set of distributions. Appendix B.1 provides additional results in other challeng-
ing tasks which have a larger discrepancy with pretraining tasks, where SMART still performs well.
Next we evaluate the resilience of SMART by comparing with all aforementioned baselines, as visu-
alized in Figure 5. We aggregate the results in all tasks by averaging the normalized reward (dividing
raw scores by expert scores) in both RTG and BC settings. When using the Exploratory dataset
for pretraining, SMART outperforms ACL, and is comparable to DT which has extra information
of reward. When pretrained with the Random dataset, SMART is significantly better than DT and
ACL, while ACL fails to outperform training from scratch. This result show that SMART is robust
to low-quality data as compared to other baseline methods.
                                                                             RTG-conditioned Policy Learning                                                                                                                                                                      Behavior Cloning

                       0.8                         Scratch                                                                                                                                                           0.6                 Scratch
                                                   Exploratory                                                                                                                                                                           Exploratory
Normalized Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Normalized Reward


                       0.6                         Random                                                                                                                                                                                Random
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4

                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                       0.2

                              0                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                          Scratch                   CT-Single                       ACL                          DT                        SMART                                                            Scratch                                      CT-Single                               ACL                              SMART
Figure 5: Downstream learning rewards (normalized by expert score) of all methods using Exploratory
and Random dataset. The gap between each pair of green and red bars corresponds to the resilience of each
method to pretraining data quality, and our SMART shows the best resilience among all baselines.

6.3                                       A BLATION AND D ISCUSSION
Ablation of Pretraining Objectives. As we analyzed in Section 5.2, forward prediction and inverse
prediction aim to learn the information of short-term control, while the random masked hindsight
control (in short, Mask-Ctl) learns the long-term control information. To show the effectiveness
of combining these two kinds of information, we conduct ablation study over these three terms.
Figure 6 demonstrates their relative improvements wrt Scratch as defined in Appendix A.4. We


                                                                                                                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                Pretraining with Exploratory Data (RTG Downstream)                                                                                                          Pretraining with Random Data (RTG Downstream)
                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                0.6

  Normalized Reward


                                                                                                                                                   Normalized Reward
                       0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                       0.4



                       0.2                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                Only Mask-Ctl       w/o Mask-Ctl    w/o Inverse                             w/o Forward             SMART                                               Only Mask-Ctl         w/o Mask-Ctl    w/o Inverse                                    w/o Forward               SMART

Figure 6: Ablation study on proposed pretraining objective. Rewards are averaged over tasks. Both long-term
control information (Mask-Ctl) and short-term control information (Forward and Inverse) are important.
                                          Cheetah Run                                                                  Walker Run                                               0.6                                                                                0.6


                                                                                                                                                Average Relative Improvement


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Average Relative Improvement
                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                                                               0.55
Relative Improvement


                                                                         Relative Improvement
                       0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.55
                                                                                                1.5

                       0.2
                                                                                                 1                                                                              0.5                                                                                0.5

                       0.1                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                               0.45                                                                               0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                      128        256 (our setting)      512                                              6           8 (our setting)         10
                        0                                                                        0
                             SMART + Reward             SMART                                         SMART + Reward                SMART                                                        Embedding Size                                                               Number of Transformer Blocks

                        (a) Reward-based v.s. reward-free pretraining.             (b) Overall performance v.s. model capacity.
                       Figure 7: Ablation study of the effect of reward in pretraining and comparison of various model capacity.
can see that only learning long-term control information (Only Mask-Ctl) or only learning short-term
control information (w/o Mask-Ctl) renders much lower performance than the original SMART that
leverages both types of information. In addition, we find that both the performance slightly drops
if either forward prediction or inverse prediction is removed, as the combination of these two terms
leads to more stable and comprehensive representation for short-term control. This ablation study
verifies the effectiveness of each component in the proposed pretraining objective. More results in
other settings are provided in Appendix B.5.1.
Reward-free v.s. Reward-based Pretraining. As discussed in Section 5.1, including reward in-
formation in pretraining objectives is not necessarily helpful. We study the effects of rewards in
pretraining by adding two reward-based objectives in the pretraining phase: immediate reward pre-
diction and RTG-based action prediction. We evaluate this reward-based variant of SMART using
exploratory dataset and RTG-conditioned downstream learning. Note that the RTG-based action
prediction is used both in pretraining and finetuning of the reward-based variant, providing strong
supervision for the pretrained model. However, we (surprisingly) observe that such supervision does
not improve the downstream performance in many tasks, as shown in Figure 7a. A potential rea-
son is that reward-based objectives are more fragile to distribution shifts, which also explains the
non-ideal performance of DT pretrained from random data.
Discussion on Model Capacity. In large-scale training problems, performance usually benefits
from larger model capacity (Kaplan et al., 2020). We investigate if this also applies to sequential
decision making tasks by varying the embedding size (width) and the number of layers (depth) in
CT. The aggregated results averaged over all tasks are show in Figure 7b. From the comparison, we
can see that in general, increasing the model depth leads to a better performance. However, when
embedding size gets too large, the performance further drops, as a large representation space might
allow for irrelevant information. Per-task comparison is provided in Appendix B.2.
Other Potential Variants of SMART. Following the basic idea of SMART, there could be many
other variants and extensions on the design of both architecture and pretraining objective (e.g., does
an additional contrastive loss help?). We investigate several variants of SMART and discuss the
results in Appendix B.5.2. In summary, adding more components to SMART could further improve
its performance in certain scenarios, although such improvement may be limited and task-dependent.
Exploring more extensions of SMART in various settings is an interesting future work.

7                              C ONCLUSION
This paper studies how to pretrain a versatile, generalizable and resilient representation model for
multi-task sequential decision making. We propose a self-supervised and control-centric objective
that encourages the transformer-based model to capture control-relevant representation. Empirical
results in multiple domains and tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, as well
as its robustness to distribution shift and low-quality data. Future work includes strengthen the
attention mechanism on both spatial observation space and temporal state-observation interactions,
as well as investigating its potential generalization in a wider range of application scenarios.


                                                                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   E THICS S TATEMENT
SMART is a method that learns pretrained representations for controls tasks involving sequencial
decision-making. As such, our models will reproduce patterns and biases found in its pretraining
and finetuning datasets.

9   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The codebase, pretrained models and datasets are provided at https://github.com/microsoft/smart.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Andrea Banino, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Jacob C Walker, Tim Scholtes, Jovana Mitrovic, and
  Charles Blundell. CoBERL: Contrastive BERT for reinforcement learning. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=sRZ3GhmegS.
Rogerio Bonatti, Sai Vemprala, Shuang Ma, Felipe Frujeri, Shuhang Chen, and Ashish Kapoor.
  Pact: Perception-action causal transformer for autoregressive robotics pre-training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.11133, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Chang Chen, Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning
  with transformer world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481, 2022.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 15084–15097. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  file/7f489f642a0ddb10272b5c31057f0663-Paper.pdf.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJx63jRqFm.
Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Generalized decision transformer for offline
  hindsight information matching. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CAjxVodl_v.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning:
  A survey of learning methods. ACM Comput. Surv., 50(2), apr 2017. ISSN 0360-0300. doi:
  10.1145/3054912. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3054912.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34, 2021.
Saurav Kadavath, Samuel Paradis, and Brian Yao. Pretraining & reinforcement learning: Sharpening
  the axe before cutting the tree. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02497, 2021.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Alex Lamb, Riashat Islam, Yonathan Efroni, Aniket Didolkar, Dipendra Misra, Dylan Foster, Lekan
  Molu, Rajan Chari, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Guaranteed discovery of con-
  trollable latent states with multi-step inverse models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08229, 2022.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu, Sergio
  Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game decision transform-
  ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15241, 2022.
Seunghyun Lee, Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Jinwoo Shin. Offline-to-online
  reinforcement learning via balanced replay and pessimistic q-ensemble. In 5th Annual Conference
  on Robot Learning, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AlJXhEI6J5W.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18459–18473, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   Bkg6RiCqY7.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discover-
  ing and achieving goals via world models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34, 2021.
Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample efficient world models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00588, 2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Takayuki Osa, Joni Pajarinen, Gerhard Neumann, J Andrew Bagnell, Pieter Abbeel, Jan Peters, et al.
  An algorithmic perspective on imitation learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 7(1-2):
  1–179, 2018.
Simone Parisi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Senthil Purushwalkam, and Abhinav Gupta. The unsurprising
  effectiveness of pre-trained vision models for control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03580, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Ilija Radosavovic, Tete Xiao, Stephen James, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Trevor Darrell.
   Real world robot learning with masked visual pre-training. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot
   Learning.
Kate Rakelly, Abhishek Gupta, Carlos Florensa, and Sergey Levine.            Which mutual-
  information representation learning objectives are sufficient for control?   In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26345–26357. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  dd45045f8c68db9f54e70c67048d32e8-Paper.pdf.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
  A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin,
 R Devon Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron C Courville. Pretraining representations for data-
 efficient reinforcement learning. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
 J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
 12686–12699. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
 cc/paper/2021/file/69eba34671b3ef1ef38ee85caae6b2a1-Paper.pdf.
Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Stephen James, and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning with action-
  free pre-training from videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13880, 2022.
Rutav Shah and Vikash Kumar. Rrl: Resnet as representation for reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
  from reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9870–9879.
  PMLR, 2021.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel,
  Tom Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and
  tasks for continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020. ISSN 2665-9638. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S2665963820300099.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mengjiao Yang and Ofir Nachum. Representation matters: offline pretraining for sequential decision
 making. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11784–11794. PMLR, 2021.
Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 27042–27059. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/zheng22c.html.



                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1    I MPLEMENTATION OF P RETRAINING O BJECTIVES

I. Forward Dynamics Prediction.
For each observation-action pair (ot , at ) in a control sequence, the forward prediction loss is con-
structed as follows. Let gθ be the observation tokenizer being trained where θ denotes the parameter-
ization. We maintain a momentum encoder ḡθ̄ whose parameters are updated by θ̄ = τ (θ̄)+(1−τ )θ.
With the next observation ot+1 , we have ŝt+1 := SG(ḡθ̄ (ot+1 )), where SG refers to stop gradient.
Then the forward prediction loss is defined as:
                               Lfwd := MSE (ffwd (ϕ(ot ), ϕ(at )), ŝt+1 ) ,                           (1)
where ffwd is a linear prediction head.
II. Inverse Dynamics Prediction.
For each consecutive observation pair (ot , ot+1 ), inverse prediction tries to recover the action that
leads ot to ot+1 , which gives the loss function
                               Linv := MSE (finv (ϕ(ot ), ϕ(ot+1 )), at ) ,                            (2)
where finv is a linear prediction head.
III. Random Masked Hindsight Control.
In our implementation, we use a predefined mask-token m = [−1, · · · , −1] to replace the original
tokens. Let h̃ denote the masked control sequence, and 0 ≤ s1 , s2 , · · · , sk ≤ L be the selected
indices for masked actions. Then the loss function can be defined as:
                           Xk
              Lmask-inv :=       l(si ),
                             i=1
                                                                                                (3)
                              (
                                MSE fmask-inv (ϕM (mt+si ); h̃), at+si , if si < L
              where l(si ) =
                                0                                             if si = L
where fmask-inv is a linear prediction head, and ϕM is the transformer model without a causal mask.
Note that we do not predict at+L as it is infeasible to recover it without future observations.
Schedule of Masking Size. Theoretically, it is possible to recover a full action sequence for a given
observation sequence, which implies that k = L is a reasonable setup. But in environments with
complex dynamics, directly recovering all actions is hard in the start of training. Hence, we adjust
the difficulty of random masked hindsight control in a curriculum way, by gradually increasing the
value of k in the following schedule:

                                                  current epoch + 1
                           k = max 1, int L ∗                                                      (4)
                                                     total epochs
On the other hand, if we predict actions from all observations, it is possible that the model mainly
relies on local dynamics, i.e., predict at mainly based on ot−1 , ot−2 , ot−3 , conflicting with our desire
of learning long-term dependence. Therefore, we also mask a subset of observations with k ′ . In the
extreme case k ′ = L, the objective becomes similar to goal-conditioned modeling with ot being the
start and ot+L is the goal. However, in a control environment, there usually exist multiple paths from
ot to ot+L , making the action prediction ambiguous. Schwarzer et al. (2021) uses a goal-conditioned
objective which finds the shortest path. However, extra value fitting and planning are required, which
may lead to higher cost and compounding errors. Therefore, we intentionally make k ′ smaller than
the context length (half of L), such that the model is able to predict the masked actions based on
revealed subsequence of observations and actions. The schedule of k ′ is as below.

                                                L current epoch + 1
                           k ′ = max 1, int        ∗                            .                       (5)
                                                2       total epochs

The overall pretraining objective is
                                         min               Lfwd + Linv + Lmask-inv .                   (6)
                                 ϕ,ffwd ,finv ,fmask-inv


                                                              13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2    E NVIRONMENT AND DATASET.

Table 2 lists all domains and tasks from DMC used in our experiments, and their relations are further
depicted in Figure 8.

                        Phase                  Domain          Task        Expert Score by SAC
                                               cartpole       swingup               875
                                                hopper          hop                 200
             Pretraining & Finetuning          cheetah          run                 850
                                                walker         stand                980
                                                walker          run                 700
                                               cartpole       balance              1000
                                                hopper         stand                900
                   Finetuning only              walker         walk                 950
                                              pendulum        swingup              1000
                                                finger          spin                800

Table 2: A list of domains and tasks used in pretraining and finetuning. The first 5 tasks are used for pretraining.
In the finetuning phase, we use the pretrained model to learn policies in all 10 tasks, including the last 5 tasks
that are unseen during pretraining.


                               Figure 8: Graphical relations of all tasks involved.

To generate our datasets for pretraining and finetuning, we first train 5 agents (corresponding to
different random seeds) for each task with ground truth vector states using SAC (Haarnoja et al.,
2018) for 1M steps, and collect the full replay buffer with corresponding RGB images (3×84×84)
rendered by the physical simulator. Then, we divide the replay buffers and create the following
datasets of different qualities.
• Random: Randomly generated interaction trajectories. This dataset has 400K timesteps per task.
• Exploratory: The first 80K timesteps of each SAC learner, corresponding to the exploratory
  stage. For all 5 agents, this leads to a cumulative of 400K timesteps per task.
Note that different tasks have different difficulties for the SAC agent to converge. For example, in
cartpole, the agent converges with much less samples than in walker. Therefore, we slightly adjust
the proportion of data from different tasks in multi-task pretraining to avoid overfitting to simple
tasks and underfitting to harder tasks. In pretraining, we use 40K timesteps from each cartpole
behavior agent (200K by 5 agents), and 90K timesteps from each walker behavior agent (450K by 5
agents), and 80K for all other agents (400K by 5 agents).
Datasets for downstream learning:
• Sampled Replay (for RTG): We randomly sample 10% trajectories from the full replay buffer
  of 1 SAC agent, resulting in a dataset of size 100K per task, with diverse return distribution.
• Expert (for BC): We select 10% trajectories with the highest returns from the full replay buffer
  of 1 SAC agent, resulting in an expert dataset of size 100K per task.

A.3    M ODEL AND H YPERPARAMETERS .

Following the implementation of Decision Transformer (Chen et al., 2021), our transformer back-
bone is based on the minGPT implementation https://github.com/karpathy/minGPT with the default


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). For both pretraining and finetuning, the learning
rate is set to be 6 × 10−4 and batch size 256. For learning rate, linear warmup and cosine decay are
used. A context length 30 is used in all tasks for both training and execution. We tested different
context lengths in preliminary experiments, and a shorter context length (5/10/20) does not work as
well as 30 when training from scratch. We use 8 attention heads, 8 layer attention blocks, and an
embedding size 256 in all experiments, for both our model and baselines. There are 10.8 M train-
able parameters in the model. We test SMART with varying layer numbers and embedding sizes in
Appendix B.2.
For the execution of learned RTG-conditioned policies, we set the expected RTG as the expert scores
in Table 2. Tuning the RTG setting may further increase the results. But since our focus is to show
the effectiveness of pretraining, we did not explore other possibilities.
All models are trained for 10 epochs in pretraining, and 20 epochs for each downstream task. The
performance of the best checkpoint is reported, as detailed in the next section.

A.4                       E VALUATION M ETRICS .

For both BC and RTG downstream learning, we report the average cumulative reward of the learned
policy by interacting with the environment for 50 episodes. In Figure 5, we calculate the normalized
reward based on expert scores.
In Figure 6 and Figure 7a, we report the relative improvement of each ablated method calculated by
the following formula.
                                                                                                                                                     method reward − scratch reward
                                                         relative improvement :=                                                                                                    ,                                                                                                                                             (7)
                                                                                                                                                             scratch reward
where the scratch reward is the best reward of training from scratch using the same learning config-
urations.

B                    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
B.1                       M ORE R ESULTS OF D OWNSTREAM L EARNING

                                                                                       Cheetah Run: RTG-based Policy Learning                        Hopper Hop: RTG-based Policy Learning                              Walker Stand: RTG-based Policy Learning                                  Walker Run: RTG-based Policy Learning
                     Cartpole Swingup: RTG-based Policy Learning

                                                     Scratch                                                        Scratch                60                                     Scratch                                                                                       400                                           Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scratch
                                                     CT-Single                                                      CT-Single                                                     CT-Single                                                                                                                                   CT-Single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT-Single
               600                                                           600                                    SMART                                                         SMART                   800                                                                                                                 SMART
                                                     SMART                                                                                                                                                                  SMART
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                300
                                                                                                                                           40
RTG


                                                                                                                                  Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                          600
                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Reward
      Reward


               400                                                           400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                200

                                                                                                                                           20                                                             400
               200                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                                                                          200
                0                                                              0                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                     0          5        10         15                             0            5        10         15                           0           5        10         15                                 0               5      10         15                                     0             5      10         15
                                       Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                                Epoch                                                                  Epoch
                           Cartpole Swingup: Behavior Clone
                                                                                            Cheetah Run: Behavior Clone                                   Hopper Hop: Behavior Clone                                        Walker Stand: Behavior Clone                                            Walker Run: Behavior Clone
                                                       Scratch
                                                                                                                    Scratch                100          Scratch                                                                                     Scratch                                                                 Scratch
               400                                     CT-Single                                                                                                                                                                                                           120
                                                                                                                    CT-Single                           CT-Single                                                                                   CT-Single                                                               CT-Single
                                                       SMART
                                                                             600                                    SMART                   80          SMART                                                                                       SMART                                                                   SMART
                                                                                                                                                                                                       250                                                                 100
               300
      Reward


                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                   Reward


                                                                                                                                Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                              Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Reward


                                                                             400                                                                                                                                                                                                80
BC


               200
                                                                                                                                            40                                                         200                                                                      60
               100                                                           200
                                                                                                                                            20                                                                                                                                  40

                 0                                                                                                                                                                                     150                                                                      20
                                                                              0                                                              0
                      0          5        10          15                           0           5        10         15                            0           5        10         15                             0               5         10        15                                   0             5         10         15
                                        Epoch                                                         Epoch                                                         Epoch                                                               Epoch                                                                  Epoch



Figure 9: Downstream learning rewards of SMART (red) compared with pretraining CT with single-task data
(blue) and training from scratch (gray), using the Random pretraining dataset. Results are averaged over 3
random seeds.

Curves with the Random Dataset. The results in Figure 3 and Figure 4 are generated with the
Exploratory pretraining dataset. Now, we show the performance of models pretrained using the
Random dataset in seen tasks and unseen tasks in Figure 9 and Figure 10, respectively.
Although the single-task pretrained model consistently outperforms training from scratch when pre-
trained with the Exploratory dataset, it sometime gets worst-than-scratch downstream perfor-
mance when pretrained with the Random dataset. Therefore, it is challenging to overcome the distri-
bution shift problem. In contrast, SMART still achieves much better performance than training from


                                                                                                                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                          Hopper Stand: RTG-based Policy Learning                               Walker Walk: RTG-based Policy Learning                                  Finger Spin: RTG-based Policy Learning                                  Finger Spin: RTG-based Policy Learning
                        Cartpole Balance: RTG-based Policy Learning
               1,000                                                                                                    Scratch                                    Scratch                                                                 Scratch                                                                 Scratch
                                Scratch                                         150                                     CT-Single                                  CT-Single                                          600                  CT-Single                                           600                 CT-Single
                                CT-Single
                                                                                                                        SMART                  600                 SMART                                                                   SMART                                                                   SMART
                                SMART
                800


RTG
                                                                                100


                                                                       Reward


                                                                                                                                      Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      400                                                                      400


      Reward
                                                                                                                                               400
                600

                                                                                 50                                                                                                                                   200                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                               200
                400

                                                                                  0                                                                                                                                        0                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                    0
                           0          5        10         15                          0            5        10          15                                  0              5      10         15                                     0              5       10        15                                    0              5       10         15
                                             Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                                 Epoch                                                                    Epoch                                                                  Epoch
                                Cartpole Balance: Behavior Clone
                                                                                               Hopper Stand: Behavior Clone                                         Walker Walk: Behavior Clone                                             Finger Spin: Behavior Clone                                            Finger Spin: Behavior Clone

                                Scratch                                                                                                                                                                            800                                                                    800
                                                                                                                       Scratch                                                              Scratch                                      Scratch                                                                 Scratch
                                CT-Single                                       300                                                            120
                                                                                                                       CT-Single                                                            CT-Single                                    CT-Single                                                               CT-Single
               800              SMART                                                                                  SMART                                                                SMART                  600                   SMART                                            600                    SMART
                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                200
      Reward


               700


                                                                      Reward


                                                                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reward
                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400                                                                    400
BC


                                                                                                                                               60
               600                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200                                                                    200
                                                                                                                                               40

               500                                                                0                                                                                                                                    0                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                               20
                        0            5         10           15                        0            5        10         15                               0               5        10         15                                  0              5          10        15                                 0              5          10        15
                                             Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                                Epoch                                                                    Epoch                                                                  Epoch



Figure 10: Downstream learning rewards in unseen tasks and domains of SMART (red) compared with pre-
training CT with single-task data (blue) and training from scratch (gray), using the Random pretraining dataset.
Results are averaged over 3 random seeds.


scratch in all tested tasks, which verifies the resilience of SMART due to multi-task self-supervised
pretraining.
Generalizability of SMART: Tasks That Have Larger
Discrepancy with Pretraining Tasks. In addition to the
generalizability test we show in Section 6.2, we evaluate
the performance of the pretrained SMART model in other
more challenging domains/tasks from DMC, that are sig-
nificantly different from the pretraining tasks. These
additional domain-tasks are: ball-in-cup-catch, finger-
turn-hard, fish-swim, swimmer-swimmer6 and swimmer-                                                                                                                                                      Figure 11: Discrepancy between pretrain-
swimmer15. Note that these agents have significantly dif-                                                                                                                                                ing domains and selected downstream do-
ferent appearance and moving patterns compared to pre-                                                                                                                                                   mains: (left) Walker domain. (right) Swim-
                                                                                                                                                                                                         mer domain (6 and 15 links)
training tasks, as visualized in Figure 11.
The results are shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13, where we can see that the pretrained model can
still work in most cases, even under such a large task discrepancy. Note that here CT-Single is
pretrained with data from exactly the downstream task, where SMART has never seen a sample from
the downstream tasks and is pretrained on significantly different domains. Therefore, it is unsurpris-
ing that CT-Single is generally better than SMART in this setting. However, it is interesting to
see that SMART is comparable with or even better than CT-Single in some tasks, suggesting the
strong generalizability of SMART.
On the other hand, one can imagine that it is unavoidable that the performance of a pretrained
model will decrease as the discrepancy between pretraining tasks and downstream tasks increases.
Therefore, we stress the importance of using diverse multi-task data for pretraining in practice.

                                                                                      Finger Turn Hard: RTG-based Policy Learning                               Fish Swim: RTG-based Policy Learning
                       Ball In Cup Catch: RTG-based Policy Learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Swimmer Swimmer6: RTG-based Policy Learning                           Swimmer Swimmer15: RTG-based Policy Learning
                                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                400                                                                                                          Scratch
                               Scratch                                                        Scratch                                                                                                                                                               Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                                             CT-Single                                                                                                            Scratch
                               CT-Single                                                      CT-Single                                                                                                                                                             CT-Single
                                                                                                                                               85                                            SMART                                                                                             140                CT-Single
                               SMART                                                          SMART                                                                                                                   140                                           SMART
               600                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SMART
                                                                                300
RTG


                                                                                                                                      Reward
                                                                       Reward
      Reward


                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      120                                                                      120
               400                                                              200
                                                                                                                                               75                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
               200                                                              100
                                                                                                                                               70                                                                      80

                       0             5        10          15                          0            5        10          15                              0               5        10          15                                  0              5         10        15                                     0           5         10         15
                                            Epoch                                                         Epoch                                                                Epoch                                                                    Epoch                                                                  Epoch

                               Ball In Cup Catch: Behavior Clone                             Finger Turn Hard: Behavior Clone                                       Fish Swim: Behavior Clone                                           Swimmer Swimmer6: Behavior Clone                                       Swimmer Swimmer15: Behavior Clone

                                                          Scratch                            Scratch                                                              Scratch                                                                                                                                        Scratch
                                                                                140                                                            85
                                                          CT-Single                          CT-Single                                                            CT-Single                                        100                                                                                           CT-Single
                                                          SMART                              SMART                                                                SMART                                                                                                                                          SMART
               200                                                              120                                                                                                                                                                                                       120
                                                                                                                                               80                                                                     95
                                                                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Scratch
      Reward


                                                                      Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reward


                                                                                100
BC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      90                    CT-Single                                     110
               150
                                                                                                                                               75                                                                                           SMART
                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      85
                                                                                60                                                                                                                                                                                                        100
               100                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                40
                       0             5        10          15                          0            5        10         15                               0              5         10         15                                  0              5          10        15                                 0              5          10        15
                                            Epoch                                                         Epoch                                                                Epoch                                                                    Epoch                                                                  Epoch



Figure 12: Downstream learning rewards of SMART (red) in challenging tasks that have larger discrepancy
with pretraining tasks, using the Exploratory pretraining dataset. Results are from 1 random seed.



                                                                                                                                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                          Finger Turn Hard: RTG-based Policy Learning                       Fish Swim: RTG-based Policy Learning
                     Ball In Cup Catch: RTG-based Policy Learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Swimmer Swimmer6: RTG-based Policy Learning                                                          Swimmer Swimmer15: RTG-based Policy Learning
               800                                                                                                                                 85
                                                                                                                                                                                        Scratch
                           Scratch                                                                 Scratch                                                                                                                                                                                Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                                        CT-Single                                                                                                                    180               Scratch
                           CT-Single                                                400            CT-Single                                                                                                                                                                              CT-Single
                                                                                                                                                                                        SMART                                                                                                                                          CT-Single
                           SMART                                                                   SMART                                                                                                        140                                                                       SMART
               600                                                                                                                                 80                                                                                                                                                                160               SMART

RTG                                                                                 300


                                                                                                                                          Reward
                                                                           Reward
      Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     140


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                120


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reward
               400                                                                                                                                 75                                                                                                                                                                120
                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
               200                                                                  100                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80                                                                                                   80

                     0          5                     10          15                          0         5         10         15                         0           5        10         15                              0          5                       10                             15                                    0           5        10       15
                                                    Epoch                                                       Epoch                                                      Epoch                                                                         Epoch                                                                                     Epoch

                          Ball In Cup Catch: Behavior Clone                                       Finger Turn Hard: Behavior Clone                              Fish Swim: Behavior Clone                                   Swimmer Swimmer6: Behavior Clone                                                                        Swimmer Swimmer15: Behavior Clone
               180
                                                                                                                                                                                       Scratch
                           Scratch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                                       CT-Single                                                                                                                130
                           CT-Single                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CT-Single
               160                                                                                                                                 85                                  SMART
                           SMART                                                    70                                                                                                                       100                                                                                                                      SMART
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                120
               140



                                                                          Reward


                                                                                                                                        Reward
                                                                                                                                                   80                                                                                                                                 Scratch
      Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Reward
BC


                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                                                CT-Single
               120                                                                                                                                                                                              90                                                                                              110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SMART
                                                                                                                                                   75
               100                                                                                                          Scratch                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                            CT-Single                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                   70
                80                                                                                                          SMART
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     90
                     0          5                     10          15                      0            5         10         15                          0          5        10         15                              0          5                 10                                    15                                0              5         10       15
                                                    Epoch                                                      Epoch                                                      Epoch                                                                   Epoch                                                                                            Epoch



Figure 13: Downstream learning rewards of SMART (red) in challenging tasks that have larger discrepancy
with pretraining tasks, using the Random pretraining dataset. Results are from 1 random seed.


B.2                      M ODEL C APACITY T EST

Figure 7b shows the results of varying model capacities averaged over tasks. To demonstrate the
influence of model capacity on different tasks, we provide the per-task comparison in Figure 14.
                                       Relative Improvement


                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                         Embedding Size=128
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Embedding Size=256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Embedding Size=512
                                                              1


                                                              0


                                                                       cartpole                      cheetah                     hopper                     walker                  walker                      cartpole                                                           hopper                walker
                                                                       swingup                         run                        hop                       stand                    run                        balance                                                             stand                 walk
                                       Relative Improvement


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Layer=6
                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Layer=8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Layer=10

                                                              1


                                                              0
                                                                       cartpole                      cheetah                     hopper                     walker                  walker                      cartpole                                                           hopper                walker
                                                                       swingup                         run                        hop                       stand                    run                        balance                                                             stand                 walk

Figure 14: Comparison of varying model capacities (embedding size and layer number) in different tasks in
terms of relative improvement wrt training from scratch.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Average Relative Improvement wrt Scratch


Further Decreasing Model Capacity. In Figure 7b, we can see                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8

that a 6-layer transformer backbone is slightly better than the 8-
layer transformer. It may suggest that the current network we use                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.75

is overly large for the tasks. To see whether it is the case, we fur-
ther decrease the number of transformer layers to 4 and 2. The                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.7
results are depicted in Figure 15, where we can see that a 4-layer or
a 2-layer transformer is clearly worse than the 6-layer and 8-layer                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.65
transformers. Therefore, the current architecture is not too heavy                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2      3     4      5     6      7                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Number of Transformer Blocks
for the DMC tasks. The exact numbers in Figure 15 are different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 15: More model capacity
from the corresponding ones in Figure 7b, because Figure 7b aggre-                                                                                                                                                                     tests. Results are from one ran-
gates results from 3 random seeds but Figure 15 is from 1 random                                                                                                                                                                       dom seed and are averaged over
seed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tasks.


                                                                                                                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.3                      C OMPARISON WITH P RETRAINED R ES N ET M ODELS

Our empirical evaluation is done for multiple transformer-based pretraining approaches. In parallel
to them, there are some existing pretraining paradigms that use large-capacity models as ResNet
instead of transformers as the backbones. Although it is hard to directly compare the performance
of totally different model architectures, we still provide the results of ResNet pretraining, to better
posit this work in literature and verify the significance of our results.
Baselines and Implementation Details. We use the following two state-of-the-art pretraining ap-
proaches.

• CPC (Oord et al., 2018) is a self-supervised representation learning approach with contrastive
  predictive coding. It has been demonstrated success in many vision applications. When leveraging
  it in sequential decision making, state representations can be pretrained by decoupled from policy
  learning.
• ATC (Stooke et al., 2021) is another contrastive learning approach target on decision making
  tasks. It also decouples representation learning from policy learning. Different from CPC which
  performs InfoNCE (Oord et al., 2018) loss in a predictive manner, ATC propose an Augmented
  Temporal Contrast to directly compute InfoNCE loss among temporally augmented clips.

For both CPC and ATC, we use 3D-ResNet18 as the encoder backbone. During pretraining, a 2-layer
2D-ConvNet is used as the prediction head for both CPC and ATC. For CPC, a single-layer Con-
vGRU is used as the aggregation network. Note that, during finetuning, both prediction heads and
aggregation network are dropped. Only the pretrained encoder (3D-ResNet18) is used to produce
the pretrained representations. During finetuning, we simply attach a single linear layer as the action
prediction head on top of the pretrained encoder, which is under the same setting with ours.
For a fair comparison, we pretrain and finetune both CPC and ATC with a context length of 30
such that all comparing models are seeing the same time horizon. Follow the widely used training
protocol in decision making tasks, we also leverage a frame stacking with stack size as 3 when
training both of them. We keep the other hyperparameters the same with our default setting.
Results. We compare our SMART with CPC and ATC in RTG and BC downstream tasks, with
Exploratory and Random dataset. The results are shown in Figure 16 and Figure 17, respec-
tively. Although training a transformer and training a ResNet model from scratch usually produces
different rewards in the same task, the results show that pretrained models are able to their cor-
responding train-from-scratch baselines. When using RTG downstream learning, we can see that
SMART outperforms CPC and ATC in all downstream tasks. When using BC as downstream learn-
ing method, the transformer backbone fails to get a high score and so does SMART pretrained mod-
els. But in remaining tasks, SMART is still significantly better than CPC and ATC. This suggests the
advantages of our pretraining framework SMART and the proposed model Control Transformer.

                           Transformer from Scratch                                                    ResNet from Scratch                                        CPC (ResNet)                                        ATC (ResNet)                                         Ours (Transformer)
                          Cartpole Swingup (RTG)                                         Hopper Hop (RTG)                                           Cheetah Run (RTG)                                             Walker Stand (RTG)                                                    Walker Walk (RTG)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   800
                                                                      60        Transformer from Scratch
               600                                                              ResNet from Scratch                              600                                                            800
                                                                                CPC (ResNet)                                                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                ATC (ResNet)
RTG


                                                                      40        Ours (Transformer)                                                                                              600
      Reward


               400
                                                                                                                        Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                       Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reward


                                                                                                                                 400
                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400
                                                                                                                                                         Transformer from Scratch                                         Transformer from Scratch                                          Transformer from Scratch
                                                                      20                                                                                                                        400
               200                                                                                                               200                     ResNet from Scratch                                              ResNet from Scratch                                               ResNet from Scratch
                                                                                                                                                         CPC (ResNet)                                                     CPC (ResNet)                             200                      CPC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                         ATC (ResNet)                                                     ATC (ResNet)                                                      ATC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                         Ours (Transformer)                     200                       Ours (Transformer)                                                Ours (Transformer)
                0                                                      0                                                           0                                                                                                                                   0
                     0     5        10         15                           0        5          10          15                         0         5          10          15                                0       5          10         15                                     0       5       10           15
                                  Epoch                                                       Epoch                                                       Epoch                                                            Epoch                                                             Epoch
                           Cartpole Swingup (BC)                                          Hopper Hop (BC)                                           Cheetah Run (BC)                                              Walker Stand (BC)                                                    Walker Walk (BC)
                                                                      100                                                                                                                    800                                                              600
               400                                                                                                                         Transformer from Scratch                                                                                                                        Transformer from Scratch
                                                                                                                                           ResNet from Scratch                                                                                                                             ResNet from Scratch
                                                                      80                                                         600       CPC (ResNet)                                                                                                                                    CPC (ResNet)
               300                                                                                                                         ATC (ResNet)                                      600                                                                                           ATC (ResNet)
                                                                                           Transformer from Scratch                                                                                                   Transformer from Scratch                400
                                                                      60                                                                   Ours (Transformer)                                                                                                                              Ours (Transformer)
      Reward


                                                                                           ResNet from Scratch                                                                                                        ResNet from Scratch
                                                            Reward


                                                                                                                      Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reward


                                                                                                                                 400
BC


                                                                                           CPC (ResNet)                                                                                                               CPC (ResNet)
               200
                                 Transformer from Scratch             40                   ATC (ResNet)                                                                                      400                      ATC (ResNet)
                                 ResNet from Scratch                                       Ours (Transformer)                                                                                                         Ours (Transformer)                      200
                                                                                                                                 200
               100               CPC (ResNet)                         20
                                 ATC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                                                             200
                                 Ours (Transformer)
                 0                                                     0                                                          0                                                                                                                                0
                     0     5        10         15                           0         5          10         15                         0        5          10           15                            0       5            10          15                                  0       5          10          15
                                  Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                     Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                              Epoch



Figure 16: Downstream learning rewards of SMART (red) compared with CPC (darkblue) and ATC (darkor-
ange), using the Exploratory pretraining dataset. CPC and ATC are based on ResNet, whose performance
of training from scratch is shown in darkgreen in comparison to training transformer from scratch (grey).



                                                                                                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Transformer from Scratch                                                               ResNet from Scratch                                                    CPC (ResNet)                                      ATC (ResNet)                                               Ours (Transformer)
                                     Cartpole Swingup (RTG)                                                   Hopper Hop (RTG)                                                  Cheetah Run (RTG)                                                 Walker Stand (RTG)                                                               Walker Walk (RTG)
                   600

                                                                                                                                                          600                                                                   800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         600

                   400                                                              40                    Transformer from Scratch
RTG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                600
          Reward


                                                                                                                                                 Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Reward
                                                                                                          ResNet from Scratch


                                                                           Reward
                                                                                                                                                          400                                                                                                                                            400
                                                                                                          CPC (ResNet)
                                                                                                          ATC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                                                      Transformer from Scratch                                            Transformer from Scratch                                                        Transformer from Scratch
                   200                                                              20                    Ours (Transformer)                                                                                                    400
                                                                                                                                                          200                         ResNet from Scratch                                                 ResNet from Scratch                                                             ResNet from Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                                                      CPC (ResNet)                                                        CPC (ResNet)                                                                    CPC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                                                      ATC (ResNet)                                                        ATC (ResNet)                                                                    ATC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                                                      Ours (Transformer)                        200                       Ours (Transformer)                                                              Ours (Transformer)
                       0                                                             0                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                           0          5          10          15                          0                5            10        15                               0         5             10             15                               0       5          10          15                                          0            5          10          15
                                               Epoch                                                                 Epoch                                                              Epoch                                                              Epoch                                                                           Epoch
                                     Cartpole Swingup (BC)                                                    Hopper Hop (BC)                                                   Cheetah Run (BC)                                                  Walker Stand (BC)                                                               Walker Walk (BC)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                          600         Transformer from Scratch                                                                                                      600
                   300                                                              80                                                                                ResNet from Scratch
                                                                                                                                                                      CPC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                Transformer from Scratch                              ATC (ResNet)                                           600
                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                Transformer from Scratch                                                        Transformer from Scratch
                                                                                                                ResNet from Scratch                       400         Ours (Transformer)                                                                                                            400
                                                                          Reward
          Reward


                   200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ResNet from Scratch                                                             ResNet from Scratch


                                                                                                                                               Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Reward
                                                                                                                CPC (ResNet)
BC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CPC (ResNet)                                                                    CPC (ResNet)
                                                                                    40                          ATC (ResNet)                                                                                                                          ATC (ResNet)                                                                    ATC (ResNet)
                                               Transformer from Scratch                                                                                                                                                      400
                                                                                                                Ours (Transformer)                                                                                                                    Ours (Transformer)                                                              Ours (Transformer)
                   100                         ResNet from Scratch                                                                                        200                                                                                                                                       200
                                               CPC (ResNet)                         20
                                               ATC (ResNet)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             200
                                               Ours (Transformer)
                                                                                    0                                                                      0
                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                           0          5           10         15                          0                5            10        15                               0         5           10           15                               0       5            10          15                                        0            5            10          15
                                                Epoch                                                                Epoch                                                            Epoch                                                              Epoch                                                                           Epoch



                       Figure 17: Comparison with ResNet-based pretrained models using the Random pretraining dataset.



B.4                            P RETRAIN CT FOR O NLINE F INETUNING

Similar to most transformer-based decision making models, we consider policy learning in the form
of IL and offline RL. For online RL, special care is needed due to the environment uncertainty and
the need of exploration. A recent work by Zheng et al. (2022) proposes online decision transformer
(ODT), which first pretrains the model with offline trajectories and then finetune the model in an
online manner. Zheng et al. (2022) demonstrate the effectiveness of ODT in a series of MuJoCo tasks
with groundtruth state being observations. It is shown that the offline pretraining phase is crucial
for online fintuning with transformer-based models. However, the pretraining phase of ODT is DT
with reward supervision. With the self-supervised control-centric pretraining objective (Lfwd , Linv ,
Lmask-inv ) proposed in this work, we would like to ask the following questions. (1) Can we replace
the supervised DT pretraining objective with our self-supervised pretraining objective that does not
require reward supervision? (2) Can we improve ODT by combining our objectives with it?
We follow the open-sourced implementation of ODT and evaluate our proposed objective using the
default model and hyperparameter settings of ODT. We first replace the DT pretraining loss with
our self-supervised losses. The results shown in Figure 18 suggests that even without any reward
information, pretraining ODT with our self-supervised losses can achieve comparable performance
with pretraining with reward supervisions. Although our pretrained model takes more steps to warm
up due to the lack of supervised pretraining, it quickly converges to similar results as ODT in online
finetuning. Therefore, in practical applications where only reward-free pretraining trajectories are
available, DT pretraining is infeasible while our pretraining can be used without sacrificing the
finetuning performance.
                                          hopper-medium-v2                                                                       hopper-random-v2                                                                                                                                                                    walker2d-random-v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   walker2d-medium-v2

                                                                                                      1,000                                                                                                                                                                      600                     Supervised Pretrain
         3,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Self-supervised Pretrain (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                            3,000
                                                                                                       800

         2,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reward
Reward


                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                   Reward


                                                                                                       600                                                                                  2,000

                                                                                                       400
         1,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                            1,000

                                          Supervised Pretrain                                          200                       Supervised Pretrain                                                                Supervised Pretrain
                                          Self-supervised Pretrain (ours)                                                        Self-supervised Pretrain (ours)                                                    Self-supervised Pretrain (ours)
                   0                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                  0
                                                                                                         0
                           0    20        40       60   80        100     120                                    0       20      40     60   80                 100   120                            0        20    40            60   80         100       120                        0                 20              40    60   80             100        120
                                                  Epoch                                                                                Epoch                                                                                     Epoch                                                                                        Epoch


Figure 18: Comparison of our self-supervised pretraining objective and the supervised pretraining objective of
ODT in hopper and walker2d environments with medium and random pretraining dataset.


To answer the second question, we combine our pretraining objective with ODT. There are two
potential ways of such combination: (1) only combine in pretraining, and (2) add our self-supervised
losses during both pretraining and finetuning (the losses serve as auxiliary tasks in online finetuning).
We evaluate both versions in our experiments, as shown in Figure 19. The results suggest that
including our pretraining objective can improve the performance of ODT, especially when the data
quality is low ({task}-random dataset is used). However, when our objective is only used during
pretraining, it suffers from high variance in downstream learning. To address this issue, we find that


                                                                                                                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


adding our objective as auxiliary loss in finetuning can effectively improve the result and decrease
the variance.
                                       hopper medium                                                  hopper random                                                                                                                          walker random
                                                                                                                                                                                        walker medium
                                                                                                                                                  4,000                                                                                          ODT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ODT + Ours
                    3,000                                                          1,000                                                          3,500                                                                      600                 ODT + Ours (Auxiliary)

                                                                                    800                                                           3,000
                    2,500


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reward
Reward


                                                                          Reward


                                                                                                                                       Reward
                                                                                    600                                                                                                                                      400
                                                                                                                                                  2,500
                    2,000
                                                                                    400
                                                                                                                                                  2,000
                                             ODT                                                             ODT                                                                ODT                                          200
                    1,500                    ODT + Ours                             200                      ODT + Ours                                                         ODT + Ours
                                             ODT + Ours (Auxiliary)                                          ODT + Ours (Auxiliary)               1,500                         ODT + Ours (Auxiliary)
                                                                                      0
                            0    10   20     30    40    50    60                          0    20   40       60   80    100    120                                       0      10   20      30    40   50   60                   0   20   40    60   80    100   120
                                             Epoch                                                           Epoch                                                                            Epoch                                              Epoch


Figure 19: Combining our pretraining objectives with ODT produces better results, especially when the pre-
training dataset has low quality. Results are averaged over 5 random seeds.

It is also interesting to see that the online learning performance of ODT depends on the quality of
pretraining dataset. When the random dataset is used, ODT converges to a suboptimal policy in
finetuning, although it could have explored better solutions. Adding our self-supervised pretraining
objective improves the performance, but it still cannot match the performance of models pretrained
in a higher-quality dataset. We hypothesize that this is due to a very large distribution shift between
the random dataset and the ideal dataset for online learning. That is, the model pretrained with
random data overfits to the random behavior and fails to further explore and exploit. How to make
a transformer-based model adapt to an online environment with low-quality pretraining data is still
an open problem that we aim to study in our future work.

B.5                             A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDY

B.5.1                              A BLATION OF P RETRAINING O BJECTIVE
In addition to Figure 6 which uses RTG as the downstream learning objective, we also provide the
ablation results of BC downstream learning in Figure 20. Similar to the results of RTG, removing any
term from the control-centric pretraining objective usually causes a performance drop, which verifies
the effectiveness of our objective design. One exception is that removing the inverse prediction gives
a better result for BC with exploratory pretraining data. Combined with results in other cases, we
can find that inverse prediction is not as helpful as forward prediction and random masked hindsight
control on average. But in most cases, especially when pretraining data is low-quality (Random),
including the inverse prediction still improves the performance.
Implementation Details. For the ablation study, we pretrain the model with the same hyperparam-
eter settings on the same datasets using different versions of (ablated) pretraining objectives. The
results are averaged over 8 tasks: cartpole-swingup, cartpole-balance, hopper-hop, hopper-stand,
cheetah-run, walker-stand walker-run, and walker-walk, spanning both seen and unseen tasks. Due
to the large number of experiments (4 variants × 2 learning scenarios × 2 dataset selections × 8
downstream tasks = 128 experiments), the results in Figure 6 and Figure 20 are from one random
seed. Although randomness exists, we believe that the conclusion is meaningful as the results are
averaged over multiple tasks and multiple learning scenarios.
                                            Pretraining with Exploratory Data (BC Downstream)                                                                                                     Pretraining with Random Data (BC Downstream)
                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
Normalized Reward


                                                                                                                                                Normalized Reward


                       1                                                                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                    0.2


                       0                                                                                                                                             0
                            Only Mask-Ctl      w/o Mask-Ctl           w/o Inverse              w/o Forward           SMART                                                    Only Mask-Ctl        w/o Mask-Ctl    w/o Inverse          w/o Forward          SMART

Figure 20: Ablation study of our pretraining objective with BC (behavior cloning) being the downstream learn-
ing algorithm. Both long-term control information (Mask-Ctl) and short-term control information (Forward and
Inverse) are important.

B.5.2                              VARIANTS OF P RETRAINING O BJECTIVE
We also investigate some other possible variants of the pretraining objective.
(1) Multi-step Inverse (inspired by Lamb et al. (2022)): masking all states/actions but st and st+L


                                                                                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and predicting at .
(2) Max Fixed Mask: using a fixed mask size k = L and k ′ = L/2 instead of gradually increasing
k and k ′ .
(3) + Masked State Prediction: in addition to the original objective, this variant also predicts the
masked state token in the third term. (The state token target is generated from the momentum
encoder, as in forward prediction.)
(4) + Contrastive Loss: in addition to the original objective, this variant also employs an additional
contrastive loss, which takes the state/action token and their representations for the same timestep
as positive pairs, while regarding representations from other timesteps as negative samples (inspired
by Banino et al. (2022)).
The implementation and comparison of these variants follow the same setup with the ablation study
in Appendix B.5.1. Note that (3) and (4) are both adding new losses to the original method, which
renders higher computational cost.
The results of comparison with these variants are shown in Figure 21, with RTG being the down-
stream learning objective. The results show that Multi-step Inverse and Max Fixed Mask are in
general worse than SMART, suggesting the effectiveness of our design. Interestingly, optimizing an
extra state prediction loss or a contrastive loss gives better performance when the pretraining data is
Random, while hurts the performance when the pretraining data is Exploratory. We hypothe-
size that this is because such two additional losses emphasize more on capturing visual information
from pixel observations, which is more important for learning and transferring representation from
the Random dataset. In other words, a better visual representation is more crucial under a larger
distribution shift (on behavior policies) that happened when a Random dataset is used for pretrain-
ing. On the other hand, when the pretraining data is of higher quality, adding these two components
downgrades the original SMART. A potential reason is that with a smaller distribution shift, the
control-centric objective can already capture sufficient information from data, while adding new
losses may make the optimization harder and less stable.

                                           Pretraining with Exploratory Data (RTG Downstream)                                                                    Pretraining with Random Data (RTG Downstream)
                     0.8
                                                                                                                                      0.7
                                                                                                                  Normalized Reward
Normalized Reward


                    0.75
                                                                                                                                      0.6
                     0.7

                                                                                                                                      0.5
                    0.65

                     0.6                                                                                                              0.4
                           Multi-step Inverse   Max Fixed Mask + Masked State Pred   + Contrastive   SMART                                  Multi-step Inverse   Max Fixed Mask + Masked State Pred   + Contrastive   SMART

Figure 21: Comparison between SMART and its variants. Adding masked state prediction and contrastive loss
to SMART could increase the performance, but the improvement is not across all scenarios, with a cost of more
computations.
In summary, although none of the tested variants can outperform SMART in all scenarios, some
of them can render better results in certain cases by adding extra pretraining losses to the original
objective, at a cost of more computations and possibly more challenging optimization. Therefore,
whether to use these variants in practice depends on the specific use case and computation resources.
A deeper and more thorough understanding of the relationships among these pretraining losses is de-
sired for better application of pretraining methods, which would be our future work. We emphasize
that multi-task pretraining for control tasks is a relatively new area. This paper takes one step fur-
ther towards general large-scale pretraining models for sequential decision making. Exploring more
possibilities of SMART would be an interesting and important future direction to further improve
its performance in a variety of real-world tasks.


                                                                                                             21
