Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ROMPT- TO -P ROMPT I MAGE E DITING
WITH C ROSS -ATTENTION C ONTROL

    Amir Hertz∗ 1,2 , Ron Mokady∗ 1,2 , Jay Tenenbaum 1 , Kfir Aberman1 , Yael Pritch1 , and Daniel
                                             Cohen-Or∗ 1,2
                                              1
                                                Google Research
                      2
                          The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

                                                  A BSTRACT
             Recent large-scale text-driven synthesis diffusion models have attracted much at-
             tention thanks to their remarkable capabilities of generating highly diverse images
             that follow given text prompts. Therefore, it is only natural to build upon these
             synthesis models to provide text-driven image editing capabilities. However, Edit-
             ing is challenging for these generative models, since an innate property of an edit-
             ing technique is to preserve some content from the original image, while in the
             text-based models, even a small modification of the text prompt often leads to a
             completely different outcome. State-of-the-art methods mitigate this by requir-
             ing the users to provide a spatial mask to localize the edit, hence, ignoring the
             original structure and content within the masked region. In this paper, we pursue
             an intuitive prompt-to-prompt editing framework, where the edits are controlled
             by text only. We analyze a text-conditioned model in depth and observe that the
             cross-attention layers are the key to controlling the relation between the spatial
             layout of the image to each word in the prompt. With this observation, we pro-
             pose to control the attention maps of the edited image by injecting the attention
             maps of the original image along the diffusion process. Our approach enables us
             to monitor the synthesis process by editing the textual prompt only, paving the
             way to a myriad of caption-based editing applications such as localized editing by
             replacing a word, global editing by adding a specification, and even controlling
             the extent to which a word is reflected in the image. We present our results over
             diverse images and prompts with different text-to-image models, demonstrating
             high-quality synthesis and fidelity to the edited prompts.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, large-scale language-image (LLI) models, such as Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022b),
DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Parti (Yu et al., 2022), have shown phenomenal generative
semantic and compositional power, and gained unprecedented attention from the research commu-
nity and the public eye. These LLI models are trained on extremely large language-image datasets
and use state-of-the-art image generative models including auto-regressive and diffusion models.
However, these models do not provide simple editing means, and generally lack control over spe-
cific semantic regions of a given image. In particular, even the slightest change in the textual prompt
may lead to a completely different output image. To circumvent this, LLI-based methods (Nichol
et al., 2021; Avrahami et al., 2022a; Ramesh et al., 2022) require the user to explicitly mask a
part of the image to be inpainted, and drive the edited image to change in the masked area only,
while matching the background of the original image. This approach has provided appealing re-
sults, however, the masking procedure is cumbersome, hampering quick and intuitive text-driven
editing. Moreover, masking the image content removes important structural information, which is
completely ignored in the inpainting process. Therefore, some capabilities are out of the inpainting
scope, such as modifying the texture of a specific object.
In this paper, we introduce an intuitive and powerful textual editing method to semantically edit
images in pre-trained text-conditioned diffusion models via Prompt-to-Prompt manipulations. To
do so, we dive deep into the cross-attention layers and explore their semantic strength as a handle to
control the generated image. Specifically, we consider the internal cross-attention maps, which are
    ∗
        Performed this work while working at Google.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    “The boulevards are crowded today.”   “Photo of a cat riding on a bicycle.”   “Landscape with a house near a river


                                               “a cake with decorations.”                          a castle next to a river.”
          “My f luffy bunny doll.”

Figure 1: Prompt-to-Prompt editing capabilities. Our method paves the way for a myriad of
caption-based editing operations: tuning the level of influence of an adjective word (bottom-left),
making a local modification in the image by replacing or adding a word (bottom-middle), or speci-
fying a global modification (bottom-right).
high-dimensional tensors that bind pixels and tokens extracted from the prompt text. We find that
these maps contain rich semantic relations which critically affect the generated image.
Our key idea is that we can edit images by injecting the cross-attention maps during the diffusion
process, controlling which pixels attend to which tokens of the prompt text during which diffusion
steps. To apply our approach to various creative editing applications, we show several methods to
control the cross-attention maps through a simple and semantic interface (see fig. 1). The first is to
change a single token’s value in the prompt (e.g., “dog” to “cat”), while fixing the cross-attention
maps, to preserve the scene composition. The second is adding new words to the prompt and freezing
the attention on previous tokens while allowing new attention to flow to the new tokens. This enables
us to perform global editing or modify a specific object. The third is to amplify or attenuate the
semantic effect of a word in the generated image. Furthermore, we demonstrate how to use these
attention maps to obtain a local editing effect that accurately preserves the background.
Our approach constitutes an intuitive image editing interface through editing only the textual prompt,
therefore called Prompt-to-Prompt. This method enables various editing tasks, which are chal-
lenging otherwise, and does not require model training, fine-tuning, extra data, or optimization.
Throughout our analysis, we discover even more control over the generation process, recognizing a
trade-off between the fidelity to the edited prompt and the source image. We also demonstrate that
our method operates with different text-to-image models as a backbone and we will publish our code
for the public models upon acceptance. Finally, our method even applies to real images by using
an existing inversion technique. Our experiments show that our method enables intuitive text-based
editing over diverse images that current methods struggle with.

2     R ELATED WORK
Image editing is one of the most fundamental tasks in computer graphics, encompassing the process
of modifying an input image through the use of an auxiliary input, such as a label, mask, or refer-
ence image. A specifically intuitive way to edit an image is through textual prompts provided by
the user. Recently, text-driven image manipulation has achieved significant progress using GANs
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2019), which are known for their high-
quality generation, in tandem with CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), which consists of a semantically rich
joint image-text representation, trained over millions of text-image pairs. Seminal works (Patashnik
et al., 2021; Gal et al., 2021; Xia et al., 2021a) which combined these components were revolution-
ary, since they did not require extra manual labor, and produced realistic manipulations using text
only. For instance, Bau et al. (2021) further demonstrated how to use masks to restrict the text-based
editing to a specific region. However, while GAN-based editing approaches succeed on curated data,
e.g., human faces, they struggle over large and diverse datasets (Mokady et al., 2022).
To obtain more expressive generation capabilities, Crowson et al. (2022) use VQ-GAN (Esser et al.,
2021b), trained over diverse data, as a backbone. Other works (Avrahami et al., 2022b; Kim et al.,
2022) exploit the recent Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2021; 2022a), which achieve
state-of-the-art generation quality over diverse datasets, often surpassing GANs (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021). Kim et al. (2022) show how to perform global changes, whereas Avrahami et al. (2022b) suc-


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                   fixed attention maps and random seed


    “lemon cake.”   “apple cake.”   “chocolate cake.”    “beet cake.”       “pasta cake.”   “lego cake.”   “monster cake.”   “brick cake.”
                                                             fixed random seed


    “lemon cake.”   “apple cake.”   “chocolate cake.”    “beet cake.”       “pasta cake.”   “lego cake.”   “monster cake.”   “brick cake.”

Figure 2: Content modification through attention injection. We start from an original image
generated from the prompt ”lemon cake” (top left), and modify the text prompt to a variety of other
cakes. On the top row, we inject the attention weights of the original image during the diffusion
process. On the bottom, we only use the same random seeds as the original image, without injecting
attention. The latter leads to a completely new structure that is hardly related to the original.
cessfully perform local manipulations using user-provided masks for guidance. While most works
that require only text (i.e., no masks) are limited to global editing (Crowson et al., 2022; Kwon &
Ye, 2021), Bar-Tal et al. (2022) proposed a text-based localized editing technique without using any
mask, showing impressive results. Yet, their techniques mainly allow changing textures, but not
modifying complex structures, such as changing a bicycle to a car. Moreover, unlike our method,
their approach requires training a network for each input.
Numerous works (Ding et al., 2021; Hinz et al., 2020; Tao et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019; Ramesh et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2018b; Crowson et al., 2022; Gafni et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2021) advanced
the generation of images conditioned on plain text, known as text-to-image synthesis. But only re-
cently these were followed by several large-scale text-image models, such as Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022b), DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), and Parti (Yu et al., 2022), demonstrating unprecedented
semantic generation. However, these models do not provide control over a generated image, specif-
ically using text guidance only. Changing a single word in the original prompt associated with the
image often leads to a completely different outcome. For instance, adding the adjective “white” to
“dog” often changes the dog’s shape. To overcome this, several works (Nichol et al., 2021; Avrahami
et al., 2022a) assume that the user provides a mask to restrict the edited region.
Unlike previous works, our method requires textual input only, by using the spatial information from
the internal layers of the generative model itself. This offers the user a much more intuitive editing
experience of modifying local or global details by merely modifying the text prompt.

3       M ETHOD
Let I be an image that was generated by a text-guided diffusion model using the text prompt P
and a random seed s. Our goal is to edit I, using only the guidance of an edited prompt P ∗ , in
order to get an edited image I ∗ that maintains the content and structure of the original image but
corresponds to the edited prompt. For example, consider an image generated from the prompt “my
new bicycle”, and assume that the user wants to edit the color of the bicycle or replace it with a
scooter while preserving the appearance and structure of the original image. An intuitive interface
for the user is to directly change the text prompt by further describing the appearance of the bike,
or replacing it with another word, respectively. As opposed to previous works, we wish to avoid
relying on any user-defined mask to assist or signify where the edit should occur. A simple, but
unsuccessful attempt is to fix the internal randomness and regenerate using the edited text prompt.
Unfortunately, as fig. 2 shows, this results in a completely different structure and composition.
Our key observation is that the structure and appearance of the generated image depend not only on
the random seed, but also on the interaction between the pixels to the text embedding through the
diffusion process. By modifying the pixel-to-text interaction that occurs in cross-attention layers,
we provide Prompt-to-Prompt image editing capabilities. More specifically, injecting the cross-
attention maps of the input image I enables us to preserve the original composition and structure. In
Section 3.1, we review how cross attention is used, and in Section 3.2, we describe how to exploit the
cross-attention for editing. Self-attention is discussed in section 3.3. For background on diffusion
models, refer to appendix A.


                                                                        3
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       ap o n
                                                     m enti
                                                          s
Pixel features   Pixel Queries      Tokens Keys                              Tokens Values         Output


                                                        t
                                                     At
                                   (from Prompt)                             (from Prompt)
                             X                                          X
    ϕ (zt )           Q                 K                    Mt                    V               ϕ
                                                                                                   b (zt )
                                             Text to Image Cross Attention
                                               Cross Attenetion Control

                                                                                 New weighting

  Mt                                   Mt∗
                                 Mt∗                                                         M
                                                                                             ct
                                                                      M
                                                                      ct
              Word Swap                          Prompt Refinement                Attention Re–weighting
  Figure 3: Method overview. Top: visual and textual embedding are fused using cross-attention
  layers that produce attention maps for each textual token. Bottom: we control the spatial layout
  and geometry of the generated image using the attention maps of a source image. This enables
  various editing tasks through editing the textual prompt only. When swapping a word in the prompt,
  we inject the source image maps Mt , overriding the target maps Mt∗ . In the case of adding a
  refinement phrase, we inject only the maps that correspond to the unchanged part of the prompt. To
  amplify or attenuate the semantic effect of a word, we re-weight the corresponding attention map.
  3.1    C ROSS - ATTENTION IN TEXT- CONDITIONED D IFFUSION M ODELS
  In this section, we refer to the Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022b) text-guided synthesis model as our
  backbone, although our method is not limited to a specific model, and results with Latent Diffusion
  and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021) are presented in section 4.1 and appendix C. All
  three models condition on the text prompt in the noise prediction of each diffusion step throughout
  cross-attention layers. For further details about the attention layers within each model, please see
  appendix A.2. Since the composition and geometry are mostly determined at the 64 × 64 resolution,
  we only adapt the text-to-image diffusion model, using the super-resolution process as is. Recall
  that each diffusion step t consists of predicting the noise ϵ from a noisy image zt and text embedding
  ψ(P) using a U-shaped network (Ronneberger et al., 2015). At the final step, this process yields
  the generated image I = z0 . Most importantly, the interaction between the two modalities occurs
  during the noise prediction, where the embeddings of the visual and textual features are fused using
  cross-attention layers that produce spatial attention maps for each textual token. More formally, as
  illustrated in fig. 3 (top), the deep spatial features of the noisy image ϕ(zt ) are projected to a query
  matrix Q = ℓQ (ϕ(zt )), and the textual embedding is projected to a key matrix K = ℓK (ψ(P)) and
  a value matrix V = ℓV (ψ(P)), via learned linear projections ℓQ , ℓK , ℓV . Attention maps are then
                                                             QK T

                                          M = Softmax         √      ,                                  (1)
                                                                d
  where the cell Mij defines the weight of the value of the j-th token on the pixel i, and d is the latent
  projection dimension of the keys and queries. Finally, the cross-attention output is defined to be
  ϕb (zt ) = M V , which is then used to update the spatial features ϕ(zt ).
  Intuitively, the cross-attention output M V is a weighted average of the values V where the weights
  are the attention maps M , which are correlated to the similarity between Q and K. In practice, to
  increase their expressiveness, multi-head attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) is used in parallel, and then
  the results are concatenated and passed through a learned linear layer to get the final output.
  3.2    C ONTROLLING THE C ROSS - ATTENTION
  We return to our key observation — the spatial layout and geometry of the generated image depend
  on the cross-attention maps. The interaction between pixels and text is illustrated in fig. 4, where
  the average attention maps are plotted. As can be seen, pixels are more attracted to the words that
  describe them, e.g., pixels of the bear are correlated with the word “bear”. Note that averaging is
  done for visualization purposes, and attention maps are kept separate for each head. Interestingly,
  we can see that the structure is already determined in the early steps of the diffusion process.
  Since the attention reflects the overall composition, we can inject the attention maps M that were
  obtained from the generation with the original prompt P, into a second generation with the modified
  prompt P ∗ . This allows the synthesis of an edited image I ∗ that is not only manipulated according


                                                         4
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Synthesized image    “a            furry           bear          watches        a             bird”
                                 Average cross–attention maps across all timestamps
                                  Cross–attention maps for individual timestamps
    bear


            t=T                                                                                       t=1

    Figure 4: Cross-attention maps of a text-conditioned diffusion image generation. Top: average
    attention masks for each word in the prompt which was used to synthesize the left image. Bottom:
    attention maps with respect to the word “bear” from different diffusion steps, ranging from the first
    step T = 256 to the last step t = 1 in equal intervals.
    to the edited prompt, but also preserves the structure of the input image I. This is a specific instance
    of a broader set of attention-based manipulations leading to different types of intuitive editing. We,
    therefore, start by proposing a general framework, followed by the details of the specific operations.
    Let DM (zt , P, t, s) be the computation of a single step t of the diffusion process, which out-
    puts the noisy image zt−1 , and the attention map Mt (omitted if not used). We denote by
    DM (zt , P, t, s){M ← M   c} the diffusion step where we override the attention map M with an
    additional given map M , but keep the values V from the supplied prompt. We also denote by Mt∗
                           c
    the produced attention map using the edited prompt P ∗ . Lastly, we define Edit(Mt , Mt∗ , t) to be a
    general edit function, receiving as input the t’th attention maps of the original and edited images.
    Our general algorithm for controlled generation consists of performing the iterative diffusion process
    for both prompts simultaneously, where an attention-based manipulation is applied in each step
    according to the desired editing task. We fix the internal randomness since even for the same prompt,
    two random seeds produce drastically different outputs. We also define a local editing scheme in a
    subsequent paragraph. Formally, our general algorithm for editing the image I, which is generated
    by prompt P and seed s, is defined:
   Algorithm 1: Prompt-to-Prompt image editing
1  Input: A source prompt P, a target prompt P ∗ , and a random seed s.
                                        ∗                   ∗
 2 Optional for local editing: w and w , words in P and P , specifying the editing region.
 3 Output: A source image xsrc and an edited image xdst .
 4 zT ∼ N (0, I) a unit Gaussian random variable with random seed s;
    ∗
 5 zT ← zT ;
 6 for t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1 do
 7     zt−1 , Mt ← DM (zt , P, t, s);
 8     Mt∗ ← DM (zt∗ , P ∗ , t, s);
 9     ct ← Edit(Mt , Mt∗ , t);
       M
         ∗
10     zt−1  ← DM (zt∗ , P ∗ , t, s){M ← Mct };
11     if local then
                                     ∗
12          α ← B(M t,w ) ∪ B(M t,w∗ );
             ∗                              ∗
13          zt−1 ← (1 − α) ⊙ zt−1 + α ⊙ zt−1    ;
14     end
15 end
                  ∗
16 Return (z0 , z0 )


    For editing real images, see section 4. Also, note that we can skip the forward call in line 8 by
    applying the edit function inside the diffusion forward function. Moreover, a diffusion step can
    be applied on both zt−1 and zt∗ in the same batch (i.e., in parallel). We now turn to address local
    editing followed by specific editing operations, filling the missing definition of the Edit(Mt , Mt∗ , t)
    function. An overview is presented in fig. 3(Bottom).

    Local Editing. In a common scenario, the user would like to modify a specific object or region,
    while preserving the rest of the details (i.e., background). For this purpose, we utilize the cross-


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
“cat riding a bicycle.” bicycle    car


    Source Image         w/o injection                                                     Full injection

Figure 5: Attention injection through a varied number of diffusion steps. We edit the image
by replacing a word and injecting the cross-attention maps of the source image ranging from 0%
(left) to 100% (right) of the steps. Without injection, none of the source content is preserved, while
injecting throughout all the steps may over-constrain the geometry. The latter results in low fidelity
to the text, e.g., the car becomes a bicycle. The full figure is in the appendix (fig. 11).

attention map layers corresponding to the edited object. In practice, we approximate a mask of
the edited part and constrain the modification to be applied only in this local region (lines 11-14
in Algorithm 1). To calculate the mask at step t, we compute the average attention map M t,w
                                                                        ∗
(averaged over steps T, . . . , t) of the original word w and the map M t,w∗ of the new word w∗. We
then apply a threshold to produce binary maps, where B(x) := x > k and k = 0.3 throughout all
our experiments. To support geometry modifications of the object, the edited region should include
the silhouettes of both the original and the newly edited object, therefore, our final mask α is a
union of the binary maps. Lastly, we use the mask to constrain the editing region (line 13), where ⊙
denotes an element-wise multiplication.

Word Swap. In this case, the user swaps tokens of the original prompt with others, e.g., P =“a
big bicycle” to P ∗ =“a big car”. The main challenge is to preserve the original composition
while also addressing the content of the new prompt. To this end, we inject the attention maps of
the source image into the generation with the modified prompt. However, the proposed attention
injection may over-constrain the geometry, especially when a large structural modification, such as
“car” to “bicycle”, is involved. We address this by suggesting a softer attention constrain:
                                                     ∗
                                          ∗          Mt      if t < τ
                              Edit(Mt , Mt , t) :=
                                                     Mt      otherwise,
where τ is a timestamp parameter that determines until which step the injection is applied. Note
that the composition is determined in the early steps. Therefore, by limiting the number of injection
steps, we can guide the composition while allowing the necessary geometry freedom for adapting to
the new prompt. An illustration is provided in section 4. Another relaxation is to assign a different
number of injection steps for the different tokens in the prompt. If the two words are represented
using a different number of tokens, we duplicate/average the maps as necessary using an alignment
function as described in the next paragraph.

Prompt Refinement. In another setting, the user adds new tokens to the prompt, e.g., P =“a
castle” to P ∗ =“children drawing of a castle”. To preserve the common details, we apply the
attention injection only over the common tokens from both prompts. Formally, we use an alignment
function A that receives a token index from target prompt P ∗ and outputs the corresponding token
index in P or None if there isn’t a match. Then, the editing function is:
                                                  ∗
                                   ∗             (Mt )i,j       if A(j) = N one
                     (Edit (Mt , Mt , t))i,j :=
                                                 (Mt )i,A(j)    otherwise.
Recall that the index i corresponds to a pixel value, where j corresponds to a text token. Again,
we may control the number of injection steps. This enables diverse capabilities such as stylization,
specification of object attributes, or global manipulations as demonstrated in section 4.

Attention Re–weighting. Lastly, the user may wish to strengthen or weakens the extent to which
each token affects the resulting image. For example, consider the prompt P = “a fluffy ball”, and
assume we want to make the ball more or less fluffy. To achieve such a manipulation, we scale the
attention map of the assigned token j ∗ with a parameter c ∈ [−2, 2], resulting in a stronger/weaker
effect. The rest of the attention maps remain unchanged. The editing function is therefore:
                                                                  if j = j ∗

                                       ∗             c · (Mt )i,j
                        (Edit (Mt , Mt , t))i,j :=
                                                     (Mt )i,j     otherwise.
As described in section 4, the parameter c allows fine and intuitive control over the induced effect.
In addition, since fine textures are generated during the super-resolution phase, we observe that this
application can benefit from applying our method also to the super-resolution diffusion model in the
case of amplifying or attenuating such fine textures, such as “fluffiness” as shown in fig. 7.

                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                           Local description                                                   Global description


    Source image   “...mat black car...”      “...sport car...”   “...old car...”   “...the blossom street.”       “...at sunset.”   “...in Manhattan.”

                                                    “A car on the side of the street.”
Figure 6: Editing by prompt refinement. By extending the description of the initial prompt, we
perform local or global editing. Additional results are in the appendix (fig. 13, 23) .


                                                “The picnic is ready under a blossom( ) tree.”

Figure 7: Text-based editing with fader control. By reducing or increasing the cross-attention of
specific words (marked with an arrow), we control the extent to which it influences the generation.
Additional results are in the appendix (fig. 24).

3.3     S ELF - ATTENTION
                                         “Mylayers,
Most models also consist of self-attention   ﬂuffy( ) bunny
                                                      whichdoll.
                                                             affect the spatial layout and geometry of
the generated image as well. However, unlike cross-attention, the interaction that occurs in self-
attention layers is only between the pixels to themselves. Therefore, manipulations with respect
to specific textual tokens are not feasible. For example, our proposed attention re-weighting and
local editing require the matching between the cross-attention maps to the prompt tokens. Another
example is presented in the appendix (fig. 16), where we do not inject the attention of the entire
prompt but only the attention of a specific word – “butterfly”. This enables the preservation of the
original butterfly while changing the rest of the content. Contrarily, we can’t specify which object
should be preserved using only self-attention. Moreover, we observe that the self-attention maps
provide inferior semantic control compared to the cross-attention. For instance, as demonstrated in
the appendix (fig. 17), using cross-attention injection we can swap between apples and oranges by
swapping these words in the prompt. The same experiment fails when using self-attention which
lacks a strong interaction between textual tokens and pixels.
Yet, we find that injecting self-attention through a small portion (20%) of the steps in addition to
cross-attention injection might further help preserve the source content in some cases. And so,
we consider it as an additional tool for Prompt-to-Prompt editing. We provide further analysis
in appendix B.

4     R ESULTS
In this section, we show several applications of our approach and compare it to other methods.
4.1     A PPLICATIONS
Text-Only Localized Editing. We first demonstrate localized editing by modifying the user-
provided prompt without requiring any user-provided mask. In fig. 2, we generate an image using
the prompt “lemon cake”. Our method allows us to retain the spatial layout, geometry, and se-
mantics when replacing the word “lemon” with “apple” (top row). Observe that the background is
well-preserved, including the top-left lemons transforming into apples. On the other hand, naively
feeding the model with the prompt “apple cake” results in a completely different geometry (2nd
row), even when using the same randomness in a deterministic setting (DDIM). Our method suc-
ceeds even for a challenging “pasta cake.” — the generated cake consists of pasta layers with tomato
sauce on top. In case the user adds a new specification, we keep the attention maps of the original
prompt, while allowing the generator to address the newly added words. For example, see fig. 6,
where we add “old” to the “car”, resulting in newly added details over the source car while the
background is preserved. Additional results are in the appendix (fig. 16, 22, and 23).
As presented in fig. 5, our method is not confined to modifying only textures and can modify the
structure as well, e.g., changing a “bicycle” to a “car”. We first show the results without cross-
attention injection, where changing a word leads to an entirely different outcome. We then show


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: User Study results. The participants were asked to rate: (1) background / structure
preservation with respect to the source image, (2) alignment to the text, and (3) realism.
                                      VQGAN+CLIP         Text2Live      baseline         Ours
       (1) Background / Structure ↑    1.84 ± 1.11       4.15 ± 1.09   3.38 ± 1.12   4.64 ± 0.64
       (2) Text Alignment ↑            2.46 ± 1.16       2.89 ± 1.22   4.26 ± 1.03   4.55 ± 0.71
       (3) Realism ↑                   1.32 ± 0.70       2.36 ± 1.12   4.11 ± 0.93   4.42 ± 0.82


the resulting image by injecting attention to an increasing number of steps. Note that applying the
cross-attention injection in a larger number of steps results in greater similarity to the source image.
Therefore, the optimal result is not necessarily achieved by applying the injection throughout all
steps. This enables us an even better control by changing the number of injection steps.
Global editing. Preserving the composition is not only valuable for local editing, but also an im-
portant aspect of global editing. In this setting, the editing should affect all parts of the image, but
still retain the original composition, such as the location and identity of the objects. For example, in
fig. 6, we preserve the content while changing the lighting. Additional examples are in the appendix
(fig. 18), including translating a sketch into a realistic image and inducing an artistic style.
Fader Control using Attention Re-weighting. While controlling the image by editing the prompt
is very effective, we find that it still does not allow full control over the generated image. Consider
the prompt “snowy mountain”. A user may want to control the amount of snow on the mountain.
However, it is quite difficult to describe the desired amount of snow through text. Instead, we suggest
a fader control (Lample et al., 2017), where the user controls the magnitude of the effect induced by
a specific word, as in fig. 7. As described in section 3.2, we achieve such control by re-scaling the
attention of the specified word. Additional results are in the appendix (fig. 24, 27 and 30).
Different Backbone We use the Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022b) model as a backbone for most of
our experiments and results, exploiting its state-of-the-art synthesis quality. However, our method
is not limited to a specific model and can be applied to different models as long as they consist of
cross-attention layers which are widely used. To validate this, we present results in the appendix
(fig. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30) using the public and popular Latent Diffusion and Stable Diffusion
models (Rombach et al., 2021). As can be seen, our method works well using these models as a
backbone, enabling various editing capabilities while preserving the source image content. Further
analysis is provided in appendix C.1.
Real Image Editing. Editing a real image requires finding an initial noise vector that produces the
given input image when fed into the diffusion process. This process, known as inversion, has recently
drawn considerable attention for GANs (Xia et al., 2021b; Bermano et al., 2022), but has not yet
been fully addressed for text-guided diffusion models. We show preliminary editing results on real
images, based on common inversion techniques for diffusion models. First, a rather naı̈ve approach
is to add Gaussian noise to the input image, and then perform a predefined number of diffusion steps.
Since this results in significant distortions, we adopt an improved inversion approach (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Song et al., 2020), which is based on the deterministic DDIM model rather than
the DDPM. We perform the diffusion process in the reverse direction, that is x0 → xT instead of
xT → x0 , where x0 is set to be the given real image. This process often produces satisfying results,
as presented in the appendix (fig. 19). However, the inversion is not sufficiently accurate in other
cases, as in fig. 20. This is partially due to a distortion-editability tradeoff, where we recognize that
reducing the classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2021) parameter (i.e., reducing the prompt
influence) improves reconstruction but constrains our ability to perform significant manipulations.
To alleviate this limitation, we propose to restore the unedited regions of the original image using a
mask, directly extracted from the attention maps. Note that here the mask is generated with no guid-
ance from the user, as described in the local editing paragraph (section 3.2). As presented in fig. 21,
this approach works well even using the naı̈ve DDPM inversion scheme (adding noise followed by
denoising). Note that the cat’s identity is well-preserved under various editing operations, while the
mask is produced only from the prompt itself.
4.2   C OMPARISONS
To evaluate our method, we first randomly generate text-based editing examples from predefined text
templates, see appendix F for more details. Source text is then fed to the Imagen model to obtain
the source image. We compare our results to other text-guided editing methods: (1) VQGAN+CLIP


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                               “Photo of a squirrel bear enjoys at the playground.”


    Source image         VQGAN+CLIP                     Text2Live                    Baseline            Ours
                                “A bucket full with apples tomatoes is lying on the table.”
                                       “A landscape image of a river in the valley at fall.”


    Source image   Inpainting mask      Blended Diffusion              Glide                  Baseline    Ours

Figure 8: Visual comparison. Top: text-guided editing methods (same supervision as ours). Bot-
   Source image        VQGAN+CLIP           Text2Live            Baseline              Ours
tom: text-guided inpainting methods which rely on an additional input mask (on the left).
(Crowson, 2021), (2) Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022), (3) Blended Diffusion Avrahami et al. (2022b)
and (4) Glide (Nichol et al., 2021). We also consider (5) a baseline approach where we only replace
the source prompt with the target prompt after 20% of diffusion steps using the same random seed.
Qualitative Comparison. As can be seen in fig. 8, both VQGAN+CLIP and Text2Live may result
in severe artifacts when editing highly structured objects, e.g., a squirrel to a bear. Our method
and Text2Live better preserve the background since both methods estimate a mask editing layer. In
contrast, the baseline approach produces realistic and meaningful results, but fails to preserve the
background. Furthermore, both VQGAN+CLIP and Text2Live require optimization per example
which takes 3 and 9 minutes respectively on a GPU. Our method is applied in a single diffusion pass
which takes up to 20 seconds.
We also consider text-driven inpainting methods which rely on a given user-defined mask. As can
be seen in fig. 8, Glide and Blended Diffusion do produce meaningful edits, but fail to preserve
the original structure. Note that these approaches are limited to local changes and cannot handle
global edits such as changing the weather in the image. See fig. 14 and 15 in the appendix for more
qualitative comparisons.
Quantitative Comparison. In the absence of ground truth for text-based editing, quantitative eval-
uation remains an open challenge. Therefore, similar to (Bar-Tal et al., 2022), we present a user
study in table 1. The participants were asked to rate each result in terms of (1) background and
structure preservation with respect to the source image, (2) alignment to the text, and (3) realism.
Please see appendix E for more details. As shown, the users preferred our method with regard to
all three aspects. Glide and Blended Diffusion were not quantitatively evaluated since they require
manual labor to produce the input masks.
We provide additional measures in the appendix (table 2) to further validate our claims. We evaluate
text-image correspondence using their CLIP score, demonstrating competitive results to methods
that directly optimize this metric. In addition, we evaluate the perceptual similarity between the
original and edited images using LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018a) and MS-SSIM (Wang et al., 2003).
This shows our capability of performing local editing, similar to Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022).
However, CLIP score and perceptual similarity do not reflect our superior quality and realism which
are demonstrated in the user study.

5    C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we uncovered the powerful capabilities of the cross-attention layers within text-to-
image diffusion models. We showed that these high-dimensional layers have an interpretable rep-
resentation of spatial maps that play a key role in tying the words in the text prompt to the spatial
layout of the synthesized image. With this observation, we showed how various manipulations of
the prompt can directly control attributes in the synthesized image, paving the way to various ap-
plications including local and global editing. This work is a first step towards providing users with
simple and intuitive means to edit images and navigate through a semantic, textual, space, which
exhibits incremental changes after each step, rather than producing an image from scratch after each
text manipulation.


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   E THIC STATEMENT
Our work suggests a new editing technique for images that are generated using state-of-the-art text-
to-image diffusion models. As explained in section 4.1 and appendix D, our approach can edit real
images, although this still remains a more challenging setting. Such manipulation of real photos
might be exploited by malicious parties to produce fake content in order to spread disinformation.
This is a known problem, common to all image editing techniques. However, research in identifying
and preventing malicious editing is already making significant progress. We believe our work would
contribute to this line of work, since we provide a comprehensive analysis of the editing procedure
using text-to-image diffusion models.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Noa Glaser, Adi Zicher, Yaron Brodsky, Shlomi Fruchter and David Salesin for their
valuable inputs that helped improve this work, and to Mohammad Norouzi, Chitwan Saharia and
William Chan for providing us with their support and the pretrained models of Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022b). Special thanks to Yossi Matias for early inspiring discussion on the problem and for
motivating and encouraging us to develop technologies along the avenue of intuitive interaction.

R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski.         Blended latent diffusion.    arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.02779, 2022a.
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022b.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02491, 2022.
David Bau, Alex Andonian, Audrey Cui, YeonHwan Park, Ali Jahanian, Aude Oliva, and Antonio
  Torralba. Paint by word, 2021.
Amit H Bermano, Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Ron Mokady, Yotam Nitzan, Omer Tov, Oren Patashnik,
 and Daniel Cohen-Or. State-of-the-art in the architecture, methods and applications of stylegan.
 In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 41, pp. 591–611. Wiley Online Library, 2022.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Katherine Crowson. Vqgan + clip, 2021. https://colab.research.google.com/
  drive/1L8oL-vLJXVcRzCFbPwOoMkPKJ8-aYdPN.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Cas-
  tricato, and Edward Raff. Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08583, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19822–19835, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  12868–12878, 2021a.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021b.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman.
  Make-a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.13131, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-
  guided domain adaptation of image generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00946, 2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Tobias Hinz, Stefan Heinrich, and Stefan Wermter. Semantic object accuracy for generative text-to-
  image synthesis. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2020.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Sali-
  mans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23:
  47–1, 2022.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022.
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Clipstyler: Image style transfer with a single text condition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.00374, 2021.
Guillaume Lample, Neil Zeghidour, Nicolas Usunier, Antoine Bordes, Ludovic Denoyer, and
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Fader networks: Manipulating images by sliding attributes. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip Torr. Controllable text-to-image genera-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ron Mokady, Omer Tov, Michal Yarom, Oran Lang, Inbar Mosseri, Tali Dekel, Daniel Cohen-Or,
  and Michal Irani. Self-distilled stylegan: Towards generation from internet photos. In Special
  Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Proceedings, pp.
  1–9, 2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-
  driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.17249, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad
  Norouzi. Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07636, 2021.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH
  2022 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–10, 2022a.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sali-
  mans, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-
  to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487,
  2022b.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ming Tao, Hao Tang, Songsong Wu, Nicu Sebe, Xiao-Yuan Jing, Fei Wu, and Bingkun Bao. Df-
 gan: Deep fusion generative adversarial networks for text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2008.05865, 2020.
Narek Tumanyan, Omer Bar-Tal, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Splicing vit features for semantic
  appearance transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10748–10757, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality
  assessment. In The Thrity-Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, 2003,
  volume 2, pp. 1398–1402. Ieee, 2003.
Weihao Xia, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, and Baoyuan Wu. Tedigan: Text-guided diverse face image
 generation and manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
 and pattern recognition, pp. 2256–2265, 2021a.
Weihao Xia, Yulun Zhang, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, Bolei Zhou, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Gan
 inversion: A survey, 2021b.
Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku, Yuanzhong
   Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with improved vqgan.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04627, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018a.
Zizhao Zhang, Yuanpu Xie, and Lin Yang. Photographic text-to-image synthesis with a
  hierarchically-nested adversarial network. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6199–6208, 2018b.


A       BACKGROUND
A.1       D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion Denoising Probabilistic Models (DDPM) Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015); Ho et al. (2020)
are generative latent variable models that aim to model a distribution pθ (x0 ) that approximates the
data distribution q(x0 ) and easy to sample from. DDPMs model a “forward process” in the space
of x0 from data to noise.1 This process is a Markov chain starting from x0 , where we gradually add
noise to the data to generate the latent variables
                                            Qt     x1 , . . . , xT ∈ X. The sequence of latent variables
therefore follows q(x1 , . . . , xt | x0 ) = i=1 q(xt | xt−1 √     ), where a step in the forward process
is defined as a Gaussian transition q(xt | xt−1 ) := N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I) parameterized by a
schedule β0 , . . . , βT ∈ (0, 1). When T is large enough, the last noise vector xT nearly follows an
isotropic Gaussian distribution.
An interesting property of the forward process is that one can express the latent variable xt directly
as the following linear combination of noise and x0 without sampling intermediate latent vectors:
                                  √         √
                             xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt w, w ∼ N (0, I),                                  (2)
              Qt
where αt := i=1 (1 − βi ).
In order to sample from the distribution q(x0 ), we define the dual “reverse process” p(xt−1 | xt )
from isotropic Gaussian noise xT to data by sampling the posteriors q(xt−1 | xt ). Since the
intractable reverse process q(xt−1 | xt ) depends on the unknown data distribution q(x0 ), we
approximate it with a parameterized Gaussian transition network pθ (xt−1 | xt ) := N (xt−1 |
µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)). The µθ (xt , t) can be replaced (Ho et al., 2020) by predicting the noise ϵθ (xt , t)
added to x0 using equation 2.
Under this definition, we use Bayes’ theorem to approximate

                                          1             βt
                           µθ (xt , t) = √      xt − √        ϵθ (xt , t) .                                 (3)
                                           αt          1 − αt
Once we have a trained ϵθ (xt , t), we can using the following sample method
                                    xt−1 = µθ (xt , t) + σt z, z ∼ N (0, I).                                (4)
We can control σt of each sample stage, and in DDIMs (Song et al., 2020) the sampling process can
be made deterministic using σt = 0 in all the steps. The reverse process can finally be trained by
solving the following optimization problem:

                                                                                        2
                          min L(θ) := min Ex0 ∼q(x0 ),w∼N (0,I),t ∥w − ϵθ (xt , t)∥2 ,
                           θ               θ
teaching the parameters θ to fit q(x0 ) by maximizing a variational lower bound.

A.2       ATTENTION LAYERS IN T EXT TO I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS

We implement our method on three different diffusion models: Imagen, Latent Diffusion, and Sta-
ble Diffusion. We describe here only a high-level description of each model and its attention layers
that are relevant to our method. Note that these models condition on the text prompt in the noise
prediction of each diffusion step through two types of attention layers: i) cross-attention layers. ii)
    1
        This process is called “forward” due to its procedure progressing from x0 to xT .


                                                         13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


hybrid attention that acts both as self-attention and cross-attention by concatenating the text embed-
ding sequence to the key-value pairs of each self-attention layer. Our method only intervenes in the
cross-attention part of the hybrid attention. That is, only the last channels, which refer to text tokens,
are modified in the hybrid attention modules.
Imagen. (Saharia et al., 2022b) consists of three text-conditioned diffusion models and a language
model: A text-to-image 64 × 64 model, two super-resolution models – 64 × 64 → 256 × 256 and
256 × 256 → 1024 × 1024 and a pre-trained T5 XL language model Raffel et al. (2020). These
predict the noise ϵθ (zt , c, t) via a U-shaped network, for t ranging from T to 1. Where zt is the latent
vector and c is the text embedding of the language model. We highlight the differences between the
three diffusion models:

       • 64 × 64 – starts from a random noise, and uses the U-Net as in (Dhariwal & Nichol,
         2021). This model is conditioned on text embeddings via both cross-attention layers at
         resolutions [16, 8] and hybrid-attention layers at resolutions [32, 16, 8] of the downsampling
         and upsampling within the U-Net.
       • 64 × 64 → 256 × 256 – conditions on a naively upsampled 64 × 64 image. An efficient ver-
         sion of a U-Net is used, which includes Hybrid attention layers in the bottleneck (resolution
         of 32).
       • 256 × 256 → 1024 × 1024 – conditions on a naively upsampled 256 × 256 image. An
         efficient version of a U-Net is used, which only includes cross-attention layers in the bot-
         tleneck (resolution of 64).

Latent Diffusion. Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2021) is substantially different
from Imagen. First, to reduce memory consummation, LDM operates in the latent space of a pre-
trained VQGAN Yu et al. (2021); Esser et al. (2021a). This reduces the spatial size of an input image
from 256 × 256 to a quantized latent space of size 32 × 32 with 4 channels. Second, the language
model is trained from scratch with the main diffusion model and consists of 32 transformer layers.
For the diffusion process, a U-Net is used as in (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), which consists of self-
attention layers followed by text-conditioned cross-attention layers at resolutions 32, 16, 8 and 4.
Stable Diffusion. Stable Diffusion (SD) is an improved version of LDM which is trained on higher
resolution with more resources and data. The latent space is of size 64 × 64 with 4 channels, which
after decoding results in an image of size 512 × 512. SD uses pre-trained CLIP model (Radford
et al., 2021) for the conditioned text embedding, and consists of self-attention layers followed by
text-conditioned cross-attention layers at resolutions 64, 32, 16 and 8.

B    S ELF -ATTENTION IN T EXT-C ONDITIONED D IFFUSION M ODELS
An interesting question is the role of self-attention maps. In particular, compared to cross-attention,
how well it reveals the structure of the generated image, and how its injection affects the image
generation under our settings.
Similar to the cross-attention maps, we found that self-attention maps are correlated to the structure
and different semantic regions in the image. As can be seen in fig. 9, the self-attention maps of
different pixels highlight the close region of the pixel in addition to regions in the image that contain
the same semantic content. For example, a pixel on the crust of the pizza attends to other pixels
on the crust. In addition, if we look at the top principle components of the self-attention maps, we
can clearly identify the layout of the generated image, as previously shown in (Tumanyan et al.,
2022) for a different model. However, since the self-attention maps are not correlated to specific
words, these provide inferior control compared to cross-attention maps. For instance, it is much
more challenging to find a map that highlights only the pepperoni using self-attention.
Next, we inject the self-attention maps of a source image during the generation of an image con-
ditioned on another target prompt. Notice that the source and target prompts might be unaligned
in this scenario. Such examples are shown in fig. 12, where we apply self-attention injection for
a gradually increased number of diffusion steps. As we can see, the attention maps drastically af-
fect the resulting images such that injecting the maps for more than 50% steps suppresses almost
any connection to the target prompt. Interestingly, the self-attention maps can also determine the
color palette in the image. Since the self-attention injection may restrict the editing capability of our


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Average cross–attention maps


Synthesized image    “image               of              an            elephant       playing   tennis”
                                   Average self–attention maps of individual pixels


                                 Top principle components of the self–attention maps


                                           Average cross–attention maps


Synthesized image   “pepperoni           pizza            next             to          orange    juice”
                                   Average self–attention maps of individual pixels


                                 Top principle components of the self–attention maps


Figure 9: Visualization of cross and self-attention. The top row for each example illustrates the
average cross-attention maps for the given prompt. The second row shows the self-attention maps
with respect to different pixels (marked in green). The third row shows the principle components of
the self-attention maps. All examples present the attention maps at resolution 16×16 after averaging
across diffusion steps, different layers, and attention heads.


method, we use self-attention injection for up to 20% of the diffusion steps. We found that this may
improve the source background preservation in some cases.

C     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
Additional quantitative results are provided in table 2.
Full figures for fig. 5 and 6, are in fig. 11 and 13 respectively. Additional qualitative comparisons
are provided in fig. 14 and 15.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In fig. 16, we do not inject the attention of the entire prompt but only the attention of a specific
word – “butterfly”. This enables the preservation of the original butterfly while changing the rest
of the content. As demonstrated in fig. 17, using cross-attention injection we can swap between
apples and oranges by swapping these words in the prompt. The same experiment fails when using
self-attention which lacks a strong interaction between textual tokens and pixels.
Additional global editing results are presented in fig. 18, illustrating a translation of a sketch into a
photo-realistic image and inducing an artistic style. Examples for editing of real images provided in
fig. 19, 20, and 21.
We provide additional visual examples for different editing operations using our method: fig. 22
show word swap results, fig. 23 show adding specification to an image, and fig. 24 show attention
re-weighting.

C.1    D IFFERENT BACKBONES

Results for the Latent Diffusion and Stable Diffusion models are in fig. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30.
We observe that text-based replacement and refinement operations work well for all three models.
However, we notice a small difference between the three models in the Fader Control using Atten-
tion Re-weighting. Visual examples of this application are presented in fig. 24, 27 and 30 using
Imagen, Latent Diffusion and Stabe Diffusion respectively. As can be seen, when using Imagen as
the backbone, our method produces high-quality results and can even handle delicate changes such
as reducing the “cubic” appearance of sushi. On the other hand, applying our method with Stable
Diffusion may result in unexpected artifacts. For example, when reducing the attention to the word
“night” (last example in fig. 30), not only the time of the day is changed but also the dark skies turns
into trees.
We hypothesize that this difference is the result of using different language models for text embed-
ding. Imagen uses a T5 language model that is trained using an unsupervised language objective
of span masking. Stable Diffusion uses CLIP which is trained with a multi-modal constructive
objective. Lastly, the Latent Diffusion language model is trained with the same reconstitution objec-
tive as the diffusion model. Therefore, we suggest that the text embedding of T5 better represents
disentangled information and so yields superior results.

D     L IMITATIONS
While we have demonstrated semantic control by changing only textual prompts, our technique is
subject to a few limitations. First, the current inversion process results in a visible distortion over
some of the test images, see fig. 20. Moreover, the inversion requires the user to come up with a
suitable prompt which could be challenging for complicated compositions. Note that the challenge
of inversion for text-guided diffusion models is an orthogonal endeavor to our work, which would
be studied in the future. Second, current attention maps are of low resolution, as the cross-attention
is placed in the network’s bottleneck. This bounds our ability to perform more precise editing. To
alleviate this, we suggest incorporating cross-attention also in higher-resolution layers. We leave this
for future work as it requires analyzing the training which is out of our scope. Third, our method
requires setting the timestamp parameter for attention injection and the scale parameter for attention
re-weighting. Tuning these usually requires roughly a minute for the Imagen model. However, our
method is not highly sensitive to these, and using a constant timestamp produces satisfying results in
most cases.Furthermore, we believe that future works will reduce the inference time of these models,
so tuning the parameter will be quicker and more intuitive. Finally, we recognize that our method
cannot be used for large structural changes in the image, like changing the pose of an animal, move
objects or changing the number of objects in the image, see examples in fig. 10. We leave this kind
of control for future work.
E     U SER S TUDY
32 participants answered our user study. Each was asked to evaluate 18 randomly selected Prompt-
to-Prompt examples for each method. The examples were given in random order and were divided
into three parts: (A) consists of 6 replacement examples using templates 1 and 2 (see appendix F).
(B) consists of 6 local refinement examples using templates 3 and 4. (C) consist of 6 global refine-


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          “A dog playing in the field.”                      “A living room with two chairs.”                       “A child holding a bunny doll.”


     Source image          playing      sleeping           Source image            “...four chairs...”           Source image      “...smiling bunny doll.”


Figure 10: Editing Failure Cases. Since Prompt-to-Prompt preserves the overall structure of the
source image, it fails when large structural modification is required. For example, changing the pose
of the dog from “playing” to “sleeping” (on the left) or changing the number of chairs (middle). In
addition, our method is limited by the semantic understanding of the diffusion model, for example,
on the right, we add the refinement ”smiling bunny doll” that made both the bunny and the child
smile.


ment examples using templates 5 and 6. For each example the user was asked to rate the image on a
1 − 5 scale (higher is better) with respect to the following questions:
(1) How well does the right image preserve the structure and the background of the left image?
Consider the preservation of properties that are not specified by the text above the images.
(2) How well does the right image match the text description above it? Specifically, consider the
highlighted text.
(3) Rate the overall realism and quality of the right image.
See fig. 31 for screenshots.

F      E VALUATION P ROMPTS
We use the following prompt templates to generate the evaluation data:


T e m p l a t e 1 : ” Image o f <A RPC> i n s i d e a <B CONST>.”
Select A = [” apples ” , ” oranges ” , ” chocolates ” , ” k i t t e n s ” , ” puppies ” , ” candies ”]
S e l e c t B = [ ” box ” , ” bowl ” , ” b u c k e t ” , ” n e s t ” , ” p o t ” ]

T e m p l a t e 2 : ”A <A RPC> f u l l o f <B CONST> i s l y i n g on t h e t a b l e . ”
S e l e c t A = [ ” box ” , ” bowl ” , ” b u c k e t ” , ” n e s t ” , ” p o t ” ]
Select B = [” apples ” , ” oranges ” , ” chocolates ” , ” k i t t e n s ” , ” puppies ” , ” candies ”]

T e m p l a t e 3 : ” P h o t o o f a <A RPC> <CONST>.”
s e l e c t f r o m a = [ ” c a t ” , ” dog ” , ” l i o n ” , ” c a m e l ” , ” h o r s e ” , ” b e a r ” , ” s q u i r r e l ” ,
                              ” e l e p h a n t ” , ” z e b r a ” , ” g i r a f f e ” , ” cow ” ]
s e l e c t f r o m b = [” s e a t i n g in the f i e l d ” , ” walking in the f i e l d ” , ” walking in the c i t y ” ,
                              ” wandering around the c i t y ” , ” wandering in the s t r e e t s ” , ” walking in the d e s e r t ” ,
                              ” s e a t i n g in the d e s e r t ” , ” walking in the f o r e s t ” , ” s e a t i n g in the f o r e s t ” ,
                              ” walking in the d e s e r t ” , ” s e a t i n g in the d e s e r t ” , ” plays a t the playground ” ,
                              ” enjoys at the playground ”]

T e m p l a t e 3 : ” P h o t o o f a <A CONST> <B ADD> w i t h a <C CONST> on i t . ”
Select A = [” t r e e ” , ” shrub ” , ” flower ” , ” chair ” , ” f r u i t ”]
s e l e c t B = [ ” made o f c a n d i e s ” , ” made o f b r i c k s ” , ” made o f p a p e r ” , ” made o f c l a y ” ,
                      ” made o f wax ” , ” made o f f e a t h e r s ” ]
S e l e c t C = [ ” bug ” , ” b u t t e r f l y ” , ” b e e ” , ” g r a s s h o p p e r ” , ” b i r d ” ]

T e m p l a t e 4 : ” Image o f a <A ADD> <B CONST> on t h e s i d e o f t h e r o a d . ”
S e l e c t A = [ ” wooden ” , ” o l d ” , ” c r a s h e d ” , ” g o l d e n ” , ” s i l v e r ” , ” s p o r t ” , ” t o y ” ]
s e l e c t B = [ ” c a r ” , ” b u s ” , ” b i c y c l e ” , ” m o t o r c y c l e ” , ” s c o o t e r ” , ” van ” ]


T e m p l a t e 5 : ”A l a n d s c a p e Image o f <A CONST> <B ADD>.”
Select A = [” a r i v e r ” , ”a lake ” , ”a v a l l e y ” , ” mountains ” ,
                    ”a f o r e s t ” , ”a r i v e r in the valley ” ,
                    ” a v l i l a g e on a m o u n t a i n ” ,
                    ” a w a t e r f a l l between t h e mountains ” , ” t h e c l i f f s i n t h e d e s e r t ” ]
s e l e c t B = [ ” i n t h e w i n t e r ” , ” i n t h e autumn ” , ” a t n i g h t ” , ” a t s u n s e t ” , ” a t s u n r i s e ” ,
                    ” a t f a l l ” , ” i n r a i n y day ” , ” i n a c l o u d y day ” , ” a t e v e n i n g ” ]


                                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                    Source image


                                                            Source Prompt: “Photo of a cat riding on a bicycle.”
bicycle         motorcycle


bicycle         train


cat       chicken


cat       ﬁsh


Figure 11: Attention injection through a varied number of diffusion steps. Top: source image
and prompt. In each row, we modify the content of the image by replacing a single word in the text
and injecting the cross-attention maps of the source image ranging from 0% (left) to 100% (right)
of the steps. Without our method, none of the source image content is guaranteed to be preserved.
On the other hand, injecting the cross-attention throughout all the steps may over-constrain the
geometry, resulting in low fidelity to the text.


T e m p l a t e 6 : ”<A CONST> i n t h e <B ADD> s t r e e t . ”
S e l e c t A = [ ” Heavy t r a f f i c ” , ” The h o u s e s ” , ” The b u i l d i n g s ” , ” C y c l i n g ” ,
                    ” The t r a m i s p a s s i n g ” , ” The b u s a r r i v e d a t t h e s t a t i o n ” ]
s e l e c t B = [ ” snowy ” , ” f l o o d e d ” , ” b l o s s o m ” , ” modern ” ,
                    ” h i s t o r i c ” , ” commercial ” , ” c o l o r f u l ”]

We generate 20 random examples using each template where the tokens <CONST>, <RPC> and <ADD> where randomly replaced with
one item in the corresponding selection list below each template.
<CONST> stands for phrase that is used in both source and target prompt.

<RPC> stands for phrase that is different between the source and target.

<ADD> stands for refinement phrase which is only replaced in the target prompt and omitted in the source prompt.


                                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                        Source image


                                                         Source prompt: “A sailing boat near a castle.”
Target prompt: “An elephant in the ﬁeld.”


Target prompt: “A bedroom.”


Target prompt: “Vanilla ice cream with marshmallows.”


Target prompt: “a city skyline.”


W.O. self–attention injection                                                                 Full self–attention injection


Figure 12: Self-attention injection through a varied number of diffusion steps. In each row, we
conditioned the image generation on a new target prompt and inject the self-attention maps of the
source image ranging from 0% (left) to 100% (right) of the diffusion steps.


Table 2: Additional quantitative results. We measure text-image correspondence using CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021), demonstrating competitive results to methods that directly optimize the CLIP
score. In addition, we evaluate the similarity between the original and the edited images using the
LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018a) perceptual distance and MS-SSIM (Wang et al., 2003). This show our
capability of performing local editing, similar to Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022).
                                                  CLIP score ↑    MS-SSIM ↑         LPIPS ↓
                           VQGAN+CLIP             0.282 ± 0.04    0.27 ± 0.046    0.64 ± 0.05
                           Text2Live              0.247 ± 0.04    0.82 ± 0.065    0.25 ± 0.05
                           baseline               0.253 ± 0.03    0.69 ± 0.13     0.35 ± 0.12
                           Ours                   0.253 ± 0.04    0.81 ± 0.11     0.22 ± 0.1


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 “A car on the side of the street.”


                                                                     “...crushed car...”       “...golden car...”      “...American car...”


           source image              “...cyberpunk car...”          “...limousine car...”     “...futuristic car...”   “...emergency car...”

                                             Local description
                                             Global description


                                                                  “...in the snowy street.”     “...at autumn.”          “...at evening.”


       “...the ﬂooded street.”         “...in London.”            “...the historic street.”    “...in the forset.”         “...at night.”


Figure 13: Editing by prompt refinement. By extending the description of the initial prompt, we
can make local edits to the car (top rows) or global modifications (bottom rows).


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            “Photo of a cat camel seating in the forest.”


                            “Image of a bowl with oranges chocolates.”


                     “Photo of a ﬂower made of candies with a butterﬂy on it.”


                        “Image of a golden scooter on the side of the road.”


                             “A landscape image of a lake at sunset.”


  Source image        VQGAN+CLIP             Text2Live              Baseline         Ours

Figure 14: Additional comparisons to text-guided image editing. Similar to ours, these methods do
not require a user-provided mask.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           “Photo of a lion zebra seating in the forest.”


                           “Photo of a cat bear walking in the desert.”


                      “A plate full of cookies puppies is lying on the table.”


                      “Photo of a ﬂower made of feathers with a bug on it.”


                      “Image of a Lego motorcycle on the side of the road.”


  Source image      Inpainting mask     Blended Diffusion            Glide        Ours

Figure 15: Additional comparisons to text-guided in-painting methods. Unlike our method, these
techniques require an auxiliary segmentation mask which is provided by the user.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  Cross–attention injection


 “...on a ﬂower.”    “...on a road.”     “...on a lake.”           “...on a ball            “...on a table    “...on a mirror.”   “...on a cup,”     “...on a computer.”


  “...on a ﬂute.”   “...on a violin,”   “...on a present.”      “...on a choclate.”        “...on a mufﬁn.”   “...on a cake.”     “...on a pizza.”    “...on a bread.”

                                                                    Self–attention injection


 “...on a ﬂower.”   “...on the road.”    “...on a lake.”          “...on a ball”            “...on a table    “...on a mirror.”   “...on a cup,”     “...on a computer.”


  “...on a ﬂute.”   “...on a violin,”   “...on a present.”      “...on a choclate.”        “...on a mufﬁn.”   “...on a cake.”     “...on a pizza.”    “...on a bread.”


                                                             “A photo of a butterfly on...”

Figure 16: Object preservation and replacement using cross and self attention injection. Top:
by injecting only the cross-attention weights of the word “butterfly” taken from the top-left image
we can preserve the structure and appearance of a single item while replacing its context (i.e.,
background). Bottom: using only self-attention injection we can’t specify which object should be
preserved, therefore, modifying the background while keeping the butterfly is more challenging.


                                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    “apples”         “oranges”


Source images


Self–attention injection


Cross–attention injection
                                    “oranges”         “kittens”


Source images


Self–attention injection


Cross–attention injection


Figure 17: Object replacement using cross-attention injection and self-attention injection.
Cross–attention injection better preserves the semantic relation between the generated image and
the text prompt. Top: using cross-attention injection (third row) we can swap between apples and
oranges in the source image by swapping these words in the prompt “apples and oranges are on
the table.”. The same experiment fails when using self-attention which lacks a strong interaction
between textual tokens and pixels. Bottom: cross-attention injection (6th row) better preserves the
distinct elements in the image when replacing the word “oranges” with “kittens” in the sentence “a
basket with oranges on the counter.”


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 “drawing of...”       “photo of...”


   source image         “relaxing photo of...”   “dramatic photo of...”      “...in the jungle.”     “... in the desert.”        “... on mars.”

  “photo of...”        “painting of...”


   source image            “watercolor...”           “charocal...”           “impressionism...”         “futuristic...”        “neo classical...”

                                             “A waterfall between the mountains.”

Figure 18: Image stylization. By adding a style description to the prompt while injecting the source
attention maps, we can create various images in the new desired styles that preserve the structure of
the original image.



  “A black bear is walking in the grass.”


     real image            reconstructed          “...next to red ﬂowers.”   “...when snow comes   “while another black bear   “Oil painting of...”
                                                                                    down.”               is watching.”
 “Landscape image of trees in a valley...”


     real image            reconstructed                “...at fall.”           “...at winter.”         “...at sunrise.”          “...at night.”


Figure 19: Editing of real images. On the left, inversion results using DDIM Song et al. (2020)
sampling. We reverse the diffusion process initialized on a given real image and text prompt. This
results in a latent noise that produces an approximation to the input image when fed to the diffusion
process. Afterward, on the right, we apply our Prompt-to-Prompt technique to edit the images.


    Real image            Reconstructed                Real image              Reconstructed              Real image             Reconstructed



Figure 20: Inversion Failure Cases. Current DDIM-based inversion of real images might result in
unsatisfied reconstructions.



                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


“image of cat wearing
   a ﬂoral shirt.”
                                                         “shirt”
input image + prompt      noised       denoised + attention map    blended              SR


                                         different noise seeds


Figure 21: Mask-based editing. Using the attention maps, we preserve the unedited parts of the
image when the inversion distortion is significant. This does not require any user-provided masks,
as we extract the spatial information from the model using our method. Note how the cat’s identity
is retained after the editing process.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    “Photo of a cat riding on a bicycle.”


    source image          cat       dog          cat          chicken    cat      squirrel    cat      elephant

                          “Photo of a house with a ﬂag on a mountain.”


    source image       house        hotel       house          tent      house       car       house      tree

                                          “A basket full of apples.”


    source image      basket        bowl        basket          box     basket       pot      basket      nest


 apples    oranges   apples       chocolates   apples         cookies   apples      kittens   apples     smoke


                                “A ball between two chairs on the beach.


    source image        ball       bucket        ball         palace       ball      basket     ball    turtle


Figure 22: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by word swapping using the Imagen
model (Saharia et al., 2022b)..


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          “A photo of a bear wearing sunglasses and having a drink.”


                                                                                   “...geeky sunglass-        “...beer drink.”


           Source image                  “...wearing a squared sunglasses...”   “...colorful sunglasses...” “”...coffee drink.”

                                     “A photo of a butterﬂy on a ﬂower.”


                                                                                    “...wither ﬂower.”      “...origami ﬂower.”


           Source image                        “...on a spikey ﬂower.”             “...ﬂower made of       “...wooden ﬂower.”
                                                                                        candies.”
                                         “A mushroom in the forest.”


                                                                                  “...in the dry forest.” “A plastic mushroom...”


           Source image                         “...in the wet forest.”           “Line art of a mush- “A neon mushroom...”
                                                                                        room...”


Figure 23: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by adding a specification using the Ima-
gen model (Saharia et al., 2022b)..


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               “A leopard sleeping( ) cake next to an apple.”


                                      “A smiling( ) teddy bear.”


                                      “Photo of a cubic( ) sushi.”


                           “A photo of a birthday( ) cake next to an apple.”


                                      “My colorful( ) bedroom.”


                                “Photo of a field of poppies at night( ).”


Figure 24: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by attention re-weighting using the Im-
agen model (Saharia et al., 2022b).


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  “A painting of a squirrel eating a burger    “A bench with a pile of books magazines on        “Banknote portrait of a cow horse.”
                  pizza.”                                         top.”


 “Snail Turtle in the middle of the forest.      “A bowl with apples snacks on a table.”        “Photo of a butterﬂy bee on a ﬂower.”
            Afternoon light.”


 “A photo of a dog wearing a ﬂoral dotted       “A photo of a cat dog wearing a blue tie.”    “A photo of a cat playing chess domino .”
                  shirt.”


  “A vase ﬁled with cotton tennis balls.”       “A beautiful bouquet of tulips daisies on a    “A deﬂated inﬂated tire on the ground.”
                                                                 table.”


“A painting of a lion bear eating an apple.”      “A car is driving on the beach road.”              “Soup with rice noodles.”


 “Watercolour painting photo of a latent         “A photo of an astronaut riding a horse         “A castle made out of sand corn.”
                space.”                                         camel.”


  “A snowman scarecrow in the garden.”              “Lemon Apple cake on the table.”            “Image of candies toys inside a box.”


Figure 25: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by word swap using the Latent Diffusion
Model (Rombach et al., 2021).


                                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


“A beautiful bouquet of tulips of the colour    “A school bus is driving in the street.”       “A car is driving in the ﬂooded street.”
             red and yellow.”


“A landscape with a lake between mountains            “Pizza with mushrooms.”                      “A wooden bike in the yard.”
                at sunset.”


“A fashion sketch of an evening dress with      “A speeding race car is driving on the            “A big yellow apple on a table”
              long sleeves.”                                  beach.”


“My bicycle are in the street of Las Vegas.”        “A banknote portrait of a cat.”           “A cubist painting of a vase with lilies.”


  “A small clay bunny with a big smile.”       “My bicycle are in the street at blossom.”   “Photo of a landscape with a river and moun-
                                                                                                          tains at sunrise.”


 “A TV screen with many burnt pixels.”         “A stove outside creating a smoke cloud      “A bear with yellow sunglasses and a drink.”
                                                               above.”


 “A photo of a dog wearing a ﬂoral shirt.”       “A landscape photo of a harbor in the          “The scooter at the city at winter.”
                                                               storm.”


Figure 26: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by adding a specification using the La-
tent Diffusion Model (Rombach et al., 2021).


                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   "A photo of a blossom ( ) tree."


                              “A landscape with a snowy ( ) mountain.”


                                  “A photo of the ancient ( ) city.”


                                        “A crahsed ( ) car.”


                                        “My puffy ( ) shirt.”


                               “A photo of a poppy field at night ( ).”


Figure 27: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by attention re-weighting using the La-
tent Diffusion Model (Rombach et al., 2021).


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


“A painting of a squirrel cat eating a burger.”    “A bench with many books magazines on          “Banknote portrait of a mouse horse.”
                                                                   top.”


    “A car is driving on the beach road.”              “A chair in the bed living room.”          “A deﬂated inﬂated tire on the ground.”


“A fashion BW sketch of an evening dress of       “A huge translucent mushroom avocado in         “A kangaroo deer in a pub eating sushi.
            an evening dress.”                     the middle of the forest. Afternoon light.”                  DSLR.”


“A pepperoni mushroom pizza on a table.”          “A stove over a pile of diverse random house   “An evil robot holding a sword broom.”
                                                      sports objects. Low lighting image.”


          “An origami bottle cup.”                   “A vase ﬁled with cotton tennis balls.”     “A photo of a cat playing chess domino .”


      “Photo of a dog cat in the street.”             “A piano made out of Lego cubes.”           “A painting of a squirrel eating a burger
                                                                                                                  pizza.”


   “A beautiful bouquet of tulips daisies.”              “An apple orange on a table.”            “Image of candies mints inside a box.”


Figure 28: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by word swap using the Stable Diffusion
Model .


                                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


“A beautiful bouquet of tulips of the colour        “A big yellow apple on a table”               “A wooden bike in the yard.”
             red and yellow.”


“A bridge made of rope between two cliffs.”      “A dangerous bridge missing its steps        “A speeding race car is driving on the
                                                         between two cliffs.”                               beach.”


 “A fashion sketch of an evening dress with     “A painting of a squirrel jumping over a     “A huge translucent mushroom in the
               long sleeves.”                         metal fence with spikes.”              middle of the forest. Afternoon light.”


  “A painting of lilies in the style of Van     “A pepperoni pizza with mushroom and           “A banknote portrait of a mouse.”
                  Gogh.”                              olive toppings on a table”


  “A small clay bunny with a big smile.”          “A recliner sofa in the living room”        “A deﬂated and ripped up tire on the
                                                                                                           ground.”


“A vase ﬁlled with cotton and metal balls.”     “A stove outside creating a smoke cloud     “A TV screen with many burnt pixels.”
                                                                above.”


“An image of soup with alphabet soup crack-    “Eyeglasses on the desk reﬂecting a strong   “Image of candies covered with chocolate
      ers in English and Russian.”                               glare.”                                 inside a box.”


Figure 29: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by adding a specification using the Stable
Diffusion Model.


                                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   "A photo of a blossom ( ) tree."


                                     “A
                              “A landscape with a snowy ( ) mountain.”


                                   “A photo of the ancient ( ) city.”


                                         “A crahsed ( ) car.”


                                      “A smiling( ) teddy bear.”


                                “A photo of a poppy field at night ( ).”


Figure 30: Additional results for Prompt-to-Prompt editing by attention re-weighting using the Sta-
ble Diffusion Model.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Local Editing                                    Global Editing


Figure 31: Screenshots from our User study. The participants were asked to evaluate: (1) back-
ground, structure, and content preservation with respect to the source image, (2) alignment to the
text, and (3) realism. The study evaluates both local and global editing.


                                               36
