Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS FOR A ERODYNAMIC
F LOW R ECONSTRUCTION FROM S PARSE S ENSING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Sensing the fluid flow around an arbitrary geometry entails extrapolating from the
         physical quantities perceived at its surface in order to reconstruct the features of
         the surrounding fluid. This is a challenging inverse problem, yet one that if solved
         could have a significant impact on many engineering applications. The exploitation
         of such an inverse logic has gained interest in recent years with the advent of
         widely available cheap but capable MEMS-based sensors. When combined with
         novel data-driven methods, these sensors may allow for flow reconstruction around
         immersed structures, benefiting applications such as unmanned airborne/underwater
         vehicle path planning or control and structural health monitoring of wind turbine
         blades. In this work, we train deep reversible Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to
         perform flow sensing (flow reconstruction) around two-dimensional aerodynamic
         shapes: airfoils. Motivated by recent work, which has shown that GNNs can be
         powerful alternatives to mesh-based forward physics simulators, we implement a
         Message-Passing Neural Network to simultaneously reconstruct both the pressure
         and velocity fields surrounding simulated airfoils based on their surface pressure
         distributions, whilst additionally gathering useful farfield properties in the form of
         context vectors. We generate a unique dataset of Computational Fluid Dynamics
         simulations by simulating random, yet meaningful combinations of input boundary
         conditions and airfoil shapes. We show that despite the challenges associated
         with reconstructing the flow around arbitrary airfoil geometries in high Reynolds
         turbulent inflow conditions, our framework is able to generalize well to unseen
         cases.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Many engineering applications stand to benefit from the ability to sense and reconstruct fluid flow
features from sparse measurements originating at a structure’s surface. Flow sensing could be crucial
for improvements in the accuracy and resilience of wind turbine and unmanned aircraft controllers.
Another possible application is monitoring of wind loaded structures (Barber et al., 2022), where the
use of cheap micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) in combination with novel methods for flow
sensing could lead to robust structural health monitoring solutions. In this work, we focus on common
aerodynamic structures: we aim to reconstruct the flow around 2-D airfoils. Traditionally, computing
the flow around an airfoil requires approaches from Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), which
are forward-physics simulators. In CFD, the inflow, outflow and wall boundary conditions are set,
and over many iterations a solution for the discretized Navier-Stokes PDEs is reached, which then
yields a pressure distribution at the airfoil surface. We aim to solve the inverse problem: given only
the pressure distribution at the airfoil surface, a solution for the flow field and farfield boundary
conditions is to be found. Moreover, our aim is to do so for any airfoil geometry subject to a wide
variety of turbulent inflows.
Adopting the notation of Erichson et al. (2020), the problem can be described in the following manner.
An airfoil equipped with p distributed barometric sensors is placed in a steady flow of air, providing
surface pressure measurements s ∈ Rp at multiple locations around its perimeter. The sensors sample
from the surrounding flow field x ∈ Rm through a measurement operator H:

                                              s = H(x)                                            (1)


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The goal is to construct an estimate of the flow field x̂ surrounding the airfoil, by learning from
training data a function F that approximates the highly nonlinear inverse measurement operator G
such that:
                                      F(s) = x̂ ≈ x = G(s)                                       (2)
Meshes are an extremely useful tool, indispensable in many engineering domains and especially
in CFD. Contrary to Cartesian grid representations, mesh representations offer high flexibility for
irregular geometries and allow for variable spatial density. This makes them ideal for discretizing
complex physical problems, where one can balance the trade-off between numerical accuracy and
computational efficiency in certain regions of interest. Furthermore, meshes can also be described
in terms of nodes and edges, i.e. as a graph. In this context, the flow reconstruction problem can
be described as follows. A graph G = (V, E, U) is constructed from an airfoil CFD mesh, with m
fluid nodes Vf and p airfoil boundary nodes Va . The flow features of all Vf are unknown, whilst the
features of Va are known. Our aim is then to learn a graph operator F that estimates the information
at the fluid nodes using the information contained at the airfoil boundary nodes, the input graph-level
attributes Uin and the edges E:
                                         Vˆf = F (Va , E, Uin )                                     (3)
An ancillary goal is to estimate the global context U of the graph, as this contains relevant information
for applications. Figure 1 provides an description of the flow reconstruction problem in terms of
graph learning.


Figure 1: Problem setup. We aim to learn the reconstruction operator F which estimates properties
of the fluid nodes as well as the graph context. This amounts to reconstructing a solution to the
Navier-Stokes equations which satisfies the boundary conditions perceived at the airfoil surface.

From a geometric learning perspective, flow reconstruction is a challenging problem for several
reasons. The first significant hurdle to overcome is the size of our graphs. We use meshes with high
densities close to the airfoil in order to achieve good spatial resolution in these critical regions. Thus,
our dataset contains graphs with a mean of around 55’000 nodes, which is an order of magnitude
higher than previous mesh-graph learned simulation methods (Pfaff et al., 2020). Moreover, the input
information is concentrated in a very localized domain of the graph: the airfoil nodes. It is difficult to
propagate the necessary information to reconstruct nodes far from the airfoil with a shallow Graph
Neural Network (GNN), meaning that deep GNN architectures with a large number of message-
passing steps are required to push this ’information barrier’ away from the airfoil nodes. However,
deep GNNs go hand in hand with other issues such as large memory requirements, over-smoothing,
and over-squashing.
In this work, we combine a number of existing graph-learning methods to tackle the aforementioned
challenges. Our contributions may be summarized as follows:

• We combine unknown Feature Propagation (Rossi et al., 2021) with very deep Grouped Reversible
  GNNs (Li et al., 2021) to reconstruct flow features at the fluid nodes, whilst additionally gathering
  contextual farfield information.
• Generalization of 2D aerodynamic flow field learning with GNNs, including (1) arbitrary airfoil
  geometries, (2) arbitrary turbulent inflow conditions (flow velocity, turbulence intensity, and angle
  of attack), and (3) simultaneous flow field reconstruction and inference of contextual farfield flow
  information based only on sparse pressure data on the surface of the airfoil.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Generation of a unique training dataset of OpenFOAM airfoil CFD simulations with many different
  geometries and inflow conditions which are parsed to graph structure and made publicly available.
• We gather qualitative and quantitative results on unseen airfoil and flow configurations, and perform
  a number of experiments to understand the limitations of this framework. In particular, we test and
  compare three different GNN layer architectures.

2    R ELATED WORK
Machine learning methods have recently garnered interest in the fluid mechanics community (Brunton
et al., 2020). Fluid-related problems are typically nonlinear, complex and generate large amounts
of data, all of which are conditions under which deep learning approaches thrive. Specifically in
the context of flow reconstruction from sparse measurements, several neural network approaches
can be found in the literature. In an article by Erichson et al. (2020), a ”Shallow Neural Network”,
i.e. a fully-connected network with only two hidden layers, was applied to estimate transient flows
from sparse measurements. The authors trained the networks on a single specific geometrical flow
configuration, for example the flow behind a cylinder, and then tested on the same configuration
at different time steps. We aim to avoid this limitation as our goal is to estimate the flow around
any airfoil geometry. The authors compare their findings against typically used proper orthogonal
decomposition (POD) methods and note significant improvements in terms of the reconstruction error.
This work was then extended to turbulent flow reconstruction around airfoils based on experimental
data in Carter et al. (2021), where the results were compared to Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV)
measurements. The viability of neural networks over other approaches was further confirmed in the
work of Fukami et al. (2020), where multiple methods were pitted against each other to estimate the
flow behind a cylinder and an airfoil. Again, here the models were trained and tested on a single
flow configuration, while also being dependent on Cartesian geometrical inputs. In Özbay & Laizet
(2022), researchers attempt to avoid this limitation by utilizing Schwarz–Christoffel mappings to
sample the points at which the flow is reconstructed, thus rendering the method geometry invariant.
The authors train multiple neural network architectures on a collection of transient flow simulations
around randomly generated 2-D Bezier shapes at a predefined inflow Reynolds number. As inputs for
the flow reconstruction, they use multiple pressure sensors on the shapes’ surface as well as velocity
probes in the wake. Their results indicate that, when compared to a Cartesian sampling strategy, a
significant performance boost is achieved for all neural network types, especially in the vicinity of
the immersed shape. While this work demonstrates robustness to various geometric configurations, it
requires additional velocity sensors and is trained on a singular farfield boundary condition, both of
which we aim to avoid and improve upon. Another method which avoids geometrical dependency
is reported in Chen et al. (2021). In this work, to which our approach most closely relates to, the
authors utilize a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) on graphs constructed
from CFD meshes of randomly generated Bezier shapes. The GCN is used to predict the flow
around the shapes at a fixed laminar (Reynolds number of 10) inflow condition without using surface
measurements. In our approach, we aim to reconstruct a wide variety of turbulent flows given only
surface readings, a significantly less constrained problem. We also aim to characterize the global
properties of the flow, similarly to Zhou et al. (2021). To our best knowledge, we are the first to
attempt to simultaneously reconstruct the flow while estimating turbulent inflow parameters at large
Reynolds numbers for arbitrary airfoil geometries.
The dataset that we generate to train our GNN model is similar in terms of the geometries, meshing
and CFD pipeline to the work of Thuerey et al. (2020), the main differences being the chosen RANS
model and the post-processing (graph parsing). Other datasets found in the literature focus only on
the NACA family of airfoils (Schillaci et al., 2021).
Graph networks are based on the message-passing framework (Gilmer et al., 2017), where a nodes
features are updated by aggregating messages emanating from its neighbors. Many different types of
message-passing schemes can be constructed, with some using attention mechanisms (Veličković
et al., 2017) and others relying on strong theoretical backgrounds (Xu et al., 2018). Graph learning
methods are increasingly being applied to a wide variety of physics problems (Sanchez-Gonzalez
et al., 2018; 2020). In Pfaff et al. (2020), the authors successfully demonstrate how GNNs can learn
to replicate forward mesh-based physics simulators and are able to predict the evolution of a transient
solution. Motivated by these results, our approach is constructed upon the the same basic Encode-
Process-Decode network structure. However, a key difference to note is that, contrary to the next-step


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Illustration of the dataset generation pipeline. Airfoil shapes are selected at random from a
database, then meshed and simulated in OpenFOAM with random feasible boundary conditions. In
the last step, the finite-volume scheme is used to parse the simulation mesh into a graph.


prediction problem, flow reconstruction has to overcome high amounts of missing information, with
known features being extremely localized. To address this hurdle, we turn to graph-based feature
propagation methods (Rossi et al., 2021), which is closely related to matrix completion approaches
(Monti et al., 2017). Feature propagation is an effective yet computationally inexpensive method for
initializing graphs with missing features. We use this method as pre-processing step, through which
graphs are passed before being fed into the rest of the GNN model.
Training GNNs for very large graphs is challenging, with typical approaches tending toward minimiz-
ing the number of learnable parameters so that the problem becomes tractable (Chen et al., 2020).
This often results in relatively shallow GNNs, which could adversely influence the propagation of
the information contained at the airfoil nodes through sufficient extents of the graph. Making use of
subgraph sampling strategies (Hamilton et al., 2017) is another possible approach, one which also
allows for larger/deeper GNNs. However, these methods are not applicable in our case, as we need
to feed entire graphs in one pass due to the heterogeneity in information localization. Moreover,
subgraph sampling would yield additional difficulties for our ancillary goal of predicting global graph
properties for farfield estimation. Recent work by Li et al. (2021) has shown that it is possible to train
very deep GNNs on large graphs by making use of Grouped Reversible layers, which reduces memory
requirements at the cost of extra computation. This method forms the core of the processing block of
the proposed flow reconstruction GNN. Another issue which traditionally characterizes training deep
GNNs on large graphs is over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2020). Over-squashing is a by-product of
a graph’s structure, where bottlenecks and tree-like structures (Topping et al., 2021) can cause the
latent representation of certain nodes to be overwhelmed by the amount of information needed to be
stored. We make use of this information while parsing the simulation meshes into graphs.

3    DATASET GENERATION
In this section we introduce the different elements of our data generation pipeline. In total we generate
1120 converged simulations, which are separated into train, validation and test datasets in a 80/10/10
split. Figure 2 depicts an illustration of this pipeline.

Geometry selection and meshing In our dataset generation pipeline, airfoil shapes are drawn at
random from the UUIC database of airfoils (Selig, 1996). Before passing the shape to the meshing
algorithm, we carry out some additional interpolation and processing to make sure that the selected
airfoil has a sufficient amount of points at the leading-edge as well as a properly defined trailing-edge.
Then, we use Gmsh (Geuzaine & Remacle, 2020) to construct an unstructured O-grid type mesh
around the selected airfoil. A sizing field is set close to the airfoil in order to make sure that meshes
with appropriate y+ values for the CFD wall-functions are generated. An overall sizing parameter is
also set for sufficient farfield density, but is adjusted to ensure that an acceptable amount of cells are
created (< 150′ 000).

CFD simulations Each mesh is associated with a different inflow configuration. Three parameters
control the farfield conditions: angle of attack, inflow velocity and turbulence intensity. These
parameters are drawn from probability distributions reflecting realistic atmospheric flows at Reynolds


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Overview of the Flow Reconstruction GNN achitecture. Feature Propagation is used to
initialize the unknown fluid nodes. The graph is then passed through the Encode-Process-Decode
pipeline, to obtain the reconstructed flow. During the Process step, node features are updated via
message-passing within a deep Grouped Reversible GNN.


numbers ranging from 2 · 105 to 6.5 · 106 , with a mean Reynolds number of around 3 · 106 . This mean
value is well beyond the typical laminar-to-turbulent transition threshold of around 5 · 105 (Incropera
et al., 1996), which greatly increases the difficulty of the flow reconstruction problem. The farfield
conditions form the global context vectors of our graphs and are estimated at inference time. We
simulate the flow around the airfoils using a steady 2-D Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS)
CFD solver with the OpenFOAM software package (Jasak et al., 2007). For turbulence modelling,
we select the K-Omega SST model (Menter & Esch, 2001) along with the standard OpenFOAM
wall-functions for boundary layer treatment. Only sufficiently converged CFD simulations with
pressure, velocity and turbulence residuals below 5 · 10−5 are kept.

Graph parsing Contrary to many other mesh-based physics simulators, CFD solvers such as
OpenFOAM are based on finite volume methods. It is a significant difference that should be reflected
in the manner in which a mesh is converted into a graph. To do so, we use the cells themselves as
the nodes, with bidirectional edges being formed between adjacent cells. This allows us to gather
an additional edge feature which is relevant to the underlying physics. Specifically, the length (or
surface for 3-D meshes) of the boundary between two cells is used as an edge feature. The benefit
of this is twofold: a form of sizing is fed to the network and a quantity relevant to flux computation
is set on the edges. For the nodes, we gather 4 types of features: pressure, x-velocity component,
y-velocity component and node category (fluid, farfield, wall), the latter of which is inputted as a
one-hot vector. The global context features are the farfield conditions (turbulence intensity, inflow
velocity and angle of attack). To avoid unnecessary computational overhead, we do not parse the
entire CFD domain, which has a radius of 100 airfoil chord lengths, into a graph. Instead we opt to
only keep cells within a 1 chord circle centered on the airfoil. Furthermore, we set the airfoil nodes to
be located at the meshed airfoil boundary and add bidirectional edges between adjacent airfoil nodes.
These additional edges are created with the aim of avoiding tree-like structures in our graphs, as these
could potentially cause bottlenecks for the learning process (Topping et al., 2021). The graphs of our
dataset have on average around 55k nodes and around 85k individual edges.

4     G RAPH NEURAL NETWORK FRAMEWORK
4.1   A RCHITECTURE

For our GNN architecture, we adopt the Encode-Process-Decode logic that is now popular for
learning on graph-based physics problems (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2020; Godwin
et al., 2022), albeit with some notable modifications. Figure 3 shows an overview of the Flow
Reconstruction GNN.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Input features In the flow reconstruction problem, we assume that the global context of the graph
is unknown, however some useful physical parameters describing the flow can be estimated. Using
Bernoulli’s principle, and given that all airfoils are simulated with a zero farfield static pressure, the
farfield inflow velocity magnitude can be initially approximated as:
                                                     r
                                                        2 · p0
                                            Û∞ =                                                      (4)
                                                          ρ
where ρ is the density of air (constant throughout simulations) and p0 is the total pressure measured
at the stagnation point, which can be estimated by taking the maximum pressure at the airfoil nodes
p0 = max(pVa ). While Bernoulli’s principle is not valid for turbulent flows such as the ones we
try to reconstruct, it serves as a good starting point for farfield velocity estimation. Another useful
graph property that can be extracted is the normal force coefficient acting on the airfoil. While the
lift coefficient is usually used to characterize airfoils, it cannot be calculated as the angle of attack is
unknown (a quantity to be inferred from the learned model). Nevertheless, the normal coefficient is
directly related to the lift coefficient and brings additional physical information which may aid the
network to reconstruct the flow. It can be estimated via the following equation:
                                                 P
                                                      pvi · lvi · ny,vi
                                               vi ∈Va
                                       Ĉn =                                                            (5)
                                                         p0

where l is the boundary length and ny is the y component of the normal boundary vector, both of
which are known properties for each mesh cell boundary. We therefore use Uin = (Û∞ , Ĉn ) as the
two-dimensional input context vector.
For the nodes, we only have access to the pressure distribution at the surface of the airfoil, while it is
set to ’NaN’ values at the fluid nodes. The type of each node is known and is encoded as a one-hot
vector, bringing the total number of input node features to four. To account for mesh geometry, the
following four edge features are used as inputs: the x and y components of the relative edge direction
vector, the edge length, and the cell boundary length value l (see Section 3).

Pre-processing Both the input and target node features are normalized. To avoid biasing the
normalization, all pressure features are normalized by the mean and standard deviation of the
known airfoil surface pressure distribution, while both components of the velocity target features
are normalized by the initial estimated farfield velocity Û∞ . We use Feature Propagation (Rossi
et al., 2021) as a preliminary step before feeding a graph to our GNN. This step is an important
part of our framework as it conditions the input graph into a plausible initial state. Essentially, the
feature propagator radiates surface pressure information outwards. In most cases, we found 20 feature
propagation iterations to be sufficient.

Encoding In the encoding layer, ReLU activated MLPs with two hidden layers and LayerNorm are
used to project the input features of the graph into latent vectors of size N . This encoding layer differs
to the standard GraphNet encoder (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020) in that the node encoder MLP
takes as input the input node features as well as the latent global vector. We make this modification
so that graph-level attributes are taken into account in the construction of the node latent variables, as
this is not the case in the processing steps.

Processing For the processing step, we opt to use a deep Grouped Reversible GNN (Li et al.,
2021) with L message-passing layers. This architecture makes modifications to the typical GNN
architecture by first splitting the input node feature matrix V across the feature dimension into
C groups ⟨V1 , V2 , ..., VC ⟩, which are then processed into grouped outputs ⟨V1′ , V2′ , ..., VC′ ⟩ with a
Grouped Reversible GNN layer. These outputs are computed as follows:
                                   C
                                   X
                           V0′ =         Vk
                                   k=2
                                                                                                        (6)
                           Vk′ = fwk (Vk−1
                                        ′
                                           , A, E) + Vk ,      k ∈ {1, . . . , C}
with A the adjacency matrix and E the edge feature matrix.
The Grouped Reversible framework allows for any type of message-passing architecture to be chosen


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for the GNN layer fwk . We choose to test three popular types of GNN layers: the Graph Attention
Network (GAT) (Veličković et al., 2017), the modified Graph Isomorphic Network (GIN) (Xu et al.,
2018) which accounts for edge features (Hu et al., 2019), and the Generalized Aggregation Networks
(GEN) Li et al. (2020) which modifies the standard GCN with different aggregation schemes while
also utilizing edge features.

Decoding Only the nodes and global context are decoded back into feature space, as the edges are
not updated. Both decoding neural networks are MLPs with two hidden layers and ReLU activations
without any output normalization. At the output of the decoder, we gather for each node the estimated
pressure and velocity fields. The output context vector is composed of an updated version of the
farfield velocity, as well as an estimation of the inflow angle (angle of attack) and of the turbulence
intensity.

4.2   T RAINING

General aspects Our models are trained on a dataset composed of 896 graphs. Models are trained
with the Adam optimizer on a single Nvidia GPU with 10GB of VRAM. Due to the size and nature of
the graphs, we can only use a batch size of one, albeit with random order shuffling occurring at each
epoch. The learning rate is initially set at 5 · 10−4 and is exponentially decayed by a factor of 0.97.

Loss function We use a multi-component loss function, in order to minimize both the node feature
reconstruction error and the context vector prediction error, with L2 losses for both components. An
additional loss component based on the velocity divergence was also tested but yielded too many
artefacts and was therefore discarded. The overall loss is:

                                    L = L2 (V, V̂) + λ · L2 (U, Û)                                  (7)
where λ is a hyperparameter used to balance the different components. In practice, we usually set λ
to 1.

5     R ESULTS

Our trained models are tested on a dataset comprising of 112 unseen airfoil simulations, each with
a different combination of turbulent inflow parameters. We show here qualitative and quantitative
results for our models and perform experiments aiming to investigate limitations and improvements
of the proposed framework.

Comparison of GNN layers In Table 1, we gather and compare results for the three different types
of GNN layers used in the Processor: GAT, GIN and GEN. The architecture of the Encoder and
Decoder networks were kept constant, with a latent size for the node, edge and global features of
N = 128. In the Grouped Reversible Processor, the number of Layers was set to L = 30, while
the number of groups was chosen as C = 4. To obtain a consistent number of learnable parameters,
the hyperparameters for each GNN layer type were carefully selected, more information about the
different configurations can be found in the appendix. We also study the impact of the depth and
width on the performance of each model in Appendix D.

Velocity reconstruction One of the more challenging prediction tasks is the estimation of the
velocity field away from the airfoil. Accurately capturing velocity shear and recirculation regions is
non-trivial even for CFD simulators and is highly dependant on the airfoil shape and the inflow angle.
To complete this task sucessfully, the GNN needs to be expressive enough to propagate relevant
information throughout the graph. Table 2 summarizes the prediction errors of the velocity field in
multiple concentric regions around the airfoil for the three models. We observe that for all three
models, the error on the x-velocity decreases further away from the airfoil, but this is not the case for
the y-velocity.

Qualitative results Figure 4 displays some qualitative results for our two best performing models
(revGAT and revGIN), compared to the CFD simulation ground truth. These results highlight the fact


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Root mean squared prediction errors averaged over the test dataset for both the flow
reconstruction task and the global parameter estimation task. Results are averaged over 3 runs with
different initializations. All models have latent size of N = 128 and L = 30 layers. While the
revGAT model performs the best in terms of pressure and y-velocity reconstruction, it is outperformed
by the revGIN model when it comes to x-velocity reconstruction, and graph-level attribute prediction.

                        Node reconstruction RMSE                            Global parameter prediction RMSE
                 pressure         x-velocity   y-velocity        farfield velocity angle of attack turbulence intensity
                    [Pa]            [m/s]        [m/s]                 [m/s]             [◦ ]                [-]
    revGAT    77.98 ± 17.99      7.96 ± 1.19 2.69 ± 0.53           0.92 ± 0.17       4.16 ± 0.10        0.04 ± 0.003
    revGIN     158.37 ± 5.16     6.23 ± 0.32 4.43 ± 0.22           0.45 ± 0.06       4.12 ± 0.09        0.03 ± 0.003
    revGEN    137.51 ± 17.31 10.81 ± 0.25 5.47 ± 0.05              0.46 ± 0.05       4.12 ± 0.01        0.04 ± 0.002


Table 2: Root mean squared prediction errors of the velocity components for different concentric
regions of the flow, averaged over the test dataset. Each region is defined as the interior of an ellipse
with a the length of semi-major axis and b the length of semi-minor (in chord lengths). Results are
averaged over 3 runs with different initializations.

                                              x-velocity                                     y-velocity
                                                [m/s]                                          [m/s]
                                 revGAT        revGIN         revGEN            revGAT        revGIN         revGEN
    region 1 (a=0.6, b=0.1)    8.26 ± 1.34   6.46 ± 0.39    11.44 ± 0.25      2.48 ± 0.60   4.15 ± 0.18    5.40 ± 0.03
    region 2 (a=0.7, b=0.15)   7.98 ± 1.25   6.30 ± 0.35    11.00 ± 0.26      2.49 ± 0.43   4.40 ± 0.23    5.52 ± 0.05
    region 3 (a=0.8, b=0.2)    7.95 ± 1.24   6.27 ± 0.33    10.92 ± 0.26      2.61 ± 0.55   4.44 ± 0.23    5.53 ± 0.05



that the learned model is able to reconstruct flow features well, albeit with some artefacts. As the
distance to the airfoil increases, these defects become more apparent. Moreover, some parts of the
flow are not well captured. This is the case for flows exhibiting long wakes. On the other hand, we
notice that flow features near the leading edge of the airfoil are in general well captured. We provide
additional examples of reconstructed flows in Appendix E.

Farfield estimation Figure 5 displays the graph-level context prediction results evaluated on the
test set for the revGIN model. The GNN is able to accurately predict farfield inflow velocity, owing
to the good initial farfield estimation provided as an input. For the angle of attack estimation, we
observe good results at small angles but less so for larger positive and negative angles. Prediction of
the turbulence intensity is however relatively poor, which can be attributed to this variable having a
lesser impact on the airfoil pressure distribution. Moreover, this variable is not directly set in the CFD
simulations as it is used to calculate turbulent boundary conditions (kinetic energy k and specific
rate of dissipation ω of the k − ω turbulence model), which makes it more difficult to retrieve in this
inverse context.


6      D ISCUSSION

Our results indicate that the type of GNN architecture chosen in the Grouped Reversible Processor
has a clear impact on the flow reconstruction quality. From our comparison, we find that, overall,
using Graph Attention Network layers usually yields the best reconstructed solutions. However, we
also observe that the Graph Isomorphic Network layer is better able to capture detached flows (see
Appendix E). Perhaps a combination of the two could lead to better reconstructed flows, which could
be for instance implemented by alternating GIN and GAT layers. Lastly, we find that the performance
of the GEN layer to be somewhat underwhelming.
Something to note is that the first few layers of nodes surrounding the airfoil carry a disproportionate
amount of relevant information which needs to be propagated outwards to an increasing number
of nodes, thus creating artificial tree-like paths within the graph. While the Grouped Reversible
framework provides a good way to train deep networks in order to circumvent this, other methods
may also feasible. One possible solution might be to use hierarchies such as those implemented in
Martinkus et al. (2021). Another option could be to apply a message-passing GNN in an iterative


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Reconstructed flow around two unseen arbitrary airfoils geometries at different inflow
configurations for the revGAT and revGIN models. Figure (a) plots the reconstructed pressure field
while the reconstructed velocity field is shown in Figure (b). For each case the ground truth is shown
for comparison. Qualitatively, the revGAT model displays fewer artefacts in the solution.

               (a)                                  (b)                                  (c)


Figure 5: Comparison of the global properties predicted by our revGIN model against the ground
truth values, evaluated on the test dataset. The model is able to accurately predict farfield flow velocity
thanks to a decent initial estimation (a) and to a lesser extent the angle of attack (b), but it falls short
for farfield turbulence intensity prediction (c).


manner, with each step reconstructing increasingly large concentric bands around the airfoil. Physics-
driven learning methods could also lead to potential improvements. For instance, the message-passing
framework may well be suited to incorporate elements from the Lattice-Bolzmann method (Chen &
Doolen, 1998) as it also functions in a similar two step algorithm (collision and streaming). Another
possible option would be to minimize the gradient of the pressure, as described in Taha & Gonzalez
(2021).

7    C ONCLUSION
In this work we applied deep graph-based learning techniques to reconstruct pressure and velocity
fields around arbitrary airfoil geometries subject to high-Reynolds turbulent flows. We show that,
despite the challenges posed by this problem, such as the large graphs and the very localized
input information, our Flow Reconstruction GNN framework is able to provide good reconstructed
solutions, and infer contextual farfield flow information. We compared several message-passing
architectures within the Grouped Reversible Processor GNN, and found that Graph Attention Network
layers yielded the best reconstructed solutions. This work provides a flexible framework which may
easily be applied to other mesh-based inverse physics problems, and which may be of significant
interest to a number of engineering applications.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05205, 2020.
Sarah Barber, Julien Deparday, Yuriy Marykovskiy, Eleni Chatzi, Imad Abdallah, Gregory Duthé,
  Michele Magno, Tommaso Polonelli, Raphael Fischer, and Hanna Müller. Development of a
  wireless, non-intrusive, mems-based pressure and acoustic measurement system for large-scale
  operating wind turbine blades. Wind Energy Science, 7(4):1383–1398, 2022.
Steven L Brunton, Bernd R Noack, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Machine learning for fluid mechanics.
  Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 52:477–508, 2020.
Douglas W Carter, Francis De Voogt, Renan Soares, and Bharathram Ganapathisubramani. Data-
  driven sparse reconstruction of flow over a stalled aerofoil using experimental data. Data-Centric
 Engineering, 2, 2021.
Junfeng Chen, Elie Hachem, and Jonathan Viquerat. Graph neural networks for laminar flow
  prediction around random 2d shapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.11529, 2021.
Ming Chen, Zhewei Wei, Zengfeng Huang, Bolin Ding, and Yaliang Li. Simple and deep graph
 convolutional networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1725–1735. PMLR,
 2020.
Shiyi Chen and Gary D Doolen. Lattice boltzmann method for fluid flows. Annual review of fluid
  mechanics, 30(1):329–364, 1998.
N Benjamin Erichson, Lionel Mathelin, Zhewei Yao, Steven L Brunton, Michael W Mahoney,
  and J Nathan Kutz. Shallow neural networks for fluid flow reconstruction with limited sensors.
  Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 476(2238):20200097, 2020.
Kai Fukami, Koji Fukagata, and Kunihiko Taira. Assessment of supervised machine learning methods
  for fluid flows. Theoretical and Computational Fluid Dynamics, 34(4):497–519, 2020.
Christophe Geuzaine and Jean-François Remacle. A three-dimensional finite element mesh generator
  with built-in pre-and post-processing facilities. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
  Engineering, (11):79, 2020.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
Jonathan Godwin, Michael Schaarschmidt, Alexander Gaunt, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Yulia
  Rubanova, Petar Veličković, James Kirkpatrick, and Peter Battaglia. Simple GNN Regularisation
  for 3D Molecular Property Prediction & Beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07971, 2022.
Nigel Gregory and CL O’reilly. Low-speed aerodynamic characteristics of naca 0012 aerofoil section,
  including the effects of upper-surface roughness simulating hoar frost. 1970.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Weihua Hu, Bowen Liu, Joseph Gomes, Marinka Zitnik, Percy Liang, Vijay Pande, and Jure Leskovec.
 Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12265, 2019.
Frank P Incropera, David P DeWitt, Theodore L Bergman, Adrienne S Lavine, et al. Fundamentals
  of heat and mass transfer, volume 6. Wiley New York, 1996.
Hrvoje Jasak, Aleksandar Jemcov, Zeljko Tukovic, et al. Openfoam: A c++ library for complex
  physics simulations. In International workshop on coupled methods in numerical dynamics,
  volume 1000, pp. 1–20. IUC Dubrovnik Croatia, 2007.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sherrie L Krist. CFL3D user’s manual (version 5.0). National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
  Langley Research Center, 1998.
Guohao Li, Chenxin Xiong, Ali Thabet, and Bernard Ghanem. Deepergcn: All you need to train
  deeper gcns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07739, 2020.
Guohao Li, Matthias Müller, Bernard Ghanem, and Vladlen Koltun. Training graph neural networks
  with 1000 layers. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6437–6449. PMLR, 2021.
Karolis Martinkus, Aurelien Lucchi, and Nathanaël Perraudin. Scalable graph networks for particle
  simulations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp.
  8912–8920. AAAI Press, 2021.
Florian Menter and Thomas Esch. Elements of industrial heat transfer predictions. In 16th Brazilian
  Congress of Mechanical Engineering (COBEM), volume 109, pp. 650, 2001.
Federico Monti, Michael Bronstein, and Xavier Bresson. Geometric matrix completion with recurrent
  multi-graph neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ali Girayhan Özbay and Sylvain Laizet. Deep learning fluid flow reconstruction around arbitrary
  two-dimensional objects from sparse sensors using conformal mappings. AIP Advances, 12(4):
  045126, 2022.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter W Battaglia. Learning mesh-
  based simulation with graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03409, 2020.
Emanuele Rossi, Henry Kenlay, Maria I Gorinova, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xiaowen Dong, and
  Michael Bronstein. On the unreasonable effectiveness of feature propagation in learning on graphs
 with missing node features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12128, 2021.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Nicolas Heess, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Josh Merel, Martin Riedmiller,
  Raia Hadsell, and Peter Battaglia. Graph networks as learnable physics engines for inference and
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4470–4479. PMLR, 2018.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 8459–8468. PMLR, 2020.
Andrea Schillaci, Maurizio Quadrio, Carlotta Pipolo, Marcello Restelli, and Giacomo Boracchi.
  Inferring functional properties from fluid dynamics features. In 2020 25th International Conference
  on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 4091–4098. IEEE, 2021.
Michael S Selig. Uiuc airfoil data site. 1996. URL https://m-selig.ae.illinois.edu/
 ads.html.
Haithem Taha and Cody Gonzalez. A variational theory of lift. In APS Division of Fluid Dynamics
  Meeting Abstracts, pp. P17–006, 2021.
Nils Thuerey, Konstantin Weißenow, Lukas Prantl, and Xiangyu Hu. Deep learning methods for
  reynolds-averaged navier–stokes simulations of airfoil flows. AIAA Journal, 58(1):25–36, 2020.
Jake Topping, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael M
  Bronstein. Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on graphs via curvature. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.14522, 2021.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018.
Kaiwen Zhou, Luanliang Zhou, Simeng Zhao, Xingyu Qiang, Yingzheng Liu, and Xin Wen. Data-
  driven method for flow sensing of aerodynamic parameters using distributed pressure measurements.
 AIAA Journal, 59(9):3504–3516, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A    B ENCHMARKING OF THE CFD MODEL
To ensure that the simulations which constitute our dataset are of sufficient quality, we benchmark
our CFD pipeline against results reported in the literature for the NACA 0012 airfoil (Krist, 1998;
Gregory & O’reilly, 1970). In Figure 6 we plot the pressure coefficient for this airfoil at two angles of
attack. We see that our CFD pipeline matches well with both the previous experimental and numerical
results.
                       (a)                                                (b)


Figure 6: Comparison of our CFD data pipeline against experimental (Gregory & O’reilly, 1970)
and other CFD results (Krist, 1998). We plot the pressure coefficient distribution on the surface of a
NACA 0012 airfoil at Re = 6 · 106 at an angle of attack of (a) 10◦ and (b) 15◦ .



B    A DDITIONAL HYPERPARAMETER DETAILS
For all models, 30 layers were used in conjunction with a latent space size of 128. The GAT
model is implemented with 2 attention heads. Moreover a LayerNorm layer is applied to the output
of each GAT layer, as it was found that this greatly aided training stability. Both the GIN and
GEN implementation makes use of ReLu activated MLPs with two hidden layers and LayerNorm.
These choice of parameters ensure that each individual layer has approximately 4.5k to 5k learnable
parameters. In total for the baseline models with 30 layers and a latent space size of N = 128, we
obtain models with around 700k trainable parameters.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    A BLATION OF E STIMATED G LOBALS
We plot in Figure 7 the result of removing the estimated farfield conditions (Û∞ and Ĉn ) from the
input of the model. We note a drastic penalty in the quality of the prediction of farfield quantities.


Figure 7: Relative performance of the model when no estimated farfield parameters are used in the
input compared to the baseline model.


D    D EPTH AND WIDTH STUDY
We display in Figure 8 the effect of model depth on the reconstruction performance of each reversible
model. In Figure 9, we plot the relative performance of different latent space sizes (the width) for the
different models.

E    A DDITIONAL RESULTS
We plot in Figure 10 and Figure 11 some additional results, showcasing the reconstructive abilities of
our models, as well as some configurations which are not well captured. Notably, detached flows
are not always properly reconstructed, an issue which may stem from either the dataset not holding
enough detached flows, or from challenges arising from the GNN architecture.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                (a)


                                                (b)


                                                (c)


Figure 8: Comparison of the impact of the depth on reconstruction performance for the different
layers, relative to the baseline architectures with 30 layers (in green). We also show the relative
training time for each depth.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  (a)


                                                  (b)


                                                  (c)


Figure 9: Comparison of the impact of the size of the latent space on reconstruction performance for
the different layers, relative to the baseline architectures with a latent space size of N = 128 layers
(in orange). We also show the relative training time for each width.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Reconstructed velocity field magnitude around two unseen arbitrary airfoils geometries at
different large wake inflow configurations for the revGAT, revGIN and revGEN models. For each
case the ground truth is shown for comparison. Qualitatively, the revGIN model is able to better
capture the detached flows in the solution.


Figure 11: Reconstructed pressure field around two unseen arbitrary airfoils geometries at different
inflow configurations for the revGAT, revGIN and revGEN models. For each case the ground truth is
shown for comparison. Qualitatively, the revGAT model displays fewer artefacts.



                                                16
