Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Decomposed Prompting : A M ODULAR A PPROACH FOR
S OLVING C OMPLEX TASKS
 Tushar Khot♣ , Harsh Trivedi♡ , Matthew Finlayson♣ , Yao Fu♠∗,
 Kyle Richardson♣ , Peter Clark♣ , Ashish Sabharwal♣
 ♣                           ♡                            ♠
   Allen Institute for AI      Stony Brook University       University of Edinburgh
 tushark@allenai.org, hjtrivedi@cs.stonybrook.edu, matthewf@allenai.org, yao.fu@ed.ac.uk,
 kyler@allenai.org, peterc@allenai.org, ashishs@allenai.org



                                              A BSTRACT

            Few-shot prompting is a surprisingly powerful way to use Large Language Models
            (LLMs) to solve various tasks. However, this approach struggles as the task com-
            plexity increases or when the individual reasoning steps of the task themselves are
            hard to learn, especially when embedded in more complex tasks. To address this,
            we propose Decomposed Prompting, a new approach to solve complex tasks by
            decomposing them (via prompting) into simpler sub-tasks that can be delegated
            to a shared library of prompting-based LLMs dedicated to these sub-tasks. This
            modular structure allows each prompt to be optimized for its specific sub-task,
            further decomposed if necessary, and even easily replaced with more effective
            prompts, trained models, or symbolic functions if desired.
            We show that the flexibility and modularity of Decomposed Prompting allows it to
            outperform prior work on few-shot prompting using GPT-3. On symbolic reason-
            ing tasks, we can further decompose sub-tasks that are hard for LLMs into even
            simpler solvable sub-tasks. When the complexity comes from the input length,
            we can recursively decompose the task into the same task but with smaller in-
            puts. We also evaluate our approach on textual multi-step reasoning tasks: on
            long-context multi-hop QA, we can more effectively teach the sub-tasks via our
            separate sub-tasks prompts; and on open-domain multi-hop QA, we can easily
            incorporate a symbolic information retrieval module within our decomposition
            framework, leading to improved performance on both tasks.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) have been shown to solve
various tasks given only a few examples as prompts, also referred to as in-context learning. These
models can even perform more complex reasoning tasks when shown the sequence of simple rea-
soning steps needed to perform the complex task as a prompt (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021).
In essence, the sequence of reasoning steps, such as in Chains-of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei
et al., 2022), demonstrates how to decompose the complex task as well as how each reasoning step
should be performed. However, as tasks become more complex, few demonstrations of the complex
task aren’t sufficient for current models to learn to perform all necessary reasoning steps. E.g., few-
shot demonstrations of concatenating the k th letter of words in a string is insufficient for GPT-3 to
learn to extract the k th letter, or learn to answer hard single-hop questions when only provided a few
demonstrations of multi-hop questions. Additionally, it is unclear whether tasks such as document
retrieval and integration, for knowledge-intensive tasks, can even be done by few-shot prompts.
To address these limitations, we propose Decomposed Prompting (D ECOM P), a new approach to
solve complex tasks by instead decomposing them into simpler sub-tasks and delegating these to
sub-task specific LLMs, with both the decomposer and the sub-task LLMs (henceforth, sub-task
handlers) having their own few-shot prompts. Fig 1 illustrates our approach. The decomposer
    ∗
        Work done during internship at Allen Institute for AI
    1
        Datasets, Code and Prompts available at https://github.com/allenai/DecomP.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           A       B       C                       A      C
                                                                              A                B      C
     Standard       Chain-of-Thought           Decomposer Prompt                  Sub-Task Handlers
    Prompting          Prompting
                                                                   Decomposed Prompting

Figure 1: While standard approaches only provide labeled examples (shown as a grey input box
with green label box), Chain-of-Thought prompting also describes the reasoning steps to arrive at
the answer for every example in the prompt. Decomposed Prompting, on the other hand, uses the
decomposer prompt to only describe the procedure to solve the complex tasks using certain sub-
tasks. Each sub-task, indicated here with A, B and C is handled by sub-task specific handlers which
can vary from a standard prompt (sub-task A), a further decomposed prompt (sub-task B) or a
symbolic function such as retrieval (sub-task C)
prompt only describes a sequence of sub-tasks (A, B, and C) needed to solve the complex tasks, in-
dicated with the dashed lines. Each sub-task is then delegated to the corresponding sub-task handler
shown on the right.
Using a software engineering analogy, the decomposer defines the top-level program for the com-
plex task using interfaces to simpler, sub-task functions. The sub-task handlers serve as modular,
debuggable, and upgradable implementations of these simpler functions, akin to a software library.
If a particular sub-task handler, say the one for identifying the k th letter or retrieving a document,
is not performing well enough, we can debug this handler in isolation, explore alternative prompts
or implementations, and seamlessly plug the improved module back into the overall system, as a
systematic way to try to improve performance on the complex end-task.
This approach has several advantages over prior work (as also shown in the figure). The sub-task
handlers can be shown a broader and richer set of examples (of the simpler task) than the specific
ones needed for the complex task prompt (task A). If a sub-task is too complex, it can be further
decomposed into simpler sub-tasks (task B). Similar to software libraries, these sub-task handlers
can be shared across multiple tasks; e.g., here tasks A and C are reused in the model for task B. As
noted above, a sub-task handler can be easily swapped with an improved implementation without
any change to the rest of the system. Few-shot prompt based LLMs can be even replaced with a
symbolic system for tasks more suited for non-neural methods; e.g., task C uses a symbolic retrieval
system such as Elasticsearch that can handle very large-scale corpora. Lastly, we can even improve
upon prior work by simply adding an error-correcting sub-task handler as a post-processing step.
To illustrate these advantages of D ECOM P, we empirically evaluate it against prior work on eight
challenging datasets using GPT3 models: (1) On a task of concatenating the k th letter, we show that
our approach of factoring out each sub-task allows us to more effectively teach the sub-problem of
extracting the k th letter(specifically, by decomposing it into even easier sub-tasks). (2) On a task
of reversing a list, we show that D ECOM P allows us to extend the capabilities of a weaker model
and build a scale-invariant system by recursively decomposing the task into reversal of smaller and
smaller lists. (3) On a task of long-context QA (Khot et al., 2022), our approach allows each sub-
task handler to accommodate more examples than feasible with CoT prompting leading to better QA
performance. (4) On three multi-hop open-domain QA datasets (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020;
Trivedi et al., 2022), we can incorporate a symbolic retrieval (ElasticSearch) API as the handler for
the retrieval sub-task leading to better results than CoT. (5) On two Math QA datasets (Cobbe et al.,
2021; Roy & Roth, 2015), we can post-process CoT to easily fix frequent formatting errors, resulting
in a surprisingly high improvement of 14-17 pts.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Few-shot Prompts for Multi-Step Reasoning Large-scale Language models (LLMs) have been
shown to learn various NLP tasks given just few examples as prompts (Brown et al., 2020). Recently,
they have also been successfully applied to various multi-step reasoning tasks by providing the
intermediate reasoning steps, i.e. Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022),
needed to arrive at the answer. An alternate approach has been to compose multiple LLMs or LLMs
with symbolic functions to perform multi-step reasoning (Jung et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2023;


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Press et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023, inter alia). We view these
prior works as specialized systems with a pre-defined decomposition structure.
The closest works to our approach are the ideas of least-to-most prompting (Zhou et al., 2023)
and successive prompting (Dua et al., 2022) where one prompt/model is used to generate the sub-
questions needed to answer a complex question and a second prompt/model sequentially answers
these sub-questions. In contrast, our approach allows for diverse decomposition structures including
recursion and other non-linear decomposition structures. E.g., by definition, least-to-most asks ques-
tions from easiest to the hardest and requires an LLM to eventually answer the complete question
(“most” in least-to-most) whereas we have no such restriction. Additionally, we iteratively generate
new questions based on previous answers (similar to successive prompting) and can explicitly assign
different prompts or symbolic systems to answer each sub-question.

Modular Approaches for Multi-Step Reasoning Our work follows a long literature in NLP on
neural modular modeling architectures (Andreas et al., 2016; Talmor & Berant, 2018; Min et al.,
2019; Jiang & Bansal, 2019; Gupta et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2020; Khot et al., 2021; Levine et al.,
2022) for question-answering and other tasks. We take particular inspiration from the Text Modular
Networks approach of Khot et al. (2021), whereby problem decomposition consists of a learned
next question generator trained to generate questions in the language of a collection of textual and
symbolic agents. Best-first search strategy was used to explore the space of possible decompositions
during inference. In contrast to this work, which largely centered around supervised training of the
next-question generator given existing agents, we leverage the power and recent successes of few-
shot LLMs to build both the decomposer and the sub-task agents that best fit the ideal decomposition.
This has the advantage of obviating the need for specialized supervised training data that may not
always be available for all sub-tasks – a key bottleneck of this prior work.

3     D ECOMPOSED P ROMPTING

As with conventional few-shot prompting, the goal is to teach an LLM to find an answer A to a
query Q using a small set of in-context examples D = {E1 , ..., E|D| }. The answer A is obtained
from the underlying distribution p(A | Q, D, θ) (Dohan et al., 2022). In the most basic few-shot
setup, examples take the form Ej = (Qj , Aj ). In the case of CoT-style prompting, the goal is to
obtain answers by first generating a sequence or chain of intermediate reasoning steps or “thoughts”
T , and then deriving the final answer based on T . To teach this ability, one uses more sophisticated
in-context examples that take the form Ej = (Qj , (Tj,1 , . . . , Tj,k ), Aj ).
In D ECOM P, the core is a decomposer LLM that tries to solve a complex task by generating a
prompting program P for it. Each step of P directs a simpler sub-query to a function in an
auxiliary set of sub-task functions F available to the system. Given a query      Q whose answer is
A, the program P is a sequence of the form (f1 , Q1 , A1 ), ..., (fk , Qk , Ak ) where Ak is the final
answer predicted by P and Qi is a sub-query directed to the sub-task function fi ∈ F. P is executed
by a high-level imperative controller, which passes the inputs and outputs between the decomposer
and sub-task handler until a stopping condition in P is met and the final output obtained.
To teach the decomposer LLM in a few-shot prompting manner, we                 use in-context examples that
take the form Ej = (Qj , fj,1 , Qj,1 , Aj,1 ), ..., (fj,kj , Qj,kj , Aj,kj ) where Aj,kj = Aj is the final
answer for Qj and (Qj,1 , . . . , Qj,kj ) is a decomposition of Qj . Each sub-task function f , in turn, is
operationalized via a sub-task handler as an in-context prompting LLM (e.g., a separate CoT-style
prompt or a additional prompting program dedicated to that sub-task), or any other symbolic or
learned function (e.g., a calculator or specialized supervised trained model).

3.1   D ECOMPOSED P ROMPTS

To illustrate this with an example, consider a multi-step task such as “Concatenate the first letter
of every word in str using a space”. We can solve this task by decomposing it into a sequence of
three simple sub-tasks: 1) Collect the list of words in the str; 2) For each word, extract the third
letter; 3) Concatenate the extracted letters using space as the separator. Fig. 2 shows an example
decomposition prompt for this task. Much like a conventional structured program, the top-level
decomp prompt provides an example program Ej using three sub-task functions: f1 :split that


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           QC: Concatenate the first letter of every word in "Jack                    Q: What are the words in "Elon Musk Tesla"?
           Ryan" using spaces                                                         A: ["Elon", "Musk", "Tesla"]
           Q1: [split] What are the words in "Jack Ryan"?
                                                                                      Q: What are the letters in "C++"?
           #1: ["Jack". "Ryan"]                                                       A: ["C", "+", "+"]
           Q2: (foreach) [str_pos] What is the first letter of #1?                    ...                                                split
           #2: ["J", "R"]
           Q3: [merge] Concatenate #2 with spaces                                     Q: Concatenate ["n", "i", "e"]
           #3: "J R"                                                                  A: "nie"
           Q4: [EOQ]
                                                                                      Q: Concatenate ["n", "i", "c", "e"] using spaces
                                                                                      A: "n i c e"
           ...                                                        decomp          ...                                         merge

Figure 2: Prompts for the decomposer and the split and merge sub-tasks used by the decom-
poser. The decomposer specifies the sequence of questions and corresponding sub-tasks (within
square braces). The sub-task prompts can be written independent of the complex task examples and
can even capture generalizations, e.g., letters in word (split) and no delimiter (merge).
splits words in an input string, f2 :str pos that finds character positions in strings and f3 :merge
that concatenates characters. In this case, we operationalize each sub-task function as a separate
in-context prompt (e.g., using a standard prompting approach for split and merge on the right
side), each containing a set of in-context examples that are independent of the original complex task.
In addition to the three functions described above, additional control structure is included, such as
the symbolic function foreach, which iterates over arrays and references to previous answers such
as #1. We note that such a helper function is not strictly necessary (e.g., we could directly generate
“Q2’: What is the first letter of Jack?” and “Q3’: What is the first letter of Ryan?” instead of Q2
in the figure) and is added to reduce the manual effort needed to specify the decomposition and also
reduce potential errors during decomposition. In our experiments we use two of the compositional
operators defined by Khot et al. (2022) (see appendix for details), although it is capable of using all
their operators (which also capture the QDMR operators from Wolfson et al. (2020)).


                 QC: Concatenate the second letter of every word in


                                                                                                                                           split
                                                                                           Q: What are the words in "John Smith"? A:
                 "John Smith" using spaces
                                                                                                                  ["John", "Smith"]
                  decomp


                           Q1: [split] What are the words in "John Smith"?
                           #1: ["John", "Smith"]                                           Q: What is the second letter in "John"? A:



                                                                                                                                           str_pos
                                                                                                                              "o"
                  decomp


                           Q2: (foreach) [str_pos] What is the second letter in #1?        Q: What is the second letter in "Smith"? A:
                                                                                                                              "m"
                           #2: ["o", "m"]
                  decomp


                                                                                                                                           merge

                           Q3: [merge] Concatenate #2 with spaces                          Q: Concatenate ["o, "m"] with spaces A:
                           #3: "o m"                                                                                         "o m"
                  decomp


                           Q4: [EOQ]
                           A: "o m"



Figure 3: The inference procedure in D ECOM P iteratively calls the decomposer prompt to generate
the next question and sub-task at each step, given the current history of question and answers. The
generated question is then routed to the assigned sub-task handler (with some handling of special
operators, when needed). When the special end-of-questions [EOQ] marker is generated, the previ-
ous answer is returned as the final prediction.


3.2   P ROMPT E XECUTION AND I NFERENCE

Given a new question and a set of background in-context examples D, the inference (i.e., the pro-
gram construction and execution) process is illustrated in Fig. 3. The new complex question is fed to
the decomposer prompt to get the first sub-question to be asked to the split prompt. With the help
of our symbolic controller, the answer generated from this prompt is then appended to the decom-
poser prompt to get the second sub-question, Q2. Due to the foreach operator in the generated
question, Q2 results in two questions (one for each word in #1) to be fed to the str pos prompt.
The answers are combined into an array to get the answer #2. The entire decomposition history is
used to generate Q3 and passed to the merge prompt to get the final answer. Since the task has been
solved, the decomposition prompt produces the special end-of-sequence marker([EOQ]) and the last
answer is returned as the final answer. Formally, performing inference involves finding the best an-
swer A to a new query Q, which in the simplest form involves computing the MAP answer using the


                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


LLMs predictive distribution for A, i.e., Â = arg maxA p(A | D, Q, θ) (Dohan et al., 2022). For
practicality, such computations are approximated using greedy search in our experiments.

3.3    D ECOM P C APABILITIES

Hierarchical Decomposition Certain sub-tasks, even when given many examples, are not solvable
with few-shot prompting. E.g., we found identifying the k th letter of a string to be challenging
for the GPT3 text-davinci-002 model. In such a scenario, we can decompose the sub-task
prompt further, to first identify the letters and their position and then select the k th element of this
array (see Fig. 4). We can also re-use existing sub-task prompts in our framework. E.g., the split
prompt can be reused since it was developed for the general task of splitting strings.2

                                                                       Q: What is at position 1 in "[("Colorless", 1), ("green", 2), ("ideas",
QC: What is the letter at position 1 of the word "Google"?
                                                                       3), ("sleep", 4), ("furiously", 5)]"?
QS: [split] What are the letters and their positions in "Google"?
                                                                       A: "Colorless"
A: "[(G, 1), (o, 2), (o, 3), (g, 4), (l, 5), (e, 6)]"
QS: [arr_pos] What is at position 1 in #1?
                                                                       Q: What is at position 2 in "[(G, 1), (o, 2), (o, 3), (g, 4), (l, 5), (e,
A: "G"
                                                                       6)]"?
QS: [EOQ]
                                                                       A: "o"
....                                                      str_pos                                                                     arr_pos
                                                                       ....

Figure 4: Since identifying the k th character is challenging for GPT3 davinci-002 model, we
further decompose it into two simpler sub-tasks: split the word into its letters (using the shared sub-
task split) and then return the k th item of this list using the arr pos prompt.


Recursive Decomposition Some problems can be naturally broken down into one or more smaller
problems of the same form. Recursive algorithms such as merge sort use this idea to solve large
problems efficiently, using a succinctly described method. We apply this same principle in D ECOM P
by allowing the decomposer prompt to recursively call itself, as shown in Fig. 5 for the task of list
reversal. By using recursion, we are able to generalize any base prompting approach (CoT in this
figure) to much longer lists by breaking the input into smaller and smaller lists till we reach a list
length where the model is highly accurate. Such recursive approaches can not be described by
current methods such as CoT and standard prompting. Least-to-most prompting (Zhou et al., 2023)
also proposes a similar solution but differs in two key aspects (a) it has to identify all the sub-
problems in one-shot instead of our iterative top-down decomposition (b) it has to learn to identify
the relevant answers from the previous solutions which we get for free from our decomposition.

                                                           QC: Reverse the sequence "newspaper, glasses, laptop, bottle".
        Base Case (using CoT)                              QS: [list_split] Split the sequence "...".
QC: Reverse the sequence "laptop, photo, clip".            A: "newspaper, glasses" and "laptop, bottle"
QS: [extract] First is laptop. Second is photo. Third is   QS: [reverse] Reverse the sequence "newspaper, glasses"
clip. Now to reverse, change the order to: Third is        A: "glasses, newspaper"                                        Recursive calls
clip. Second is photo. First is laptop. So the answer      QS: [reverse] Reverse the sequence "laptop, bottle"
is "clip, photo, laptop".                                  A: "bottle, laptop"
A: "laptop, photo, clip"                                   QS: [merge] Concatenate "bottle, laptop" and "glasses, newspaper" using a comma
QS: [EOQ]                                                  A: "bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper"
                                                           QS: [EOQ]                                                                reverse


Figure 5: Sample prompt for recursive decomposition for reversing lists. Each list is split into two
halves and each half is reversed and concatenated in the reverse order. We can recursively split a list
till we hit the base case (lists of length 3 here) where existing approaches such as CoT are accurate.



External API Calls In certain cases, the sub-tasks may not be feasible to solve using only a LLM.
E.g., retrieving knowledge from a KB or large corpus. Such sub-tasks, however, can be easily solved
using existing systems such as retrieving documents using an Elasticsearch index or webpages using
Google search (Lazaridou et al., 2022). Fig. 6 shows how D ECOM P can easily use such a system to
retrieve the relevant documents and answer a single-hop open-domain question.

    2
      Appendix G contains the complete split prompt which has examples for questions such as “Q: What are
the letters and their positions in “Mathison”?”.


                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: Which company manufactured Lost Gravity?                                                                     retrieve
QS: [retrieve] Which company manufactured Lost Gravity?
A: ["Lost Gravity (roller coaster)", "The Roller Coaster", ...]
                                                                                      Wikipedia Title: Mack Rides
QS: [singlehop_rcqa] Titles: ["Lost Gravity (roller coaster)", ... ].
                                                                                      Mack Rides GmbH & Co ...
Question: Which company manufactured Lost Gravity?
                                                                                      Q: Which company manufactured The
A: {"titles": ["Lost Gravity (roller coaster)", ...] "answer": "Mack Rides"}
                                                                                      Lost Gravity?
QS: [EOQ]
                                                                      retrieve_odqa   A: "Mack Rides"       singlehop_rcqa

Figure 6: A Decomposed Prompt to answer open-domain questions using Elasticsearch-based re-
trieval. Full usage of this prompt for open-domain multihop questions is given in Fig. 11.
4       C ASE S TUDIES

We showcase D ECOM P’s strengths through four tasks; two symbolic manipulation tasks similar to
those investigated by Wei et al. (2022) and two existing textual multi-hop reasoning tasks. Unless
specified, we use text-davinci-002 InstructGPT3 model (Ouyang et al., 2022) as the LLM
and report the Exact Match (EM) numbers, following prior work. For order-independent list an-
swers, we evaluate set equality as EM. We compare our approach to CoT rather than each specific
decomposition structure used in prior work. See App. G for the complete prompts for all our tasks.


4.1     k th LETTER CONCATENATION (H IERARCHICAL D ECOMPOSITION )

We compare D ECOM P to CoT prompting for concatenating letters at the k th position. All prompts
contain examples of concatenating letters in position 1, 4, and last position of strings with 3 words.
We create three different prompts for all our baselines and present the average to account for variance
due to the choice of examples following Perez et al. (2021). We use the decomp, split, str pos
(further decomposed as shown in Fig. 4), and merge prompts for decomposition prompting. We
adapt the CoT for last letter concatenation from prior work (Wei et al., 2022) for this task as shown
below. In addition, we consider a rolled out version of our decomposition prompts in terms of a
CoT, i.e., we describe the entire decomposition process (identify words, split each word into letters,
take k th letter and concatenate) as a single CoT. e.g, for the question “Take the letters at position 4
of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate them using a space.”, we use the CoT:
 Chain-Of-Thought                                                  Chain-Of-Thought (rolled out)
 The letter at position 4 of ”Herbert” is ”b”. The letter          The words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” are ”Her-
 at position 4 of ”Alexander” is ”x”. The letter at posi-          bert”, ”Alexander”, and ”Simon”. The letters and
 tion 4 of ”Simon” is ”o”. Concatenating ”b”, ”x”, ”o”             their positions in ”Herbert” are ”[(H, 1), (e, 2), (r,
 using a space leads to ”b x o”. So, ”Herbert Alexan-              3), (b, 4), (e, 5), (r, 6), (t, 7)]”. The letter at position
 der Simon” outputs ”b x o”. ...                                   4 in this sequence is ”b”. · · · outputs ”b x o”. ...

We similarly adapt the least-to-most prompt (Zhou et al., 2023) to include rollout. (see App. G). We
compare these four prompting techniques on 4 datasets to evaluate generalization along 3 axes: (1)
new letter position k = 3;3 (2) longer inputs, #words=4 and 5; (3) new delimiter ”;”. The words in
the test examples come from a list of most popular first and last names.4 All evaluation datasets have
100 examples. We present results on space as a delimiter averaged across three prompts in Fig. 7.5
D ECOM P outperforms chain-of-thought and least-to-most prompting, even when the prompt
uses the same reasoning procedure as the rolled out decomposition. This shows that the separate
prompts are more effective at teaching hard sub-tasks than a single CoT prompt.
D ECOM P generalizes perfectly to longer sequences. As the length of the input sequence increases,
our approach continues to achieve close to 100% accuracy on this task.6 The CoT-based approaches
drop noticeably in their scores with longer input lengths, widening the performance gap.


    3
      Note that none of the sub-task prompts contain examples for this position.
    4
      forebears.io/earth/forenames and forebears.io/earth/surnames
    5
      We obtain similar results with semi-colon shown in Fig. 22 in the appendix.
    6
      Note that we report aggregate metrics for D ECOM P too but the std. dev is zero here


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              CoT        CoT w/ rollout      L2M w/ rollout          DecomP
                     98.0                                              97.0                               CoT      CoT w/ rollout       DecomP
100                                          96.0
                                                                                   100

                                                                                                     86
 80               74.7
              71.3                        70.5                                      80          76
                                                                 66.0
 60                                                                                                                                    64
                                      53.7                    53.3                                                     59
                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                  53
 40                                                                                                                                                   42
                                                                                    40
           22.7
 20
                                  12.0                                              20                                            16
                                                        6.0
                                                                                          5.5                               6.5             4.5
  0                                                                                                         3.0                                   1
             N=3(IID)               N=4(OOD)              N=5(OOD)                   0
                                                                                          N=4(IID)          N=6(OOD)        N=8(OOD)        N=10(OOD)
Figure 7: EM Results on the k th letter concate-
                                                                                  Figure 8: EM results on reversing sequences.
nation task (k=3) using space as delimiter with
                                                                                  Incorporating CoT in D ECOM P greatly in-
different number of words in the input. D E -
                                                                                  creases the ability of the model to generalize to
COM P outperforms and generalizes better than
                                                                                  new sequence lengths.
CoT as well as Least-to-most prompting.
4.2         L IST R EVERSAL (R ECURSIVE D ECOMPOSITION )

We use the task of reversing lists of words7 to show how recursive D ECOM P enables length general-
ization. We adapt the relevant CoT prompt from Wei et al. (2022), and integrate it in a decomposed
prompt. As a control, we also compare to a CoT version w/ rollout of our decomposed prompt. All
prompts contain the same 3 examples of reversing word sequences with 3-5 items. We evaluate all
prompts for generalization to 4, 6, 8, and 10-item sequences. Here we use davinci-001 to show
that D ECOM P enables a weaker model approach davinci-002’s performance (which does solve
this task). We use the strategy from Fig. 5 and provide our prompts in App. G. Fig. 8 shows the
results of the prompting strategies on different input lengths.
D ECOM P improves the length generalization of few-shot prompting. While our base CoT
prompt does not generalize at all to longer sequences, our approach can recursively decompose
the problem and achieve better length generalization. Moreover, the CoT version of our decomposi-
tion strategy fails because the unrolled prompt becomes too long and convoluted without the ability
to abstract away sub-modules.

4.3         L ONG -C ONTEXT Q UESTION A NSWERING

We next evaluate on the CommaQA-E dataset (Khot et al., 2022) under the reading comprehension
setting. The dataset consists of synthetically generated entities (e.g. Erowid award), facts (“Wether-
ality was an actor in the movie Dewbar.”) and multi-hop questions (e.g., “What awards have the
actors of the Erowid winning movies received?”). Due to the presence of many distractors and, as a
result, longer context, this dataset has been shown to be hard for standard LMs even when fine-tuned.

What awards have movies produced by people born in 1910 won?                  What awards have movies produced by people born in 1910 won?
QS: [qa] Who were born in the year 1910?                                      QS: [simp_qa] Who were born in the year 1910?
A: ["Teeplemole", "Muntaril"]                                                 A: ["Teeplemole", "Muntaril"]
QS: (foreach_merge) [qa] For which movies was #1 the producer?                QS: (foreach_merge) [pos_qa] For which movies was #1 the producer?
A: ["Featsaw", "Zalate", "Premercy"]                                          A: ["Featsaw", "Zalate", "Premercy"]
QS: (foreach_merge) [qa] Which awards were given to #2?                       QS: (foreach_merge) [aw_qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: ["Zorgion", "Chowwurst", "Hallowcock"]                                     A: ["Zorgion", "Chowwurst", "Hallowcock"]
QS: [EOQ]                                                                     QS: [EOQ]
...                                                     coarse                ...                                                          fine

Figure 9: Sample prompts used for the CommaQA dataset. On the left, the coarse-grained decompo-
sition defines a single QA sub-task with all single-hop questions being delegated to a single sub-task
handler. On the right, the fine-grained decomposition assigns questions to three different sub-tasks
(see App. G for their prompts) depending on the question type. This allows us to provide more
examples for each question type allowing the model to learn the sub-task more effectively.

To fit these questions within GPT3’s context limit (2049 tokens), we generate a smaller version of
the CommaQA-E dataset and of the compositional generalization split such that we can fit at least
      7
          We use the vocabulary from Wei et al. (2022): https://www.vocabulary.com/lists/189583


                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


four examples in the context for CoT prompts. The CoT prompts describe the sequence of facts
needed to arrive at the answer (see App. G for all the prompts).
For D ECOM P, we can separate the task of de-
composition (independent of the context) from the
                                                                      CoT       DecomP(coarse)      DecomP(fine)
sub-tasks of single-hop question answering. As 100
shown in Fig. 9, we provide examples of the                          GPT3 (text-davinci-002)

context-independent decomposition in the decom- 80
poser prompt and use the separate sub-task prompts                              59.7                    59.7
                                                                                                               64.2
to teach the QA skill over the given context. Addi- 60                 55.0

tionally, we can choose the granularity of decompo- 40          42.0
                                                                                               33.8
sition to trade off human effort for increased accu-
racy. For example, we could have single QA prompt 20
to handle all the questions or create QA prompts for
different classes of questions. In our experiments,       0
                                                                       IID                          Comp. Gen
each sub-task prompt contains 8 QA examples (2
questions/para). We evaluate three different prompts Figure 10: EM results on the CommaQA-E
and report the average results in Fig. 10.              datasets. D ECOM P always outperforms CoT,
We make three observations on CommaQA. D E -            with  fine-grained marginally out-performing
COM P is more accurate than CoT irrespective of         coarse-grained       decomposition.
the granularity of decomposition or the evaluation
split. Finer grained decomposition can help im-
prove task performance by providing more examples for each class of questions, which in turn
increases single-hop QA accuracy. D ECOM P generalizes to new compositions such as the compo-
sitional generalization split of CommaQA, which tests models on unseen compositions of relations
observed in the training set. While CoT has a drop in score, both decomposition-based approaches
actually get a small bump (the subset of relations used in this split are easier for our QA models).

4.4     O PEN -D OMAIN Q UESTION A NSWERING

Next, we demonstrate the ability of our approach to integrate external API calls on the task of
open-domain multihop question answering. We evaluate our approach on three datasets: (1) 2Wiki-
MultihopQA (Ho et al., 2020) (2) MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022) (3) HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018).
We describe the open-domain versions of these datasets in more detail in App. A We use the Codex
(code-davinci-002) model here since it can fit the much longer contexts needed. We also evaluate
the impact of model scale on D ECOM P by using models from the Flan-T5 family: Flan-T5-Large
(0.7B), Flan-T5-XL (3B), and Flan-T5-XXL (11B).8

                                                                                        Wikipedia Title: Lost Gravity (roller ... )
 QC: In what country was Lost Gravity manufactured?
                                                                                        Lost Gravity is a steel roller coaster ...
 QS: [retrieve_odqa] Which company manufactured Lost Gravity?
                                                                                        Wikipedia Title: Mack Rides
 A: {"titles": ["Lost Gravity (roller coaster)" ... ], "answer": ["Mack Rides"]}
                                                                                        Mack Rides GmbH & Co ...
 QS: [retrieve_odqa] The company Mack Rides is from which country?
                                                                                             ...
 A: {"titles": ["Mack Rides", ...], "answer": ["Germany"]}
                                                                                        Q: In what country was Lost Gravity
 QS: [multihop_rcqa] Titles: ["Lost Gravity (roller coaster)" ..., "Mack Rides" ...].
                                                                                        manufactured?
 Question: In what country was Lost Gravity manufactured?
                                                                      decomposer        A: "Germany"             multihop_rcqa

Figure 11: The prompt used to answer open-domain multihop questions using Elasticsearch-based
retrieval. The retrieve odqa prompt is given in Fig. 6.


Fig. 11 shows the decomposition prompt we use. The decomposer generates (singlehop) sub-
questions and delegates them to retrieve odqa (described in Fig. 6). As we showed earlier,
this module retrieves relevant documents then uses an RC model to answer. retrieve odqa re-
turns both the answer and the documents, allowing subsequent sub-questions to use the answers (e.g.
“Mack Rides”) and the multihop rcqa model to use the documents. The final multihop rcqa
model is prompted to produce the answer directly or using CoT given K paragraphs.
   8
     We still use GPT3-sized models for decomposition since only these models are reliably able to produce the
required structured outputs.


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We compare our approach against two baselines: A. No Context (No-Ctxt), A closed-book setting
baseline where the model must rely only on its parametric knowledge. B. NoDecomp Context
(NoDecomp-Ctxt), A simple retrieval baseline where we retrieve K paragraphs using the multi-hop
question as the input and use that as context. For both NoDecomp-Ctxt and Decomp-Ctxt, K is
selected by hyperparameter tuning (App. A). We manually annotate CoTs and decompositions for
20 training set questions, and sample 3 prompts of 15 questions each for all approaches. The detailed
prompts are given in the Appendix G. We evaluate on 300 held-out dev questions in each dataset.

       No-Ctxt QA           NoDecomp-Ctxt QA        Decomp-Ctxt QA                 No-Ctxt QA          NoDecomp-Ctxt QA        Decomp-Ctxt QA
80                                                                           80
             code-davinci-002                                                            Flan-T5-XXL
70                                                                           70
                                                                  64.1                                                                       63.3
60                                                                           60                                        56.4
                                       50.2 49.9                                                                49.0                  49.9
50                                                         47.1              50
                                41.2
40                                                  38.1                     40
                                                                                                                               32.3
                                                                                                29.3
30                  25.4                                                     30                          24.8
             21.4                                                                        23.3
20    18.3                                                                   20   15.1
10                                                                           10

 0                                                                            0
         MuSiQue                  HotpotQA         2WikiMultihopQA                   MuSiQue               HotpotQA           2WikiMultihopQA

Figure 12: Answer F19 on three open-domain QA datasets using two base LMs: Codex (left) and
Flan-T5-XXL (right) with direct prompting. Decomp-Ctxt models (ours) significantly outperforms
the No-Ctxt models (no retrieval) in all settings and also outperforms our strong retrieval baseline
(NoDecomp-Ctxt QA), with the exception of Codex on HotpotQA where it is comparable. See App.
A.3 for results on smaller Flan-T5 models and CoT prompting.

We present results on all three datasets with direct QA prompts in Fig. 12 with other results in
App. A. The Decomp-Ctxt models performs significantly better than No-Ctxt models in all the set-
tings showing that external knowledge can be leveraged to improve few-shot models on open-domain
mulithop QA. Furthermore, we show that our Decomp-Ctxt models outperform the strong retrieval
baseline (NoDecomp-Ctxt) in all settings except one (Codex with HotpotQA). Finally, we show that
even with the much smaller Flan-T5-XXL model, Decomp-Ctxt outperforms all the baselines and
can even achieve scores comparable to the Codex-only systems.

4.5    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Post-processing CoT for error correction D ECOM P also allows us to create a targeted sub-task
handler to focus on the source of error in any system. For example, CoT for arithmetic reasoning
often rely on patterns (answer is .*) to extract answers but the CoT does not always fit this
pattern. Instead, we can assign the answer extraction to a better sub-task handler (GPT3) and reduce
these types of errors. This results in a 17 pt improvement on MultiArith (78 → 95) and 14 pt
improvement on GSM8K (36 → 50.6) compared to CoT prompting (details in App. B).
While D ECOM P outperforms the baselines in aggregate, we also see the gains of D ECOM P are
consistent across prompt choices (see App. D) and decomposition schemes (see App. E).

5     C ONCLUSION

We proposed a new approach, Decomposed Prompting, to solve complex tasks using few-shot
prompts, by decomposing them into a prompting program built out of simpler sub-tasks. Drawing
inspiration from software libraries, our decomposer and shared sub-tasks are designed in a modular
fashion: they use their own few-shot prompts, allowing one to independently optimize each prompt,
decompose a sub-task further if necessary, or even seamlessly replace it with a symbolic system. We
show that Decomposed Prompting outperforms prior work on four different tasks and generalization
settings, establishing it as an effective few-shot paradigm for solving complex tasks.
    9
      Answer F1 is computed by treating prediction and ground truth answer as bags of tokens and computing
their precision and recall (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). See HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) for details.


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank members of the Aristo team at the Allen Institute for AI (AI2) for their constructive
feedback and the reviewers for their invaluable suggestions. This work was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under grants IIS2007290.

R EFERENCES
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural module networks. In
  CVPR, 2016.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. PaLM:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.
Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large
  language models for interpretable logical reasoning. In ICLR, 2023. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=3Pf3Wg6o-A4.
David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
  Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A Saurous, Jascha Sohl-dickstein, et al. Language model
  cascades. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10342, 2022.
Dheeru Dua, Shivanshu Gupta, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Successive prompting for de-
  composing complex questions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1251–1265, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Decem-
  ber 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.emnlp-main.81.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. PAL: Program-aided language models. ArXiv, abs/2211.10435, 2022.
Nitish Gupta, Kevin Lin, Dan Roth, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Neural module networks for
  reasoning over text. In ICLR, 2020.
Xanh Ho, A. Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for
  comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In COLING, 2020.
Yichen Jiang and Mohit Bansal. Self-assembling modular networks for interpretable multi-hop
  reasoning. In EMNLP, 2019.
Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
  and Yejin Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explanations.
  In EMNLP, 2022.
Tushar Khot, Daniel Khashabi, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. Text modular
  networks: Learning to decompose tasks in the language of existing models. In NAACL, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tushar Khot, Kyle Richardson, Daniel Khashabi, and Ashish Sabharwal. Hey AI, can you solve
  complex tasks by talking to agents? In Findings of ACL, 2022.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. Internet-
  augmented language models through few-shot prompting for open-domain question answering.
  ArXiv, abs/2203.05115, 2022.
Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Ori Ram, Yoel Zeldes, Daniel Jannai, Dor Muhlgay, Yoni Osin,
  Opher Lieber, Barak Lenz, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, et al. Standing on the shoulders of giant frozen
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.10019, 2022.
Sewon Min, Victor Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Multi-hop reading compre-
  hension through question decomposition and rescoring. In ACL, 2019.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
 gustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models.
 ArXiv, abs/2112.00114, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke E. Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Francis Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan J. Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  In NeurIPS, 2022.
Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. TALM: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.
Ethan Perez, Patrick Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Kyunghyun Cho, and Douwe Kiela. Unsupervised ques-
  tion decomposition for question answering. In EMNLP, 2020.
Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. True few-shot learning with language models. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
  2022.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100, 000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP, 2016.
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. Solving general arithmetic word problems. In Proceedings of the 2015
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1743–1752, 2015. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D15-1202. URL https://aclanthology.org/D15-1202.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. ArXiv, abs/2302.04761, 2023.
Alon Talmor and Jonathan Berant. The web as a knowledge-base for answering complex questions.
  In NAACL, 2018.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. MuSiQue: Multi-
  hop questions via single-hop question composition. TACL, 2022.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency
  improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In ICLR, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou.
  Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Tomer Wolfson, Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, Matt Gardner, Yoav Goldberg, Daniel Deutch, and
  Jonathan Berant. Break it down: A question understanding benchmark. TACL, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In EMNLP, 2018.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Scharli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schu-
  urmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. In ICLR, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A      O PEN D OMAIN QA D ETAILS

A.1      R ETRIEVAL C ORPUSES FOR O PEN D OMAIN QA

We use HotpotQA in the fullwiki setting where it comes with the associated Wikipedia corpus for
open-domain QA. 2WikiMultihopQA and MuSiQue, however, are originally reading comprehension
datasets. Questions in 2WikiMultihopQA and MuSiQue are associated with 10 and 20 paragraphs
respectively. To turn these datasets into open-domain QA datasets, we create a corpora for each
dataset by combining all the paragraphs in the train, dev and test questions. As a result we get a
corpus size of 430,225 paragraphs for 2WikiMultihopQA and 139,416 for MuSiQue.

A.2      H YPERPARAMETER T UNING FOR O PEN D OMAIN QA

We treat the number of paragraphs to retrieve (K) in NoDecomp-Ctxt and Decomp-Ctxt models as
a hyperparameter. We select it based on a grid search on a set of values to maximize performance on
a held out set of 100 questions for each dataset. For NoDecomp-Ctxt, we search K ∈ {6, 8, 10} for
GPT3 models and K ∈ 2, 4, 6, 8 for Flan-T5-* models. For Decomp-Ctxt, we search K ∈ {2, 4, 6}
for GPT3 and Flan-T5-* models. Note that the ranges are different between GPT3 and Flan-T5-* as
GPT3 can fit in more number of tokens. The ranges are different for NoDecomp-Ctxt and Decomp-
Ctxt as K refers to number of paragraphs retrieved in each round of retrieval, and NoDecomp-Ctxt
has only one step of retrieval whereas Decomp-Ctxt usually has multiple retrieval steps.

A.3      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


         No-Ctxt QA         NoDecomp-Ctxt QA                       Decomp-Ctxt QA                      No-Ctxt QA            NoDecomp-Ctxt QA                       Decomp-Ctxt QA
40                                                                                             40
             MuSiQue                                                                                       MuSiQue
35                                                                                             35
                                                                                   30.9
                                                                            29.7                                                                             29.3
30                                                          26.8                               30
                                       25.3                                                                                             25.6                                        25.4
                                                                     24.4                                                                             23.3
25                              21.7                 22.0                                      25                                22.3                                        21.4
             19.0 19.6                                                                                            18.8                                                18.3
20                                                                                             20
                                                                                                           15.4                                15.1
15                                                                                             15
                         10.6                 10.3                                                                        11.1
10
       8.4                                                                                     10    7.9

 5                                                                                              5

 0                                                                                              0
      Flan-T5-Large      Flan-T5-XL           Flan-T5-XXL code-davinci-002                          Flan-T5-Large         Flan-T5-XL           Flan-T5-XXL code-davinci-002

                         (a) CoT QA Prompt                                                                               (b) Direct QA Prompt
                                                      Figure 13: Results on MuSiQue dataset


         No-Ctxt QA         NoDecomp-Ctxt QA                       Decomp-Ctxt QA                      No-Ctxt QA            NoDecomp-Ctxt QA                       Decomp-Ctxt QA
60                                                                                             60                                                            56.4
                                                                            54.9 53.5
             HotpotQA                  51.6                 51.8                                           HotpotQA                     52.7
                                49.4                 49.1            49.0                                                                             49.0                   50.2 49.9
50               47.8                                                                          50                                47.9
             41.6                                                                                                 42.7                                                41.2
40                                                                                             40          36.6

30                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                               24.8
                                              21.3                                                                        22.6
                         18.9                                                                       19.3
20    16.8                                                                                     20


10                                                                                             10


 0                                                                                              0
      Flan-T5-Large      Flan-T5-XL           Flan-T5-XXL code-davinci-002                          Flan-T5-Large         Flan-T5-XL           Flan-T5-XXL code-davinci-002

                         (a) CoT QA Prompt                                                                               (b) Direct QA Prompt
                                                      Figure 14: Results on HotpotQA dataset



                                                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        No-Ctxt QA           NoDecomp-Ctxt QA                       Decomp-Ctxt QA                      No-Ctxt QA            NoDecomp-Ctxt QA                       Decomp-Ctxt QA
80                                                                                              80
            2WikiMultihopQA                                                         70.8                    2WikiMultihopQA
70                                                                                              70
                                                             63.0                                                                                             63.3                   64.1
60                                      58.2                                 58.4               60                                       56.7
                   47.8                               48.8                                                         48.9                                49.9
50                                                                                              50                                                                            47.1
                                 44.7                                                                                             44.4
            38.9                                                      40.9
40                                                                                              40                                                                     38.1
                                                                                                            35.0
     30.4                 31.4                 32.1                                                                        32.4                 32.3
30                                                                                              30   27.3

20                                                                                              20

10                                                                                              10

 0                                                                                               0
     Flan-T5-Large        Flan-T5-XL           Flan-T5-XXL code-davinci-002                          Flan-T5-Large         Flan-T5-XL           Flan-T5-XXL code-davinci-002

                          (a) CoT QA Prompt                                                                               (b) Direct QA Prompt
                                               Figure 15: Results on 2WikiMultihopQA dataset
A.3.1         M U S I Q UE
We present all the results on the MuSiQue dataset in Fig. 13. Across all settings, we can see that
retrieval helps substantially (large gains over No-Ctxt QA) with further improvements achieved by
our DecomP-based Decomp-Ctxt QA model.

A.3.2         H OTPOT QA
We present all the results on the HotpotQA dataset in Fig. 14. On this dataset too, we can see large
gains by incorporating retrieval but the gains from using DecomP are mostly seen in the smaller
models.

A.3.3         2W IKI M ULTIHOP QA
We present all the results on the 2WikiMultihopQA dataset in Fig. 15. On this dataset, we can see
large gains by incorporating retrieval and also observe substantial gains by incorporating DecomP
(as compared to NoDecomp-Ctxt).

B     M ATH QA
We apply Decomposed Prompting to two math QA datasets: GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021) and Mul-
tiArith Roy & Roth (2015). For Chain-of-thought, we used the original prompts for math reason-
ing Wei et al. (2022). For example:


Q: There are 15 trees in the grove. Grove workers will plant trees in the grove today. After they are
done, there will be 21 trees. How many trees did the grove workers plant today? A: There are 15
trees originally. Then there were 21 trees after some more were planted. So there must have been
21 - 15 = 6. The answer is 6.
Most CoT systems Wei et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023) rely on extracting the answer by finding
the number following “answer is”. However, this may not always be accurate. For example, the
following CoT would be unanswerable by relying on simple patterns.


Parker chews 4 pieces of gum a day. There are 15 pieces of gum in a pack. So he will need 4 * 30 /
15 = 8 packs of gum to last him 30 days.

Rather than relying on patterns with limited generalization, we can use a language model to extract
the answer more reliably. Specifically, we use Decomposed Prompting to decompose the task into
first identifying the chain-of-thought reasoning and then using a second GPT3-based sub-module
to extract the answer from the CoT. We show examples of our prompts here (full prompt in App. G):

Example from the Decomposition Prompt


                                                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: There are 15 trees in the grove. Grove workers will plant trees in the grove today. After they
are done, there will be 21 trees. How many trees did the grove workers plant today?
QS: [cot] There are 15 trees in the grove. Grove workers will plant trees in the grove today. After
they are done, there will be 21 trees. How many trees did the grove workers plant today?
A: There are 15 trees originally. Then there were 21 trees after some more were planted. So there
must have been 21 - 15 = 6 trees planted.
QS: [gpt ans] There are 15 trees originally. Then there were 21 trees after some more were planted.
So there must have been 21 - 15 = 6 trees planted.
A: 6
QS: [EOQ]

Example from the gpt ans prompt


Q: There are 15 trees originally. Then there were 21 trees after some more were planted. So there
must have been 21 - 15 = 6 trees planted.
A: 6

                                                                                CoT    DecomP(coarse)       DecomP(fine)
                           CoT    DecomP
                                                                100
100                                                 95.0
                                                                 80
 80                                        78.0
                                                                 60                                                        56
                                                                                                                    49
 60
                    50.7                                         40
                                                                                                               33
 40         36.0
                                                                 20
                                                                                                     19
                                                                                               14
                                                                            9     8       10
                                                                      7
 20
                                                                  0
                                                                      text-curie-001     text-davinci-001     text-davinci-002
  0
               GSM8K                        MultiArith          Figure 17: As the models become weaker
                                                                (davinci-001) and smaller (curie-001), the
Figure 16: Our simple decomposition results in                  performance of all the models drop. D E -
14-17 pts on two MathQA datasets: GSM8k and                     COM P still outperforms CoT till the perfor-
MultiArith.                                                     mance reaches close to zero with curie.

We present our results in Fig. 16. On the GSM8K data set10 , we outperform CoT by 14 points. On
the MultiArith dataset11 , we achieve a 17 pt improvement compare to CoT. While this is a simple
change, it illustrates the possibility of using D ECOM P for other complex answer types, e.g. non-
extractive answer generation from chain-of-thoughts.

C         E FFECT OF S CALE ON C OMM AQA
We evaluate text-curie-001, text-davinci-001 and text-davinci-002 on the CommAQA dataset. Since
the curie-001 and davinci-001 have a smaller context window size, we further reduced our prompts
to fit within their context windows (2048 tokens). As shown in Fig. 17, both CoT and D ECOM P are
effected by the model size.

D         R ESULTS ON ALL PROMPTS
D.1        P ER -P ROMPT R ESULT ON L ETTER C ONCATENATION

We present the results of the letter concatenation task (with space delimiter) for different values of N
in Fig. 18. Our results are stable across the different prompts (P1, P2 and P3) and always outperform
CoT and Least-to-Most prompting.
    10
         We randomly sample 300 examples from the test set due to costs with API usage
    11
         We randomly sample 200 examples from the test set due to costs with API usage


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             N=3
      10            COT         COT w/ rollout   L2M w/ rollout    Decomp                                                N=4
       0                                                                                         COT        COT w/ rollout   L2M w/ rollout   Decomp
                                                                                      100

      75
                                                                                       75


      50
 EM


                                                                                       50


                                                                                 EM
      25                                                                               25


                                                                                        0
       0                                                                                               P1                      P2                 P3
                          P1                     P2                  P3

                                             N=5
                    COT         COT w/ rollout   L2M w/ rollout   Decomp
      100


       75


       50
 EM


       25


           0
                           P1                      P2                 P3


Figure 18: Across all values of N and different prompts (P1, P2 and P3), D ECOM P outperform
chain-of-thought reasoning and even least-to-most prompting.
D.2             P ER -P ROMPT R ESULTS ON C OMMAQA

We also present the results of all the prompts on the CommAQA dataset in Fig. 19. Here too, we
can observe that D ECOM P outperforms CoT on each prompt set.


                          COT        Decomp (coarse)      Decomp (fine)                            COT          Decomp (coarse)       Decomp (fine)
               80                                                                           80



               60                                                                           60



               40                                                                           40
 EM


                                                                                 EM


               20                                                                           20



                0                                                                            0
                                P1                  P2                P3                                 P1                     P2                P3


                                       (a) Test Set                                                         (b) Comp. Gen. Set
                                  Figure 19: Results of different prompts on the CommAQA dataset.


E          E FFECT OF D ECOMPOSITION S CHEME

To evaluate the effect of the decomposition scheme, we experiment with two other simple decom-
position structures for the letter concatenation and reversal tasks.


Letter Concatenation For letter concatenation, we consider an alternate scheme where we use
GPT3 to generate each question rather than loop over the answers, e.g.,


                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Augusta Ada King”?
A: [”Augusta”, ”Ada”, ”King”]
QS: [str position] What is the last letter in ”Augusta”?
A: ”a”
QS: [str position] What is the last letter in ”Ada”?
A: ”a”
QS: [str position] What is the last letter in ”King”?
A: ”g”
QS: [merge] Concatenate [”a”, ”a”, ”g”] using a space.
A: ”a a g”
QS: [EOQ]

By using the decomposer prompt model to generate the sub-questions, we can be more robust to
formatting issues in the output answers, e.g., we can expect GPT3 to still generate the appropriate
sub-questions even if the first answer is not a valid array. However, the generated sub-questions may
not correctly use all the elements of the list (change in order, missed element, repeated elements,
etc).


List Reversal For list reversal, instead of splitting into halves, we take the tail of the list, reverse it
and then concatenate it to the head. i.e. reverse(list) = reverse(list[1:]) + list[0]. This requires more
GPT3 calls (O(n)) compared to the original approach of splitting the list into halves (O(log(n))).
In both these cases, we noticed that the performance did not drop as shown in Fig. 20 and Fig. 21.
On the letter concatenation task, the results were exactly the same. The new reversal decomposition
schema was actually stronger on longer inputs at the cost of more calls to GPT3 (O(ln(n)) using
binary splits vs O(n) one element at a time). Both these decomposition schemes are still better than
CoT.


                                                                             Decomp (Mid Split)       Decomp (Tail Split)
               Decomp (Loop)    Decomp (Generate)
                                                                100
 100


                                                                 75
    75

                                                                 50

    50
                                                                 25

    25
                                                                  0
                                                                         4               6                  8               10

     0                                                                                            N
             N=3               N=4                  N=5

                                                               Figure 21: Recursively reversing the tail of a
Figure 20: Both decomposition schemes for the
                                                               list is more stable at longer lengths but comes
letter concatenation task have the same scores.
                                                               at the cost of more calls to GPT3.


F        E RROR A NALYSIS

F.1      L ETTER C ONCATENATION

F.1.1      D ECOM P

We analyzed the errors in D ECOM P on the letter concatenation task and only found errors in the
sub-task execution.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           CoT   CoT w/ rollout    DecomP
                     100              97                                          98
                                                             94

                                 82
                      80
                                                        70

                      60
                                                                             51

                      40
                            31

                      20
                                                   12
                                                                         7
                       0
                             N=3(IID)             N=4(OOD)              N=5(OOD)

Figure 22: EM Results on the k th letter concatenation task (k=3) using semi-colon as delimiter
with different values for N, the number of words in the input. D ECOM P always outperforms and
generalizes better than CoT.

Q: Take the letters at position 3 of the words in ”Nancy Samina Abbas Caudhari Bano” and
concatenate them using a space.
A: n m b u n
Prediction: c m b u n
Error: Incorrect letter extraction (Sub-task)
What is at position 3 in ”[(N, 1), (a, 2), (n, 3), (c, 4), (y, 5)]”? ⇒ ”c”

Q: Take the letters at position 3 of the words in ”Orlando Stephen Cho Teixeira Pierre” and
concatenate them using a space.
A: l e o i e
Prediction: leoie
Error: Incorrect concatenation (Sub-task)
Concatenate [”l”, ”e”, ”o”, ”i”, ”e”] using a space. ⇒ ”leoie”



F.1.2   C OT W / ROLLOUT

We analyzed the errors in CoT on the letter concatenation task and found similar errors during the
generation of CoT. But the frequency of these errors was higher than D ECOM P, as it is not possible
to effectively teach each sub-task with CoT.



Q: Take the letters at position 3 of the words in ”Sheila Nicolas Verma Sha Sousa” and concatenate
them using a space.
A: e c r a u
Pred: i c r a u
Error: Incorrect letter extraction
...The letters and their positions in ”Sheila” are ”[(S, 1), (h, 2), (e, 3), (i, 4), (l, 5), (a, 6)]”. The
letter at position 3 in this sequence is ”i”...

Q:Take the letters at position 3 of the words in ”Shobha Kailash Nakamura Peter Benitez”
and concatenate them using a space.
A: o i k t n
Pred: o l k t i
Error: Incorrect letter extraction
...”Benitez” are ”[(B, 1), (e, 2), (n, 3), (i, 4), (t, 5), (e, 6), (z, 7)]”. The letter at position 3 in this
sequence is ”i”...


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   C OMMAQA

Similarly in CommaQA, the errors are mostly due to sub-task errors, which in this dataset correspond
to answering single-hop questions. CoT also makes the same types of errors but they are more
frequent since this QA sub-task can not be delegated to a specialized prompt in CoT. Since all errors
are of this type, we show only one example here.


Q: What awards have movies written by people born in 1933 won?
A: [”Hydrallium”, ”Pompasole”]
Pred: [”Pompasole”]
Error: Incorrect sub-question answer
Sub-Q:What movies has Haldron written?
Sub-A: [”Polytetrafluoromethane”, ”Skia”, ”Warpstone”]
Pred: [”Skia”, ”Warpstone”]


G     TASK P ROMPTS

We have provided the task prompts for all the datasets for COT and our Decomposed Prompting
approach.

CoT Since CoT methods also perform 2-step reasoning: first generate the chain-of-thought and
second extract the answer from the CoT, we use the same decomposition-based framework for COT
baselines too. For example, consider the following example in our COT prompt:


QC: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
using a space.
QS: [extract] The letter at position 1 of ”Alan” is ”A”. The letter at position 1 of ”Mathison” is
”M”. The letter at position 1 of ”Turing” is ”T”. Concatenating ”A”, ”M”, ”T” using a space leads
to ”A M T”. So, ”Alan Mathison Turing” outputs ”A M T”.
A: ”A M T”
QS: [EOQ]


GPT3 generates the chain-of-thought during the ”decomposition” step and a regex-based answer
extractor extract (’.* outputs "(.*)"\.’) then takes this CoT and generates the answer.
In some cases, the module name is skipped in the prompt (the CoT is sent to the extractor by default).

Operators In this work, we use the same operators as defined by Khot et al.. Their select
operator is just the basic operator that replaces references to an answer index with its answer. When
not specified, select is assumed to be the default operator. In addition, we consider two operators
in our experiments: project values and project values flat unique.

       • project values: This operator takes a list answer #i = X and iterates over it to
         generate new questions by replacing mentions of #i i.e. Q = [q.replace(#i, x) for x ∈
         X]. The answer to each question is simply concatenated to get the final answer i.e. A =
         [model(q) for q ∈ Q]. We refer to this as foreach for simplicity in the main text.
       • project values flat unique: This operator performs the same steps as
         project values but then additionally flattens the list and only returns the unique enti-
         ties in the flattened list. We refer to this as foreach merge in the main text for simplicity.

G.1   L ETTER C ONCATENTATION

We show one of the prompts used for experiments here. The entire set of prompts is provided as
supplemetary material.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.1.1     D ECOMPOSED P ROMPTING

                                              decomp
QC: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Augusta Ada King”?
A: [”Augusta”, ”Ada”, ”King”]
QS: (project values) [str position] What is the last letter in ”#1”?
A: [”a”, ”a”, ”g”]
QS: [merge] Concatenate #2 using a space.
A: ”a a g”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
     using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing”?
A: [”Alan”, ”Mathison”, ”Turing”]
QS: (project values) [str position] What is the letter at position 1 in ”#1”?
A: [”A”, ”M”, ”T”]
QS: [merge] Concatenate #2 using a space.
A: ”A M T”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate
     them using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon”?
A: [”Herbert”, ”Alexander”, ”Simon”]
QS: (project values) [str position] What is the letter at position 4 in ”#1”?
A: [”b”, ”x”, ”o”]
QS: [merge] Concatenate #2 using a space.
A: ”b x o”
QS: [EOQ]

                                           split
Q: What are the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing”?
A: [”Alan”, ”Mathison”, ”Turing”]

Q: What are the letters in ”Alan”?
A: [”A”, ”l”, ”a”, ”n”]

Q: What are the letters and their positions in ”Mathison”?
A: ”[(M, 1), (a, 2), (t, 3), (h, 4), (i, 5), (s, 6), (o, 7), (n, 8)]”

Q: What are the words and their positions in ”Herbert Alexander Simon”?
A: ”[(Herbert, 1), (Alexander, 2), (Simon, 3)]”

                                                str position
QC: What is the letter at position 1 of the word ”Augusta”?
QS: (select) [split] What are the letters and their positions in ”Augusta”?
A: ”[(A, 1), (u, 2), (g, 3), (u, 4), (s, 5), (t, 6), (a, 7)]”
QS: (select) [arr position] What is at position 1 in #1?
A: ”A”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What is the last letter of the word ”Mathison”?
QS: (select) [split] What are the letters and their positions in ”Mathison”?
A: ”[(M, 1), (a, 2), (t, 3), (h, 4), (i, 5), (s, 6), (o, 7), (n, 8)]”
QS: (select) [arr position] What is the last letter in #1?
A: ”n”


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: [EOQ]

QC: What is the word at the position 4 in ”Colorless green ideas sleep furiously”?
QS: (select) [split] What are the words and their positions in ”Colorless green ideas sleep furiously
     ”?
A: ”[(Colorless, 1), (green, 2), (ideas, 3), (sleep, 4), (furiously, 5)]”
QS: (select) [arr position] What is at the position 4 in #1?
A: ”sleep”
QS: [EOQ]

                                                    merge
Q: Concatenate [”A”, ”l”, ”a”, ”n”].
A: ”Alan”

Q: Concatenate [”b”, ”x”, ”o”] using a space.
A: ”b x o”

Q: Concatenate [”a”, ”a”, ”g”] using a comma.
A: ”a,a,g”

Q: Concatenate [”Alan”, ”Mathison”, ”Turing”] using a space.
A: ”Alan Mathison Turing”

Q: Concatenate [”Allen”, ”Institute”].
A: ”AllenInstitute”

                                          arr position
Q: What is at position 4 in ”[(”Colorless”, 1), (”green”, 2), (”ideas”, 3), (”sleep”, 4), (”furiously”,
     5)]”?
A: ”sleep”

Q: What is at position 1 in ”[(M, 1), (a, 2), (t, 3), (h, 4), (i, 5), (s, 6), (o, 7), (n, 8)]”?
A: ”M”

Q: What is at the last position in ”[(A, 1), (u, 2), (g, 3), (u, 4), (s, 5), (t, 6), (a, 7)]”?
A: ”a”

Q: What is at position 1 in ”[(Herbert, 1), (Alexander, 2), (Simon, 3)]”?
A: ”Herbert”

Q: What is at last position in ”[(Allen, 1), (Institute, 2), (for, 3), (Artificial, 4), (Intelligence, 5)]”?
A: ”Intelligence”

Q: What is at position 4 in ”[(A, 1), (l, 2), (e, 3), (x, 4), (a, 5), (n, 6), (d, 7), (e, 8), (r, 9)]”?
A: ”x”

G.1.2     COT WITH ROLLOUT

                                            COT w/ rollout
QC: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.
QS: The words in ”Augusta Ada King” are ”Augusta”, ”Ada” and ”King”. The letters and their
     positions in ”Augusta” are ”[(A, 1), (u, 2), (g, 3), (u, 4), (s, 5), (t, 6), (a, 7)]”. The last letter in
     this sequence is ”a”. The letters and their positions in ”Ada” are ”[(A, 1), (d, 2), (a, 3)]”. The
     last letter in this sequence is ”a”. The letters and their positions in ”King” are ”[(K, 1), (i, 2), (
     n, 3), (g, 4)]”. The last letter in this sequence is ”g”. Concatenating ”a”, ”a”, ”g” using a space
      leads to ”a a g”. So, ”Augusta Ada King” outputs ”a a g”.
A: ”a a g”
QS: [EOQ]


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
     using a space.
QS: The words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” are ”Alan”, ”Mathison”, and ”Turing”. The letters and
     their positions in ”Alan” are ”[(A, 1), (l, 2), (a, 3), (n, 4)]”. The letter at position 1 in this
     sequence is ”A”. The letters and their positions in ”Mathison” are [(M, 1), (a, 2), (t, 3), (h, 4),
     (i, 5), (s, 6), (o, 7), (n, 8)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”M”. The letters and
     their positions in ”Turing” are ”[(T, 1), (u, 2), (r, 3), (i, 4), (n, 5), (g, 6)]”. The letter at
     position 1 in this sequence is ”T”. Concatenating ”A”, ”M”, ”T” using a space leads to ”A M
     T”. So, ”Alan Mathison Turing” outputs ”A M T”.
A: ”A M T”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate
     them using a space.
QS: The words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” are ”Herbert”, ”Alexander”, and ”Simon”. The
     letters and their positions in ”Herbert” are ”[(H, 1), (e, 2), (r, 3), (b, 4), (e, 5), (r, 6), (t, 7)]”.
     The letter at position 4 in this sequence is ”b”. The letters and their positions in ”Alexander”
     are ”[(A, 1), (l, 2), (e, 3), (x, 4), (a, 5), (n, 6), (d, 7), (e, 8), (r, 9)]”. The letter at position 4 in
     this sequence is ”x”. The letters and their positions in ”Simon” are ”[(S, 1), (i, 2), (m, 3), (o,
     4), (n, 5)]”. The letter at position 4 in this sequence is ”o”. Concatenating ”b”, ”x”, ”o” using
     a space leads to ”b x o”. So, ”Herbert Alexander Simon” outputs ”b x o”.
A: ”b x o”
QS: [EOQ]

G.1.3     COT

                                                 COT
QC: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.
QS: The last letter of ”Augusta” is ”a”. The last letter of ”Ada” is ”a”. The last letter of ”King” is ”
     g”. Concatenating ”a”, ”a”, ”g” using a space leads to ”a a g”. So, ”Augusta Ada King”
     outputs ”a a g”.
A: ”a a g”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
     using a space.
QS: The letter at position 1 of ”Alan” is ”A”. The letter at position 1 of ”Mathison” is ”M”. The
     letter at position 1 of ”Turing” is ”T”. Concatenating ”A”, ”M”, ”T” using a space leads to ”A
      M T”. So, ”Alan Mathison Turing” outputs ”A M T”.
A: ”A M T”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate
     them using a space.
QS: The letter at position 4 of ”Herbert” is ”b”. The letter at position 4 of ”Alexander” is ”x”. The
     letter at position 4 of ”Simon” is ”o”. Concatenating ”b”, ”x”, ”o” using a space leads to ”b x
     o”. So, ”Herbert Alexander Simon” outputs ”b x o”.
A: ”b x o”
QS: [EOQ]

G.1.4     L EAST- TO - MOST W / ROLLOUT

                                     Least-to-most Decomp
QC: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.
QS: [l2m] Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada” and concatenate them using a space.
A: The words in ”Augusta Ada” are ”Augusta” and ”Ada”. The letters and their positions in ”
     Augusta” are ”[(A, 1), (u, 2), (g, 3), (u, 4), (s, 5), (t, 6), (a, 7)]”. The last letter in this sequence


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      is ”a”. The letters and their positions in ”Ada” are ”[(A, 1), (d, 2), (a, 3)]”. The last letter in
     this sequence is ”a”. Concatenating ”a”, ”a” using a space leads to ”a a”. So, ”Augusta Ada”
     outputs ”a a”.
QS: [l2m] Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a
     space.
A: ”Augusta Ada” outputs ”a a”. The letters and their positions in ”King” are ”[(K, 1), (i, 2), (n, 3),
      (g, 4)]”. The last letter in this sequence is ”g”. Concatenating ”a a”, ”g” using a space leads to
      ”a a g”. So, ”Augusta Ada King” outputs ”a a g”.
QS: [ans ext] So, ”Augusta Ada King” outputs ”a a g”.
A: ”a a g”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
     using a space.
QS: [l2m] Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison” and concatenate them
     using a space.
A: The words in ”Alan Mathison” are ”Alan” and ”Mathison”. The letters and their positions in ”
     Alan” are ”[(A, 1), (l, 2), (a, 3), (n, 4)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”A”. The
     letters and their positions in ”Mathison” are [(M, 1), (a, 2), (t, 3), (h, 4), (i, 5), (s, 6), (o, 7), (n,
      8)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”M”. Concatenating ”A”, ”M” using a space
     leads to ”A M”. So, ”Alan Mathison” outputs ”A M”.
QS: [l2m] Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate
     them using a space.
A: ”Alan Mathison” outputs ”A M”. The letters and their positions in ”Turing” are ”[(T, 1), (u, 2),
     (r, 3), (i, 4), (n, 5), (g, 6)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”T”. Concatenating ”A
     M”, ”T” using a space leads to ”A M T”. So, ”Alan Mathison Turing” outputs ”A M T”.
QS: [ans ext] So, ”Alan Mathison Turing” outputs ”A M T”.
A: ”A M T”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate
     them using a space.
QS: [l2m] Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander” and concatenate them
     using a space.
A: The words in ”Herbert Alexander” are ”Herbert” and ”Alexander”. The letters and their
     positions in ”Herbert” are ”[(H, 1), (e, 2), (r, 3), (b, 4), (e, 5), (r, 6), (t, 7)]”. The letter at
     position 4 in this sequence is ”b”. The letters and their positions in ”Alexander” are ”[(A, 1), (
     l, 2), (e, 3), (x, 4), (a, 5), (n, 6), (d, 7), (e, 8), (r, 9)]”. The letter at position 4 in this sequence
     is ”x”. Concatenating ”b”, ”x” using a space leads to ”b x”. So, ”Herbert Alexander” outputs ”
     b x”.
QS: [l2m] Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and
     concatenate them using a space.
A: ”Herbert Alexander” outputs ”b x”. The letters and their positions in ”Simon” are ”[(S, 1), (i, 2)
     , (m, 3), (o, 4), (n, 5)]”. The letter at position 4 in this sequence is ”o”. Concatenating ”b x”, ”
     o” using a space leads to ”b x o”. So, ”Herbert Alexander Simon” outputs ”b x o”.
QS: [ans ext] So, ”Herbert Alexander Simon” outputs ”b x o”.
A: ”b x o”
QS: [EOQ]


                                   Least-to-most COT(l2m)
Q: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada” and concatenate them using a space.
A: The words in ”Augusta Ada” are ”Augusta” and ”Ada”. The letters and their positions in ”
    Augusta” are ”[(A, 1), (u, 2), (g, 3), (u, 4), (s, 5), (t, 6), (a, 7)]”. The last letter in this sequence
     is ”a”. The letters and their positions in ”Ada” are ”[(A, 1), (d, 2), (a, 3)]”. The last letter in
    this sequence is ”a”. Concatenating ”a”, ”a” using a space leads to ”a a”. So, ”Augusta Ada”
    outputs ”a a”.

Q: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: ”Augusta Ada” outputs ”a a”. The letters and their positions in ”King” are ”[(K, 1), (i, 2), (n, 3),
     (g, 4)]”. The last letter in this sequence is ”g”. Concatenating ”a a”, ”g” using a space leads to
     ”a a g”. So, ”Augusta Ada King” outputs ”a a g”.

Q: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison” and concatenate them using a
    space.
A: The words in ”Alan Mathison” are ”Alan” and ”Mathison”. The letters and their positions in ”
    Alan” are ”[(A, 1), (l, 2), (a, 3), (n, 4)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”A”. The
    letters and their positions in ”Mathison” are [(M, 1), (a, 2), (t, 3), (h, 4), (i, 5), (s, 6), (o, 7), (n,
     8)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”M”. Concatenating ”A”, ”M” using a space
    leads to ”A M”. So, ”Alan Mathison” outputs ”A M”.

Q: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
    using a space.
A: ”Alan Mathison” outputs ”A M”. The letters and their positions in ”Turing” are ”[(T, 1), (u, 2),
    (r, 3), (i, 4), (n, 5), (g, 6)]”. The letter at position 1 in this sequence is ”T”. Concatenating ”A
    M”, ”T” using a space leads to ”A M T”. So, ”Alan Mathison Turing” outputs ”A M T”.

Q: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander” and concatenate them using a
    space.
A: The words in ”Herbert Alexander” are ”Herbert” and ”Alexander”. The letters and their
    positions in ”Herbert” are ”[(H, 1), (e, 2), (r, 3), (b, 4), (e, 5), (r, 6), (t, 7)]”. The letter at
    position 4 in this sequence is ”b”. The letters and their positions in ”Alexander” are ”[(A, 1), (
    l, 2), (e, 3), (x, 4), (a, 5), (n, 6), (d, 7), (e, 8), (r, 9)]”. The letter at position 4 in this sequence
    is ”x”. Concatenating ”b”, ”x” using a space leads to ”b x”. So, ”Herbert Alexander” outputs ”
    b x”.

Q: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate them
    using a space.
A: ”Herbert Alexander” outputs ”b x”. The letters and their positions in ”Simon” are ”[(S, 1), (i, 2)
    , (m, 3), (o, 4), (n, 5)]”. The letter at position 4 in this sequence is ”o”. Concatenating ”b x”, ”
    o” using a space leads to ”b x o”. So, ”Herbert Alexander Simon” outputs ”b x o”.

G.1.5    A LT D ECOM P SCHEMA (G ENERATE E ACH S UB -Q UESTION )

                                                decomp
QC: Take the last letters of the words in ”Augusta Ada King” and concatenate them using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Augusta Ada King”?
A: [”Augusta”, ”Ada”, ”King”]
QS: [str position] What is the last letter in ”Augusta”?
A: ”a”
QS: [str position] What is the last letter in ”Ada”?
A: ”a”
QS: [str position] What is the last letter in ”King”?
A: ”g”
QS: [merge] Concatenate [”a”, ”a”, ”g”] using a space.
A: ”a a g”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 1 of the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing” and concatenate them
     using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Alan Mathison Turing”?
A: [”Alan”, ”Mathison”, ”Turing”]
QS: [str position] What is the letter at position 1 in ”Alan”?
A: ”A”
QS: [str position] What is the letter at position 1 in ”Mathison”?
A: ”M”
QS: [str position] What is the letter at position 1 in ”Turing”?
A: ”T”


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: [merge] Concatenate [”A”, ”M”, ”T”] using a space.
A: ”A M T”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Take the letters at position 4 of the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon” and concatenate
     them using a space.
QS: [split] What are the words in ”Herbert Alexander Simon”?
A: [”Herbert”, ”Alexander”, ”Simon”]
QS: [str position] What is the letter at position 4 in ”Herbert”?
A: ”b”
QS: [str position] What is the letter at position 4 in ”Alexander”?
A: ”x”
QS: [str position] What is the letter at position 4 in ”Simon”?
A: ”o”
QS: [merge] Concatenate [”b”, ”x”, ”o”] using a space.
A: ”b x o”
QS: [EOQ]

G.2     S EQUENCE R EVERSAL

G.2.1     S PLIT R EVERSAL
The prompts in this section implement Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 A recursive reversal strategy that splits the sequence in half, reverses each half, and
concatenates them. Runs in O(log n) calls to the LM where n is the number of items in the sequence.
  procedure S PLIT R EVERSE(x)                                                    ▷ The reversal of x
     if |x| < 4 then                                                                 ▷ The base case
          return x|x| , . . . , x1                                          ▷ The reversed sequence
     else                                                                       ▷ The inductive case
          n ← |x|/2                                                            ▷ Half the length of x
          ℓ ← x1 , . . . , x n                                                   ▷ The first half of x
          ℓR ← S PLIT R EVERSE(ℓ)                                            ▷ The reversed first half
          r ← xn+1 , . . . , x|x|                                             ▷ The second half of x
          rR ← S PLIT R EVERSE(r)                                         ▷ The reversed second half
          return r1R , . . . , rnR , ℓR              R
                                      n+1 , . . . , ℓ|x|          ▷ The concatenated reversed halves
     end if
  end procedure


                                               reverse
QC: Reverse the sequence ”driving license, button, packet, identity card, shoe”.
QS: [extract] The sequence is ”1. driving license, 2. button, 3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”.
     The sequence is 5 items long, which is more than the minimum length of 4, so we split it.
     Half of 5 is 5 / 2 = 2.5. Dropping the decimal, we get that the first half will be 2 items long,
     ending in ”2. button”. The first half (2 items) is ”1. driving license, 2. button”.
A: ”1. driving license, 2. button”
QS: [extract] The first half of the sequence ends with ”2. button”, so the second half starts after ”2.
     button” with ”3. packet”. The full sequence is 5 items long, and the first half is 2 items long,
     so the second half will be 5 − 2 = 3 items long. The second half of the sequence (3 items) is
     ”3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”.
A: ”3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”
QS: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #1.
A: ”driving license, button”
QS: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #2.
A: ”packet, identity card, shoe”
QS: [reverse] Reverse the sequence #3.
A: ”button, driving license”


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: [reverse] Reverse the sequence #4.
A: ”shoe, identity card, packet”
QS: [join] #6 #5
A: ”shoe, identity card, packet, button, driving license”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Reverse the sequence ”laptop, photo, clip”.
QS: [extract] The sequence is ”1. laptop, 2. photo, 3. clip”. The sequence is 3 items long, which is
     less than the minimum length of 4, so we don’t need to split it. All we need to do is reverse ”
     laptop, photo, clip”.
A: ”laptop, photo, clip”
QS: [cot] Reverse the sequence #1.
A: ”clip, photo, laptop”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Reverse the sequence ”newspaper, glasses, laptop, bottle”.
QS: [extract] The sequence is ”1. newspaper, 2. glasses, 3. laptop, 4. bottle”. The sequence is 4
     items long, which is equal to the minimum length of 4, so we split it. Half of 4 is 4 / 2 = 2.0.
     Dropping the decimal, we get that the first half will be 2 items long. The first half (2 items) of
     the sequence is ”1. newspaper, 2. glasses”.
A: ”1. newspaper, 2. glasses”
QS: [extract] The first half of the sequence ends with ”2. glasses”, so the second half starts after ”2.
      glasses” with ”3. laptop”. The full sequence is 4 items long and the first half is 2 items long,
     so the second half will be 4 − 2 = 2 items long, ending in ”2. glasses”. The second half of the
     sequence (2 items) is ”3. laptop, 4. bottle”.
A: ”3. laptop, 4. bottle”
QS: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #1.
A: ”newspaper, glasses”
QS: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #2.
A: ”laptop, bottle”
QS: [reverse] Reverse the sequence #3.
A: ”glasses, newspaper”
QS: [reverse] Reverse the sequence #4.
A: ”bottle, laptop”
QS: [join] #6 #5
A: ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”
QS: [EOQ]

                                        remove numbers
Q: Remove the numbers from ”4. bottle, 3. laptop, 2. glasses, 1. newspaper”.
A: ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”

Q: Remove the numbers from ”1. identity card, 2. packet, 3. button”.
A: ”identity card, packet, button”

Q: Remove the numbers from ”1. player, 2. passport, 3. umbrella, 4. radio”.
A: ”player, passport, umbrella, radio”

                                                join
Q: ”bottle, laptop” ”glasses, newspaper”.
A: ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”

Q: ”identity card, packet, button” ”magazine, notebook, glasses”.
A: ”identity card, packet, button, magazine, notebook, glasses”

Q: ”passport, umbrella, radio, mobile phone, photo” ”player”.
A: ”passport, umbrella, radio, mobile phone, photo, player”



                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: ”mirror, case” ”toothbrush, alarm clock”.
A: ”mirror, case, toothbrush, alarm clock”

Q: ”light bulb, clip, umbrella” ”driving licence, watch”.
A: ”light bulb, clip, umbrella, driving licence, watch”

                                                   cot
QC: Reverse the sequence ”newspaper, glasses, laptop, bottle”.
QS: First is newspaper. Second is glasses. Third is laptop. Fourth is bottle. Now to reverse, change
     the order to: Fourth is bottle. Third is laptop. Second is glasses. First is newspaper. So the
     answer is ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”.
A: ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”

QC: Reverse the sequence ”laptop, photo, clip”.
QS: First is laptop. Second is photo. Third is clip. Now to reverse, change the order to: Third is clip
     . Second is photo. First is laptop. So the answer is ”clip, photo, laptop”.
A: ”clip, photo, laptop”

QC: Reverse the sequence ”driving license, button, packet, identity card, pineapple”.
QS: First is driving license. Second is button. Third is packet. Fourth is identity card. Fifth is
     pineapple. Now to reverse, change the order to: Fifth is pineapple. Fourth is identity card.
     Third is packet. Second is button. First is driving license. So the answer is ”pineapple, identity
      card, packet, button, driving license”.
A: ”pineapple, identity card, packet, button, driving license”

                                         unrolled decomp
QC: Reverse the sequence ”driving license, button, packet, identity card, shoe”.
QS: The sequence is ”1. driving license, 2. button, 3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”. The
     sequence is 5 items long, which is more than the minimum length of 4, so we split it. Half of
     5 is 5 / 2 = 2.5. Dropping the decimal, we get that the first half will be 2 items long, ending in
     ”2. button”. The first half (2 items) is ”1. driving license, 2. button”. The first half of the
     sequence ends with ”2. button”, so the second half starts after ”2. button” with ”3. packet”.
     The full sequence is 5 items long, and the first half is 2 items long, so the second half will be
     5 − 2 = 3 items long. The second half of the sequence (3 items) is ”3. packet, 4. identity card,
     5. shoe”. Removing the numbers from ”1. driving license, 2. button”, we get ”driving license,
     button”. Removing the numbers from ”3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”, we get ”packet,
     identity card, shoe”. Reversing the sequence ”driving license, button”, First is driving license.
     Second is button. Now to reverse, change the order to: Second is button. First is driving
     license. So the answer is ”button, driving license”. Reversing the sequence ”packet, identity
     card, shoe”, First is packet. Second is identity card. Third is shoe. Now to reverse, change the
     order to: Third is shoe. Second is identity card. First is packet. So the answer is ”shoe, identity
      card, packet”. Joining ”shoe, identity card, packet” and ”button, driving license”, the answer
     is ”shoe, identity card, packet, button, driving license”.
A: ”shoe, identity card, packet, button, driving license”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Reverse the sequence ”laptop, photo, clip”.
QS: The sequence is ”1. laptop, 2. photo, 3. clip”. The sequence is 3 items long, which is less than
     the minimum length of 4, so we don’t need to split it. All we need to do is reverse ”laptop,
     photo, clip”. First is laptop. Second is photo. Third is clip. Now to reverse, change the order to
     : Third is clip. Second is photo. First is laptop. So the answer is ”clip, photo, laptop”.
A: ”clip, photo, laptop”
QS: [EOQ]

QC: Reverse the sequence ”newspaper, glasses, laptop, bottle”.
QS: The sequence is ”1. newspaper, 2. glasses, 3. laptop, 4. bottle”. The sequence is 4 items long,
    which is equal to the minimum length of 4, so we split it. Half of 4 is 4 / 2 = 2.0. Dropping
    the decimal, we get that the first half will be 2 items long, ending in ”2. glasses”. The first half


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (2 items) is ”1. newspaper, 2. glasses”. The first half of the sequence ends with ”2. glasses”,
     so the second half starts after ”2. glasses” with ”3. laptop”. The full sequence is 4 items long,
     and the first half is 2 items long, so the second half will be 4 − 2 = 2 items long. The second
     half of the sequence (2 items) is ”3. laptop, 4. bottle”. Removing the numbers from ”1.
     newspaper, 2. glasses”, we get ”newspaper, glasses”. Removing the numbers from ”3. laptop,
     4. bottle”, we get ”laptop, bottle”. Reversing the sequence ”newspaper, glasses”, First is
     newspaper. Second is glasses. Now to reverse, change the order to: Second is glasses. First is
     newspaper. So the answer is ”glasses, newspaper”. Reversing the sequence ”laptop, bottle”,
     First is laptop. Second is bottle. Now to reverse, change the order to: Second is bottle. First is
     laptop. So the answer is ”bottle, laptop”. Joining ”bottle, laptop” and ”glasses, newspaper”,
     the answer is ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”.
A: ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”
QS: [EOQ]

                                          reverse (tail)
QC: Reverse the sequence ”driving license, button, packet, identity card, shoe”.
Q1: [extract] The sequence is ”1. driving license, 2. button, 3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”.
     The sequence is 5 items long, which is more than the minimum length of 4, so we split it. We
     take the first element in the sequence which is ”1. driving license”.
#1: ”1. driving license”
Q2: [extract] The full sequence is 5 items long, so the remaining sequence will be 5 − 1 = 4 items
     long. The tail of the sequence with 4 items is ”2. button, 3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”.
#2: ”2. button, 3. packet, 4. identity card, 5. shoe”
Q3: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #1.
#3: ”driving license”
Q4: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #2.
#4: ”button, packet, identity card, shoe”
Q5: [reverse] Reverse the sequence #4.
#5: ”shoe, identity card, packet, button”
Q6: [join] #5 #3
#6: ”shoe, identity card, packet, button, driving license”
Q7: [EOQ]

QC: Reverse the sequence ”laptop, photo, clip”.
Q1: [extract] The sequence is ”1. laptop, 2. photo, 3. clip”. The sequence is 3 items long, which is
     less than the minimum length of 4, so we don’t need to split it. All we need to do is reverse ”
     laptop, photo, clip”.
#1: ”laptop, photo, clip”
Q2: [cot] Reverse the sequence #1.
#2: ”clip, photo, laptop”
Q3: [EOQ]

QC: Reverse the sequence ”newspaper, glasses, laptop, bottle”.
Q1: [extract] The sequence is ”1. newspaper, 2. glasses, 3. laptop, 4. bottle”. The sequence is 4
     items long, which is more than the minimum length of 4, so we split it. We take the first
     element in the sequence which is ”1. newspaper”.
#1: ”1. newspaper”
Q2: [extract] The full sequence is 4 items long, so the remaining sequence will be 4 − 1 = 3 items
     long. The tail of the sequence with 3 items is ”2. glasses, 3. laptop, 4. bottle”.
#2: ”2. glasses, 3. laptop, 4. bottle”
Q3: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #1.
#3: ”newspaper”
Q4: [remove numbers] Remove the numbers from #2.
#4: ”glasses, laptop, bottle”
Q5: [reverse] Reverse the sequence #4.
#5: ”bottle, laptop, glasses”
Q6: [join] #5 #3
#6: ”bottle, laptop, glasses, newspaper”
Q7: [EOQ]


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.3     L ONG -D OCUMENT QA

We show one of the prompts used for CommaQA experiments here. The entire set of prompts is
provided as supplemetary material.

G.3.1    D ECOMPOSED P ROMPTING : ( COARSE )

                                             decomp
What awards have movies produced by people born in 1910 won?
QS: (select) [qa] Who were born in the year 1910?
A: [”Teeplemole”, ”Muntaril”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] For which movies was #1 the producer?
A: [”Featsaw”, ”Zalate”, ”Premercy”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Zorgion”, ”Chowwurst”, ”Hallowcock”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What movies have people from the country Stridery acted in?
QS: (select) [qa] Who is from the country Stridery?
A: [”Gastrat”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Which movies has #1 been an actor in?
A: [”Partnershipmaker”, ”Nilitude”, ”Warpstone”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What awards have the actors of the Erowid winning movies received?
QS: (select) [qa] Which movies were given the Erowid award?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Caudacite”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Who are the actors in the movie #1?
A: [”Wetherality”, ”Lougerière”, ”Gigabut”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Aniconder”, ”Trifogation”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What awards did the movies directed by the Modiparity winners receive?
QS: (select) [qa] Who has been awarded the Modiparity award?
A: [”Bioperatology”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Which movies has #1 directed?
A: [”Pestok”, ”Vitrilateral”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Gutney”, ”Antipositive”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What awards have movies written by people born in 1935 won?
QS: (select) [qa] Who were born in the year 1935?
A: [”Sclerocybin”, ”Zayage”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] What movies has #1 written?
A: [”Noenometer”, ”Tayenne”, ”Pneumodendron”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Brownbeard”, ”Goosehead”, ”Handt”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What movies have the directors from Legault directed?
QS: (select) [qa] Who is from the country Legault?
A: [”Metatoun”, ”Sapien”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [qa] What movies has #1 been the director of?
A: [”Coacheship”, ”Misapportionment”]
QS: [EOQ]



                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 qa
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: For which movies was Teeplemole the producer?
A: [”Featsaw”, ”Zalate”]

Q: Which awards were given to Featsaw?
A: [”Zorgion”]

movie: Misgendery ; directed by: Wetherality. movie: Dewbar ; director: Gigabut. movie:
     Caudacite ; director: Lougerière. movie: Tayenne ; directed by: Lougerière. movie:
     Misgendery ; awarded: Microsouenesis. movie: Dewbar ; awarded: Erowid. movie: Tayenne ;
     awarded: Cockspit. movie: Caudacite ; award: Erowid. award: Aniconder ; winner:
     Wetherality. award: Aniconder ; winner: Lougerière. person: Gigabut ; award: Trifogation.
     movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1991. movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Caudacite ; release
     year: 2008. movie: Misgendery ; year: 1991. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Dewbar.
     Gigabut was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Lougerière was an actor in the movie Tayenne.
     Lougerière acted in the movie Caudacite. Lougerière acted in the movie Misgendery. Gigabut
     was an actor in the movie Caudacite. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Misgendery.
     Wetherality was born in the year 1917. Lougerière was born in 1926. Gigabut was born in the
     year 1917. Gigabut grew up in the nation of Triclops. Lougerière is from the country of Tatkin
     . Wetherality grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Lougerière produced the movie Dewbar with
     others. Gigabut produced the movie Tayenne with others. Gigabut produced the movie
     Dewbar with others. Lougerière was one of the producers of the movie Misgendery.
     Wetherality was one of the producers of the movie Caudacite. Gigabut was one of the
     producers of the movie Caudacite. Wetherality produced the movie Misgendery with others.
     Wetherality produced the movie Tayenne with others. Wetherality wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Misgendery. Lougerière was one of the writers for the
     movie Caudacite. Wetherality wrote for the movie Misgendery. Gigabut wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Dewbar. Lougerière wrote for the movie Dewbar.
     Wetherality wrote for the movie Caudacite.
Q: Who are the actors in the movie Caudacite?
A: [”Lougerière, ”Gigabut”]

Q: Which movies were given the Erowid award?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Caudacite”]

movie: Pastillobox ; directed by: Firmline. movie: Clenestration ; directed by: Carblock. movie:
    Pestok ; directed by: Bioperatology. movie: Vitrilateral ; director: Bioperatology. movie:
    Vitrilateral ; award: Antipositive. movie: Clenestration ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pastillobox ;
    awarded: Handt. movie: Pestok ; awarded: Gutney. movie: Pestok ; writer: Firmline. movie:



                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Clenestration ; written by: Carblock. movie: Pastillobox ; written by: Bioperatology. movie:
     Pestok ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Clenestration ; written by: Firmline. movie: Vitrilateral
      ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Pastillobox ; writer: Carblock. movie: Vitrilateral ; written by
     : Carblock. movie: Pestok ; release year: 1986. movie: Clenestration ; year: 1986. movie:
     Vitrilateral ; year: 1999. movie: Pastillobox ; release year: 1984. Carblock was an actor in the
     movie Pastillobox. Firmline was an actor in the movie Vitrilateral. Bioperatology was an actor
      in the movie Clenestration. Firmline acted in the movie Pastillobox. Carblock was an actor in
      the movie Clenestration. Bioperatology was an actor in the movie Pestok. Firmline was born
     in the year 1904. Bioperatology was born in the year 1935. Carblock was born in 1935.
     Carblock grew up in the nation of Knoppock. Firmline grew up in the nation of Tatkin.
     Bioperatology grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Bioperatology won the Modiparity award.
     Halfbill was awarded to Firmline. Halfbill was awarded to Carblock. Bioperatology was one
     of the producers of the movie Pestok. Bioperatology produced the movie Vitrilateral with
     others. Firmline produced the movie Pastillobox with others. Firmline produced the movie
     Clenestration with others. Carblock was one of the producers of the movie Pastillobox.
     Carblock produced the movie Vitrilateral with others. Carblock produced the movie
     Clenestration with others. Firmline was one of the producers of the movie Pestok.
Q: Who has been awarded the Modiparity award?
A: [”Bioperatology”]

Q: Which movies has Bioperatology directed?
A: [”Pestok”, ”Vitrilateral”]

movie: Nohit ; director: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; director: Mimicocycle. movie:
     Tayenne ; directed by: Zayage. movie: Pneumodendron ; director: Sclerocybin. movie:
     Tayenne ; awarded: Goosehead. movie: Nohit ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pneumodendron ;
     award: Handt. movie: Noenometer ; awarded: Brownbeard. movie: Nohit ; writer:
     Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; written by: Sclerocybin. movie: Tayenne ; writer:
     Sclerocybin. movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Zayage. movie: Tayenne ; writer: Zayage.
     movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; release year: 1991.
     movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Nohit ; year: 2005. movie: Pneumodendron ; year: 2005.
      Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Zayage acted in the movie Pneumodendron.
      Zayage was an actor in the movie Nohit. Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie
     Noenometer. Zayage was born in 1935. Sclerocybin was born in 1935. Mimicocycle was born
      in 1930. Mimicocycle is from the country of Calderita. Sclerocybin grew up in the nation of
     Calderita. Zayage is from the country of Obility. Quinion was awarded to Zayage. Fannyxist
     was awarded to Sclerocybin. Fannyxist was awarded to Mimicocycle. Mimicocycle produced
     the movie Nohit with others. Zayage was one of the producers of the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin produced the movie
     Pneumodendron with others. Zayage produced the movie Pneumodendron with others.
     Mimicocycle was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin was one of the
     producers of the movie Noenometer. Zayage produced the movie Noenometer with others
Q: What movies has Sclerocybin written?
A: [”Noenometer”, ”Tayenne”]

Q: Who were born in the year 1935?
A: [”Sclerocybin”, ”Zayage”]

G.3.2   D ECOMPOSED P ROMPTING : ( FINE )

                                             decomp
What awards have movies produced by people born in 1910 won?
QS: (select) [simp qa] Who were born in the year 1910?
A: [”Teeplemole”, ”Muntaril”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [pos qa] For which movies was #1 the producer?
A: [”Featsaw”, ”Zalate”, ”Premercy”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [aw qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Zorgion”, ”Chowwurst”, ”Hallowcock”]


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: [EOQ]

QC: What movies have people from the country Stridery acted in?
QS: (select) [simp qa] Who is from the country Stridery?
A: [”Gastrat”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [pos qa] Which movies has #1 been an actor in?
A: [”Partnershipmaker”, ”Nilitude”, ”Warpstone”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What awards have the actors of the Erowid winning movies received?
QS: (select) [aw qa] Which movies were given the Erowid award?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Caudacite”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [pos qa] Who are the actors in the movie #1?
A: [”Wetherality”, ”Lougerière”, ”Gigabut”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [aw qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Aniconder”, ”Trifogation”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What awards did the movies directed by the Modiparity winners receive?
QS: (select) [aw qa] Who has been awarded the Modiparity award?
A: [”Bioperatology”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [pos qa] Which movies has #1 directed?
A: [”Pestok”, ”Vitrilateral”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [aw qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Gutney”, ”Antipositive”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What awards have movies written by people born in 1935 won?
QS: (select) [simp qa] Who were born in the year 1935?
A: [”Sclerocybin”, ”Zayage”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [pos qa] What movies has #1 written?
A: [”Noenometer”, ”Tayenne”, ”Pneumodendron”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [aw qa] Which awards were given to #2?
A: [”Brownbeard”, ”Goosehead”, ”Handt”]
QS: [EOQ]

QC: What movies have the directors from Legault directed?
QS: (select) [simp qa] Who is from the country Legault?
A: [”Metatoun”, ”Sapien”]
QS: (project values flat unique) [pos qa] What movies has #1 been the director of?
A: [”Coacheship”, ”Misapportionment”]
QS: [EOQ]

                                              aw qa
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
     ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
    Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
    movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
    Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
    year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
    Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
    actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
     an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
    born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
    Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
    Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
    Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
     Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
    one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: Which awards were given to Zalate?
A: [”Hallowcock”]

Q: Which awards were given to Featsaw?
A: [”Zorgion”]

movie: Misgendery ; directed by: Wetherality. movie: Dewbar ; director: Gigabut. movie:
     Caudacite ; director: Lougerière. movie: Tayenne ; directed by: Lougerière. movie:
     Misgendery ; awarded: Microsouenesis. movie: Dewbar ; awarded: Erowid. movie: Tayenne ;
     awarded: Cockspit. movie: Caudacite ; award: Erowid. award: Aniconder ; winner:
     Wetherality. award: Aniconder ; winner: Lougerière. person: Gigabut ; award: Trifogation.
     movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1991. movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Caudacite ; release
     year: 2008. movie: Misgendery ; year: 1991. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Dewbar.
     Gigabut was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Lougerière was an actor in the movie Tayenne.
     Lougerière acted in the movie Caudacite. Lougerière acted in the movie Misgendery. Gigabut
     was an actor in the movie Caudacite. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Misgendery.
     Wetherality was born in the year 1917. Lougerière was born in 1926. Gigabut was born in the
     year 1917. Gigabut grew up in the nation of Triclops. Lougerière is from the country of Tatkin
     . Wetherality grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Lougerière produced the movie Dewbar with
     others. Gigabut produced the movie Tayenne with others. Gigabut produced the movie
     Dewbar with others. Lougerière was one of the producers of the movie Misgendery.
     Wetherality was one of the producers of the movie Caudacite. Gigabut was one of the
     producers of the movie Caudacite. Wetherality produced the movie Misgendery with others.
     Wetherality produced the movie Tayenne with others. Wetherality wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Misgendery. Lougerière was one of the writers for the
     movie Caudacite. Wetherality wrote for the movie Misgendery. Gigabut wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Dewbar. Lougerière wrote for the movie Dewbar.
     Wetherality wrote for the movie Caudacite.
Q: Which movies were given the Erowid award?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Caudacite”]

Q: Which awards were given to Wetherality?
A: [”Aniconder”]

movie: Pastillobox ; directed by: Firmline. movie: Clenestration ; directed by: Carblock. movie:
    Pestok ; directed by: Bioperatology. movie: Vitrilateral ; director: Bioperatology. movie:
    Vitrilateral ; award: Antipositive. movie: Clenestration ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pastillobox ;
    awarded: Handt. movie: Pestok ; awarded: Gutney. movie: Pestok ; writer: Firmline. movie:
    Clenestration ; written by: Carblock. movie: Pastillobox ; written by: Bioperatology. movie:
    Pestok ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Clenestration ; written by: Firmline. movie: Vitrilateral
     ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Pastillobox ; writer: Carblock. movie: Vitrilateral ; written by
    : Carblock. movie: Pestok ; release year: 1986. movie: Clenestration ; year: 1986. movie:
    Vitrilateral ; year: 1999. movie: Pastillobox ; release year: 1984. Carblock was an actor in the
    movie Pastillobox. Firmline was an actor in the movie Vitrilateral. Bioperatology was an actor
     in the movie Clenestration. Firmline acted in the movie Pastillobox. Carblock was an actor in
     the movie Clenestration. Bioperatology was an actor in the movie Pestok. Firmline was born
    in the year 1904. Bioperatology was born in the year 1935. Carblock was born in 1935.
    Carblock grew up in the nation of Knoppock. Firmline grew up in the nation of Tatkin.
    Bioperatology grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Bioperatology won the Modiparity award.
    Halfbill was awarded to Firmline. Halfbill was awarded to Carblock. Bioperatology was one
    of the producers of the movie Pestok. Bioperatology produced the movie Vitrilateral with
    others. Firmline produced the movie Pastillobox with others. Firmline produced the movie
    Clenestration with others. Carblock was one of the producers of the movie Pastillobox.
    Carblock produced the movie Vitrilateral with others. Carblock produced the movie
    Clenestration with others. Firmline was one of the producers of the movie Pestok.


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: Who has been awarded the Modiparity award?
A: [”Bioperatology”]

Q: Which awards were given to Pestok?
A: [”Gutney”]

movie: Nohit ; director: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; director: Mimicocycle. movie:
     Tayenne ; directed by: Zayage. movie: Pneumodendron ; director: Sclerocybin. movie:
     Tayenne ; awarded: Goosehead. movie: Nohit ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pneumodendron ;
     award: Handt. movie: Noenometer ; awarded: Brownbeard. movie: Nohit ; writer:
     Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; written by: Sclerocybin. movie: Tayenne ; writer:
     Sclerocybin. movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Zayage. movie: Tayenne ; writer: Zayage.
     movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; release year: 1991.
     movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Nohit ; year: 2005. movie: Pneumodendron ; year: 2005.
      Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Zayage acted in the movie Pneumodendron.
      Zayage was an actor in the movie Nohit. Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie
     Noenometer. Zayage was born in 1935. Sclerocybin was born in 1935. Mimicocycle was born
      in 1930. Mimicocycle is from the country of Calderita. Sclerocybin grew up in the nation of
     Calderita. Zayage is from the country of Obility. Quinion was awarded to Zayage. Fannyxist
     was awarded to Sclerocybin. Fannyxist was awarded to Mimicocycle. Mimicocycle produced
     the movie Nohit with others. Zayage was one of the producers of the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin produced the movie
     Pneumodendron with others. Zayage produced the movie Pneumodendron with others.
     Mimicocycle was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin was one of the
     producers of the movie Noenometer. Zayage produced the movie Noenometer with others
Q: Which awards were given to Noenometer?
A: [”Brownbeard”]

Q: Which awards were given to Pneumodendron?
A: [”Handt”]


                                               pos qa
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: For which movies was Teeplemole the producer?
A: [”Featsaw”, ”Zalate”]

Q: For which movies was Muntaril the producer?
A: [”Premercy]



                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


movie: Misgendery ; directed by: Wetherality. movie: Dewbar ; director: Gigabut. movie:
     Caudacite ; director: Lougerière. movie: Tayenne ; directed by: Lougerière. movie:
     Misgendery ; awarded: Microsouenesis. movie: Dewbar ; awarded: Erowid. movie: Tayenne ;
     awarded: Cockspit. movie: Caudacite ; award: Erowid. award: Aniconder ; winner:
     Wetherality. award: Aniconder ; winner: Lougerière. person: Gigabut ; award: Trifogation.
     movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1991. movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Caudacite ; release
     year: 2008. movie: Misgendery ; year: 1991. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Dewbar.
     Gigabut was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Lougerière was an actor in the movie Tayenne.
     Lougerière acted in the movie Caudacite. Lougerière acted in the movie Misgendery. Gigabut
     was an actor in the movie Caudacite. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Misgendery.
     Wetherality was born in the year 1917. Lougerière was born in 1926. Gigabut was born in the
     year 1917. Gigabut grew up in the nation of Triclops. Lougerière is from the country of Tatkin
     . Wetherality grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Lougerière produced the movie Dewbar with
     others. Gigabut produced the movie Tayenne with others. Gigabut produced the movie
     Dewbar with others. Lougerière was one of the producers of the movie Misgendery.
     Wetherality was one of the producers of the movie Caudacite. Gigabut was one of the
     producers of the movie Caudacite. Wetherality produced the movie Misgendery with others.
     Wetherality produced the movie Tayenne with others. Wetherality wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Misgendery. Lougerière was one of the writers for the
     movie Caudacite. Wetherality wrote for the movie Misgendery. Gigabut wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Dewbar. Lougerière wrote for the movie Dewbar.
     Wetherality wrote for the movie Caudacite.
Q: Who are the actors in the movie Dewbar?
A: [”Wetherality”]

Q: Who are the actors in the movie Caudacite?
A: [”Lougerière, ”Gigabut”]

movie: Pastillobox ; directed by: Firmline. movie: Clenestration ; directed by: Carblock. movie:
     Pestok ; directed by: Bioperatology. movie: Vitrilateral ; director: Bioperatology. movie:
     Vitrilateral ; award: Antipositive. movie: Clenestration ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pastillobox ;
     awarded: Handt. movie: Pestok ; awarded: Gutney. movie: Pestok ; writer: Firmline. movie:
     Clenestration ; written by: Carblock. movie: Pastillobox ; written by: Bioperatology. movie:
     Pestok ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Clenestration ; written by: Firmline. movie: Vitrilateral
      ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Pastillobox ; writer: Carblock. movie: Vitrilateral ; written by
     : Carblock. movie: Pestok ; release year: 1986. movie: Clenestration ; year: 1986. movie:
     Vitrilateral ; year: 1999. movie: Pastillobox ; release year: 1984. Carblock was an actor in the
     movie Pastillobox. Firmline was an actor in the movie Vitrilateral. Bioperatology was an actor
      in the movie Clenestration. Firmline acted in the movie Pastillobox. Carblock was an actor in
      the movie Clenestration. Bioperatology was an actor in the movie Pestok. Firmline was born
     in the year 1904. Bioperatology was born in the year 1935. Carblock was born in 1935.
     Carblock grew up in the nation of Knoppock. Firmline grew up in the nation of Tatkin.
     Bioperatology grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Bioperatology won the Modiparity award.
     Halfbill was awarded to Firmline. Halfbill was awarded to Carblock. Bioperatology was one
     of the producers of the movie Pestok. Bioperatology produced the movie Vitrilateral with
     others. Firmline produced the movie Pastillobox with others. Firmline produced the movie
     Clenestration with others. Carblock was one of the producers of the movie Pastillobox.
     Carblock produced the movie Vitrilateral with others. Carblock produced the movie
     Clenestration with others. Firmline was one of the producers of the movie Pestok.
Q: Which movies has Bioperatology directed?
A: [”Pestok”, ”Vitrilateral”]

Q: Which movies has Carblock directed?
A: [”Clenestration”]

movie: Nohit ; director: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; director: Mimicocycle. movie:
    Tayenne ; directed by: Zayage. movie: Pneumodendron ; director: Sclerocybin. movie:
    Tayenne ; awarded: Goosehead. movie: Nohit ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pneumodendron ;
    award: Handt. movie: Noenometer ; awarded: Brownbeard. movie: Nohit ; writer:


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; written by: Sclerocybin. movie: Tayenne ; writer:
     Sclerocybin. movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Zayage. movie: Tayenne ; writer: Zayage.
     movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; release year: 1991.
     movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Nohit ; year: 2005. movie: Pneumodendron ; year: 2005.
      Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Zayage acted in the movie Pneumodendron.
      Zayage was an actor in the movie Nohit. Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie
     Noenometer. Zayage was born in 1935. Sclerocybin was born in 1935. Mimicocycle was born
      in 1930. Mimicocycle is from the country of Calderita. Sclerocybin grew up in the nation of
     Calderita. Zayage is from the country of Obility. Quinion was awarded to Zayage. Fannyxist
     was awarded to Sclerocybin. Fannyxist was awarded to Mimicocycle. Mimicocycle produced
     the movie Nohit with others. Zayage was one of the producers of the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin produced the movie
     Pneumodendron with others. Zayage produced the movie Pneumodendron with others.
     Mimicocycle was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin was one of the
     producers of the movie Noenometer. Zayage produced the movie Noenometer with others
Q: What movies has Sclerocybin written?
A: [”Noenometer”, ”Tayenne”]

Q: What movies has Zayage written?
A: [”Pneumodendron”, ”Tayenne”]

                                             simp qa
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: Who were born in the year 1910?
A: [”Teeplemole”, ”Muntaril”]

Q: From which country is Monsterscar?
A: [”Piperfish”]

movie: Nilitude ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Dewbar ; directed by: Metatoun. movie: Warpstone
     ; directed by: Gastrat. movie: Partnershipmaker ; director: Metatoun. movie: Dewbar ; award:
     Tachychronograph. movie: Partnershipmaker ; awarded: Tachychronograph. movie: Nilitude ;
     award: Paleodactyl. movie: Warpstone ; award: Sabonade. person: Gastrat ; award:
    Trifogation. award: Polyquadrase ; winner: Monsterscar. award: Trifogation ; winner:
    Metatoun. movie: Warpstone ; release year: 1956. movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1984. movie:
     Nilitude ; year: 1984. movie: Partnershipmaker ; year: 1962. Gastrat was an actor in the
    movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun was an actor in the movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun
    was an actor in the movie Nilitude. Gastrat acted in the movie Nilitude. Monsterscar was an
    actor in the movie Dewbar. Gastrat acted in the movie Warpstone. Metatoun acted in the
    movie Warpstone. Metatoun was born in 1939. Gastrat was born in the year 1933.


                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Monsterscar was born in 1933. Metatoun grew up in the nation of Moulole. Gastrat is from
     the country of Stridery. Monsterscar grew up in the nation of Moulole. Monsterscar produced
     the movie Nilitude with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone
     . Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was one of the
     producers of the movie Nilitude. Metatoun produced the movie Partnershipmaker with others.
      Metatoun produced the movie Dewbar with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of
     the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat produced the movie Dewbar with others. Metatoun
     wrote for the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat wrote for the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was
     one of the writers for the movie Dewbar. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the movie
     Nilitude. Metatoun wrote for the movie Warpstone.
Q: Who is from the country Stridery?
A: [”Gastrat”]

Q: Which movies were released in 1984?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Nilitude”]

movie: Nohit ; director: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; director: Mimicocycle. movie:
     Tayenne ; directed by: Zayage. movie: Pneumodendron ; director: Sclerocybin. movie:
     Tayenne ; awarded: Goosehead. movie: Nohit ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pneumodendron ;
     award: Handt. movie: Noenometer ; awarded: Brownbeard. movie: Nohit ; writer:
     Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; written by: Sclerocybin. movie: Tayenne ; writer:
     Sclerocybin. movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Zayage. movie: Tayenne ; writer: Zayage.
     movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; release year: 1991.
     movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Nohit ; year: 2005. movie: Pneumodendron ; year: 2005.
      Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Zayage acted in the movie Pneumodendron.
      Zayage was an actor in the movie Nohit. Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie
     Noenometer. Zayage was born in 1935. Sclerocybin was born in 1935. Mimicocycle was born
      in 1930. Mimicocycle is from the country of Calderita. Sclerocybin grew up in the nation of
     Calderita. Zayage is from the country of Obility. Quinion was awarded to Zayage. Fannyxist
     was awarded to Sclerocybin. Fannyxist was awarded to Mimicocycle. Mimicocycle produced
     the movie Nohit with others. Zayage was one of the producers of the movie Nohit.
     Sclerocybin was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin produced the movie
     Pneumodendron with others. Zayage produced the movie Pneumodendron with others.
     Mimicocycle was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin was one of the
     producers of the movie Noenometer. Zayage produced the movie Noenometer with others
Q: Who were born in the year 1935?
A: [”Sclerocybin”, ”Zayage”]

Q: When was the movie Nohit released?
A: [”2005”]

movie: Coacheship ; director: Metatoun. movie: Assamplifier ; director: Kapod. movie:
    Misapportionment ; director: Sapien. movie: Quinsid ; director: Kapod. movie: Assamplifier ;
    award: Zorgion. movie: Quinsid ; awarded: Airpipe. movie: Coacheship ; award: Electrodesal.
     movie: Misapportionment ; award: Airpipe. movie: Coacheship ; written by: Metatoun.
    movie: Misapportionment ; written by: Kapod. movie: Coacheship ; written by: Kapod. movie
    : Quinsid ; writer: Sapien. movie: Misapportionment ; written by: Metatoun. movie:
    Assamplifier ; written by: Kapod. movie: Assamplifier ; written by: Sapien. movie:
    Assamplifier ; release year: 2000. movie: Coacheship ; year: 2001. movie: Quinsid ; year:
    2005. movie: Misapportionment ; year: 2005. Sapien was an actor in the movie
    Misapportionment. Sapien acted in the movie Assamplifier. Kapod acted in the movie Quinsid
    . Sapien acted in the movie Coacheship. Metatoun was an actor in the movie Quinsid. Kapod
    acted in the movie Misapportionment. Metatoun acted in the movie Coacheship. Kapod acted
    in the movie Assamplifier. Sapien was born in the year 1910. Metatoun was born in 1928.
    Kapod was born in the year 1910. Metatoun is from the country of Legault. Kapod grew up in
     the nation of Tatkin. Sapien is from the country of Legault. Malwarp was awarded to Sapien.
    Metatoun won the Monkeynote award. Kapod won the Monkeynote award. Kapod was one of
     the producers of the movie Quinsid. Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Misapportionment. Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Quinsid. Sapien was one
     of the producers of the movie Assamplifier. Sapien produced the movie Coacheship with
     others. Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Assamplifier. Kapod was one of the
     producers of the movie Misapportionment. Kapod was one of the producers of the movie
     Coacheship.
Q: Who is from the country Legault?
A: [”Metatoun”, ”Sapien”]

Q: When was Kapod born?
A: [”1910”]

G.3.3   COT

                                                COT
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
QC: What awards have movies produced by people born in 1910 won?
QS: The people born in 1910 were Muntaril and Teeplemole. Teeplemole produced the movies
     Featsaw and Zalate. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy. Featsaw was awarded the
     Zorgion award. Premercy was awarded the Chowwurst award. Zalate was awarded the
     Hallowcock award. So the answer is [”Zorgion”, ”Chowwurst”, ”Hallowcock”].
A: [”Zorgion”, ”Chowwurst”, ”Hallowcock”]
QS: [EOQ]

movie: Misgendery ; directed by: Wetherality. movie: Dewbar ; director: Gigabut. movie:
    Caudacite ; director: Lougerière. movie: Tayenne ; directed by: Lougerière. movie:
    Misgendery ; awarded: Microsouenesis. movie: Dewbar ; awarded: Erowid. movie: Tayenne ;
    awarded: Cockspit. movie: Caudacite ; award: Erowid. award: Aniconder ; winner:
    Wetherality. award: Aniconder ; winner: Lougerière. person: Gigabut ; award: Trifogation.
    movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1991. movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Caudacite ; release
    year: 2008. movie: Misgendery ; year: 1991. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Dewbar.
    Gigabut was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Lougerière was an actor in the movie Tayenne.
    Lougerière acted in the movie Caudacite. Lougerière acted in the movie Misgendery. Gigabut
    was an actor in the movie Caudacite. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Misgendery.
    Wetherality was born in the year 1917. Lougerière was born in 1926. Gigabut was born in the
    year 1917. Gigabut grew up in the nation of Triclops. Lougerière is from the country of Tatkin
    . Wetherality grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Lougerière produced the movie Dewbar with
    others. Gigabut produced the movie Tayenne with others. Gigabut produced the movie
    Dewbar with others. Lougerière was one of the producers of the movie Misgendery.
    Wetherality was one of the producers of the movie Caudacite. Gigabut was one of the
    producers of the movie Caudacite. Wetherality produced the movie Misgendery with others.
    Wetherality produced the movie Tayenne with others. Wetherality wrote for the movie


                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Misgendery. Lougerière was one of the writers for the
     movie Caudacite. Wetherality wrote for the movie Misgendery. Gigabut wrote for the movie
     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Dewbar. Lougerière wrote for the movie Dewbar.
     Wetherality wrote for the movie Caudacite.
QC: What awards have the actors of the Erowid winning movies received?
QS: The movies that won the Erowid award are Dewbar and Caudacite. Wetherality was an actor in
      Dewbar. Lougerière and Gigabut acted in Caudacite. Wetherality won the Aniconder award.
     Lougerière also won the Aniconder award. Gigabut won the Trifogation award. So the answer
     is [”Aniconder”, ”Trifogation”].
A: [”Aniconder”, ”Trifogation”]
QS: [EOQ]

movie: Pastillobox ; directed by: Firmline. movie: Clenestration ; directed by: Carblock. movie:
     Pestok ; directed by: Bioperatology. movie: Vitrilateral ; director: Bioperatology. movie:
     Vitrilateral ; award: Antipositive. movie: Clenestration ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pastillobox ;
     awarded: Handt. movie: Pestok ; awarded: Gutney. movie: Pestok ; writer: Firmline. movie:
     Clenestration ; written by: Carblock. movie: Pastillobox ; written by: Bioperatology. movie:
     Pestok ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Clenestration ; written by: Firmline. movie: Vitrilateral
      ; writer: Bioperatology. movie: Pastillobox ; writer: Carblock. movie: Vitrilateral ; written by
     : Carblock. movie: Pestok ; release year: 1986. movie: Clenestration ; year: 1986. movie:
     Vitrilateral ; year: 1999. movie: Pastillobox ; release year: 1984. Carblock was an actor in the
     movie Pastillobox. Firmline was an actor in the movie Vitrilateral. Bioperatology was an actor
      in the movie Clenestration. Firmline acted in the movie Pastillobox. Carblock was an actor in
      the movie Clenestration. Bioperatology was an actor in the movie Pestok. Firmline was born
     in the year 1904. Bioperatology was born in the year 1935. Carblock was born in 1935.
     Carblock grew up in the nation of Knoppock. Firmline grew up in the nation of Tatkin.
     Bioperatology grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Bioperatology won the Modiparity award.
     Halfbill was awarded to Firmline. Halfbill was awarded to Carblock. Bioperatology was one
     of the producers of the movie Pestok. Bioperatology produced the movie Vitrilateral with
     others. Firmline produced the movie Pastillobox with others. Firmline produced the movie
     Clenestration with others. Carblock was one of the producers of the movie Pastillobox.
     Carblock produced the movie Vitrilateral with others. Carblock produced the movie
     Clenestration with others. Firmline was one of the producers of the movie Pestok.
QC: What awards did the movies directed by the Modiparity winners receive?
QS: The Modiparity winners are Bioperatology. Bioperatology has directed the movies Pestok and
     Vitrilateral. Pestok has won the Gutney award. Vitrilateral has won the Antipositive award. So
      the answer is [”Gutney”, ”Antipositive”].
A: [”Gutney”, ”Antipositive”]
QS: [EOQ]

movie: Nohit ; director: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; director: Mimicocycle. movie:
    Tayenne ; directed by: Zayage. movie: Pneumodendron ; director: Sclerocybin. movie:
    Tayenne ; awarded: Goosehead. movie: Nohit ; awarded: Handt. movie: Pneumodendron ;
    award: Handt. movie: Noenometer ; awarded: Brownbeard. movie: Nohit ; writer:
    Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; written by: Sclerocybin. movie: Tayenne ; writer:
    Sclerocybin. movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Zayage. movie: Tayenne ; writer: Zayage.
    movie: Pneumodendron ; written by: Mimicocycle. movie: Noenometer ; release year: 1991.
    movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Nohit ; year: 2005. movie: Pneumodendron ; year: 2005.
     Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Zayage acted in the movie Pneumodendron.
     Zayage was an actor in the movie Nohit. Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Nohit.
    Sclerocybin was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Mimicocycle was an actor in the movie
    Noenometer. Zayage was born in 1935. Sclerocybin was born in 1935. Mimicocycle was born
     in 1930. Mimicocycle is from the country of Calderita. Sclerocybin grew up in the nation of
    Calderita. Zayage is from the country of Obility. Quinion was awarded to Zayage. Fannyxist
    was awarded to Sclerocybin. Fannyxist was awarded to Mimicocycle. Mimicocycle produced
    the movie Nohit with others. Zayage was one of the producers of the movie Nohit.
    Sclerocybin was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin produced the movie
    Pneumodendron with others. Zayage produced the movie Pneumodendron with others.



                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Mimicocycle was one of the producers of the movie Tayenne. Sclerocybin was one of the
     producers of the movie Noenometer. Zayage produced the movie Noenometer with others
QC: What awards have movies written by people born in 1935 won?
QS: The people born in 1935 were Sclerocybin and Zayage. Sclerocybin has written the movies
     Noenometer and Tayenne. Zayage has written the movies Pneumodendron and Tayenne.
     Noenometer has won the Brownbeard award. Tayenne has won the Goosehead award.
     Pneumodendron has won the Handt award. So the answer is [”Brownbeard”, ”Goosehead”, ”
     Handt”].
A: [”Brownbeard”, ”Goosehead”, ”Handt”]
QS: [EOQ]

G.4   S HORTER P ROMPTS FOR S MALLER C ONTEXT W INDOWS

                                           qa(small)
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: Which awards were given to Zalate?
A: [”Hallowcock”]

Q: For which movies was Muntaril the producer?
A: [”Premercy]

Q: Who are the actors in the movie Premercy?
A: [”Monsterscar”]

movie: Nilitude ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Dewbar ; directed by: Metatoun. movie: Warpstone
     ; directed by: Gastrat. movie: Partnershipmaker ; director: Metatoun. movie: Dewbar ; award:
     Tachychronograph. movie: Partnershipmaker ; awarded: Tachychronograph. movie: Nilitude ;
     award: Paleodactyl. movie: Warpstone ; award: Sabonade. person: Gastrat ; award:
    Trifogation. award: Polyquadrase ; winner: Monsterscar. award: Trifogation ; winner:
    Metatoun. movie: Warpstone ; release year: 1956. movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1984. movie:
     Nilitude ; year: 1984. movie: Partnershipmaker ; year: 1962. Gastrat was an actor in the
    movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun was an actor in the movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun
    was an actor in the movie Nilitude. Gastrat acted in the movie Nilitude. Monsterscar was an
    actor in the movie Dewbar. Gastrat acted in the movie Warpstone. Metatoun acted in the
    movie Warpstone. Metatoun was born in 1939. Gastrat was born in the year 1933.
    Monsterscar was born in 1933. Metatoun grew up in the nation of Moulole. Gastrat is from
    the country of Stridery. Monsterscar grew up in the nation of Moulole. Monsterscar produced
    the movie Nilitude with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone
    . Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was one of the
    producers of the movie Nilitude. Metatoun produced the movie Partnershipmaker with others.
     Metatoun produced the movie Dewbar with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of


                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat produced the movie Dewbar with others. Metatoun
     wrote for the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat wrote for the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was
     one of the writers for the movie Dewbar. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the movie
     Nilitude. Metatoun wrote for the movie Warpstone.
Q: Which movies has Gastrat been an actor in?
A: [”Partnershipmaker”, ”Nilitude”, ”Warpstone”]

Q: Who is from the country Stridery?
A: [”Gastrat”]

Q: Which movies were given the Tachychronograph award?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Partnershipmaker”]

                                          aw qa(small)
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: Which awards were given to Zalate?
A: [”Hallowcock”]

Q: Which awards were given to Premercy?
A: [”Chowwurst”]

movie: Misgendery ; directed by: Wetherality. movie: Dewbar ; director: Gigabut. movie:
    Caudacite ; director: Lougerière. movie: Tayenne ; directed by: Lougerière. movie:
    Misgendery ; awarded: Microsouenesis. movie: Dewbar ; awarded: Erowid. movie: Tayenne ;
    awarded: Cockspit. movie: Caudacite ; award: Erowid. award: Aniconder ; winner:
    Wetherality. award: Aniconder ; winner: Lougerière. person: Gigabut ; award: Trifogation.
    movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1991. movie: Tayenne ; year: 2013. movie: Caudacite ; release
    year: 2008. movie: Misgendery ; year: 1991. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Dewbar.
    Gigabut was an actor in the movie Tayenne. Lougerière was an actor in the movie Tayenne.
    Lougerière acted in the movie Caudacite. Lougerière acted in the movie Misgendery. Gigabut
    was an actor in the movie Caudacite. Wetherality was an actor in the movie Misgendery.
    Wetherality was born in the year 1917. Lougerière was born in 1926. Gigabut was born in the
    year 1917. Gigabut grew up in the nation of Triclops. Lougerière is from the country of Tatkin
    . Wetherality grew up in the nation of Tatkin. Lougerière produced the movie Dewbar with
    others. Gigabut produced the movie Tayenne with others. Gigabut produced the movie
    Dewbar with others. Lougerière was one of the producers of the movie Misgendery.
    Wetherality was one of the producers of the movie Caudacite. Gigabut was one of the
    producers of the movie Caudacite. Wetherality produced the movie Misgendery with others.
    Wetherality produced the movie Tayenne with others. Wetherality wrote for the movie
    Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Misgendery. Lougerière was one of the writers for the
    movie Caudacite. Wetherality wrote for the movie Misgendery. Gigabut wrote for the movie


                                                41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Tayenne. Gigabut wrote for the movie Dewbar. Lougerière wrote for the movie Dewbar.
     Wetherality wrote for the movie Caudacite.
Q: Which movies were given the Erowid award?
A: [”Dewbar”, ”Caudacite”]

Q: Which awards were given to Wetherality?
A: [”Aniconder”]

                                         pos qa(small)
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: For which movies was Teeplemole the producer?
A: [”Featsaw”, ”Zalate”]

Q: For which movies was Muntaril the producer?
A: [”Premercy]

movie: Nilitude ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Dewbar ; directed by: Metatoun. movie: Warpstone
      ; directed by: Gastrat. movie: Partnershipmaker ; director: Metatoun. movie: Dewbar ; award:
      Tachychronograph. movie: Partnershipmaker ; awarded: Tachychronograph. movie: Nilitude ;
      award: Paleodactyl. movie: Warpstone ; award: Sabonade. person: Gastrat ; award:
     Trifogation. award: Polyquadrase ; winner: Monsterscar. award: Trifogation ; winner:
     Metatoun. movie: Warpstone ; release year: 1956. movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1984. movie:
      Nilitude ; year: 1984. movie: Partnershipmaker ; year: 1962. Gastrat was an actor in the
     movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun was an actor in the movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun
     was an actor in the movie Nilitude. Gastrat acted in the movie Nilitude. Monsterscar was an
     actor in the movie Dewbar. Gastrat acted in the movie Warpstone. Metatoun acted in the
     movie Warpstone. Metatoun was born in 1939. Gastrat was born in the year 1933.
     Monsterscar was born in 1933. Metatoun grew up in the nation of Moulole. Gastrat is from
     the country of Stridery. Monsterscar grew up in the nation of Moulole. Monsterscar produced
     the movie Nilitude with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone
     . Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was one of the
     producers of the movie Nilitude. Metatoun produced the movie Partnershipmaker with others.
      Metatoun produced the movie Dewbar with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of
     the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat produced the movie Dewbar with others. Metatoun
     wrote for the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat wrote for the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was
     one of the writers for the movie Dewbar. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the movie
     Nilitude. Metatoun wrote for the movie Warpstone.
Q: Which movies has Gastrat been an actor in?
A: [”Partnershipmaker”, ”Nilitude”, ”Warpstone”]

Q: Which movies has Monsterscar been an actor in?


                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: [”Dewbar”]

                                        simp qa(small)
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
      ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:
     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
Q: Who were born in the year 1910?
A: [”Teeplemole”, ”Muntaril”]

Q: Who is from the country Piperfish?
A: [”Teeplemole”, ”Monsterscar”]

movie: Nilitude ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Dewbar ; directed by: Metatoun. movie: Warpstone
      ; directed by: Gastrat. movie: Partnershipmaker ; director: Metatoun. movie: Dewbar ; award:
      Tachychronograph. movie: Partnershipmaker ; awarded: Tachychronograph. movie: Nilitude ;
      award: Paleodactyl. movie: Warpstone ; award: Sabonade. person: Gastrat ; award:
     Trifogation. award: Polyquadrase ; winner: Monsterscar. award: Trifogation ; winner:
     Metatoun. movie: Warpstone ; release year: 1956. movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1984. movie:
      Nilitude ; year: 1984. movie: Partnershipmaker ; year: 1962. Gastrat was an actor in the
     movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun was an actor in the movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun
     was an actor in the movie Nilitude. Gastrat acted in the movie Nilitude. Monsterscar was an
     actor in the movie Dewbar. Gastrat acted in the movie Warpstone. Metatoun acted in the
     movie Warpstone. Metatoun was born in 1939. Gastrat was born in the year 1933.
     Monsterscar was born in 1933. Metatoun grew up in the nation of Moulole. Gastrat is from
     the country of Stridery. Monsterscar grew up in the nation of Moulole. Monsterscar produced
     the movie Nilitude with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone
     . Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was one of the
     producers of the movie Nilitude. Metatoun produced the movie Partnershipmaker with others.
      Metatoun produced the movie Dewbar with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of
     the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat produced the movie Dewbar with others. Metatoun
     wrote for the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat wrote for the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was
     one of the writers for the movie Dewbar. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the movie
     Nilitude. Metatoun wrote for the movie Warpstone.
Q: Who is from the country Stridery?
A: [”Gastrat”]

Q: Who were born in the year 1939?
A: [”Metatoun”]

                                         COT(small)
movie: Premercy ; directed by: Muntaril. movie: Skirtsicine ; director: Teeplemole. movie: Featsaw
    ; directed by: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Zalate ; awarded:


                                                43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Hallowcock. movie: Featsaw ; awarded: Zorgion. movie: Premercy ; award: Chowwurst.
     movie: Skirtsicine ; award: Hallowcock. award: Goatfly ; winner: Teeplemole. person:
     Monsterscar ; award: Glodome. person: Muntaril ; award: Goatfly. movie: Featsaw ; release
     year: 1973. movie: Zalate ; release year: 1964. movie: Skirtsicine ; release year: 1973. movie:
     Premercy ; year: 1961. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Muntaril was an
     actor in the movie Skirtsicine. Monsterscar was an actor in the movie Premercy. Muntaril was
      an actor in the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole was an actor in the movie Zalate. Muntaril was
     born in the year 1910. Teeplemole was born in 1910. Monsterscar was born in 1942.
     Teeplemole is from the country of Piperfish. Monsterscar is from the country of Piperfish.
     Muntaril is from the country of Clony. Muntaril produced the movie Skirtsicine with others.
     Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar produced the movie
      Premercy with others. Monsterscar produced the movie Zalate with others. Teeplemole was
     one of the producers of the movie Featsaw. Teeplemole produced the movie Zalate with
     others. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy with others. Monsterscar wrote for the movie
     Premercy. Muntaril was one of the writers for the movie Zalate. Muntaril wrote for the movie
     Featsaw. Teeplemole wrote for the movie Featsaw. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the
     movie Zalate. Teeplemole was one of the writers for the movie Skirtsicine.
QC: What awards have movies produced by people born in 1910 won?
QS: The people born in 1910 were Muntaril and Teeplemole. Teeplemole produced the movies
     Featsaw and Zalate. Muntaril produced the movie Premercy. Featsaw was awarded the
     Zorgion award. Premercy was awarded the Chowwurst award. Zalate was awarded the
     Hallowcock award. So the answer is [”Zorgion”, ”Chowwurst”, ”Hallowcock”].
A: [”Zorgion”, ”Chowwurst”, ”Hallowcock”]
QS: [EOQ]

movie: Nilitude ; director: Monsterscar. movie: Dewbar ; directed by: Metatoun. movie: Warpstone
      ; directed by: Gastrat. movie: Partnershipmaker ; director: Metatoun. movie: Dewbar ; award:
      Tachychronograph. movie: Partnershipmaker ; awarded: Tachychronograph. movie: Nilitude ;
      award: Paleodactyl. movie: Warpstone ; award: Sabonade. person: Gastrat ; award:
     Trifogation. award: Polyquadrase ; winner: Monsterscar. award: Trifogation ; winner:
     Metatoun. movie: Warpstone ; release year: 1956. movie: Dewbar ; release year: 1984. movie:
      Nilitude ; year: 1984. movie: Partnershipmaker ; year: 1962. Gastrat was an actor in the
     movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun was an actor in the movie Partnershipmaker. Metatoun
     was an actor in the movie Nilitude. Gastrat acted in the movie Nilitude. Monsterscar was an
     actor in the movie Dewbar. Gastrat acted in the movie Warpstone. Metatoun acted in the
     movie Warpstone. Metatoun was born in 1939. Gastrat was born in the year 1933.
     Monsterscar was born in 1933. Metatoun grew up in the nation of Moulole. Gastrat is from
     the country of Stridery. Monsterscar grew up in the nation of Moulole. Monsterscar produced
     the movie Nilitude with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone
     . Metatoun was one of the producers of the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was one of the
     producers of the movie Nilitude. Metatoun produced the movie Partnershipmaker with others.
      Metatoun produced the movie Dewbar with others. Monsterscar was one of the producers of
     the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat produced the movie Dewbar with others. Metatoun
     wrote for the movie Partnershipmaker. Gastrat wrote for the movie Warpstone. Gastrat was
     one of the writers for the movie Dewbar. Monsterscar was one of the writers for the movie
     Nilitude. Metatoun wrote for the movie Warpstone.
QC: What movies have people from the country Stridery acted in?
QS: The people born in Stridery are Gastrat. Gastrat acted in Partenrshipmaker, Nilitude and
     Warpstone. So the answer is [”Partnershipmaker”, ”Nilitude”, ”Warpstone”].
A: [”Partnershipmaker”, ”Nilitude”, ”Warpstone”]
QS: [EOQ]

G.5   M ATH QA

The decomposer here deterministically calls cot to generate the CoT and then calls gpt ans to
extract the answer.

                                               cot


                                                44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: There are 15 trees in the grove. Grove workers will plant trees in the grove today. After they are
     done, there will be 21 trees. How many trees did the grove workers plant today?
A: There are 15 trees originally. Then there were 21 trees after some more were planted. So there
    must have been 21 − 15 = 6. The answer is 6.

Q: If there are 3 cars in the parking lot and 2 more cars arrive, how many cars are in the parking lot
     ?
A: There are originally 3 cars. 2 more cars arrive. 3 + 2 = 5. The answer is 5.

Q: Leah had 32 chocolates and her sister had 42. If they ate 35, how many pieces do they have left
    in total?
A: Originally, Leah had 32 chocolates. Her sister had 42. So in total they had 32 + 42 = 74. After
    eating 35, they had 74 − 35 = 39. The answer is 39.

Q: Jason had 20 lollipops. He gave Denny some lollipops. Now Jason has 12 lollipops. How many
     lollipops did Jason give to Denny?
A: Jason started with 20 lollipops. Then he had 12 after giving some to Denny. So he gave Denny
     20 − 12 = 8. The answer is 8.

Q: Shawn has five toys. For Christmas, he got two toys each from his mom and dad. How many
    toys does he have now?
A: Shawn started with 5 toys. If he got 2 toys each from his mom and dad, then that is 4 more toys.
     5 + 4 = 9. The answer is 9.

Q: There were nine computers in the server room. Five more computers were installed each day,
    from monday to thursday. How many computers are now in the server room?
A: There were originally 9 computers. For each of 4 days, 5 more computers were added. So 5 * 4
    = 20 computers were added. 9 + 20 is 29. The answer is 29.

Q: Michael had 58 golf balls. On tuesday, he lost 23 golf balls. On wednesday, he lost 2 more.
    How many golf balls did he have at the end of wednesday?
A: Michael started with 58 golf balls. After losing 23 on tuesday, he had 58 − 23 = 35. After losing
    2 more, he had 35 − 2 = 33 golf balls. The answer is 33.

Q: Olivia has $23. She bought five bagels for $3 each. How much money does she have left?
A: Olivia had 23 dollars. 5 bagels for 3 dollars each will be 5 x 3 = 15 dollars. So she has 23 − 15
    dollars left. 23 − 15 is 8. The answer is 8.


                                             gpt ans
Q: There are 15 trees originally. Then there were 21 trees after some more were planted. So there
     must have been 21 − 15 = 6 trees planted.
A: 6

Q: There are originally 3 cars. 2 more cars arrive. 3 + 2 = 5. The answer is 5.
A: 5

Q: Originally, Leah had 32 chocolates. Her sister had 42. So in total they had 32 + 42 = 74. After
    eating 35, they had 74 − 35 = 39. The answer is 39.
A: 39

Q: Jason started with 20 lollipops. Then he had 12 after giving some to Denny. So he gave Denny
     20 − 12 = 8 apples.
A: 8

Q: Shawn started with 5 toys. If he got 2 toys each from his mom and dad, then that is 4 more toys.
     5 + 4 = 9. The answer is 9.
A: 9



                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: There were originally 9 computers. For each of 4 days, 5 more computers were added. So 5 * 4
    = 20 computers were added. 9 + 20 is 29. The answer is 29.
A: 29

Q: Michael started with 58 golf balls. After losing 23 on tuesday, he had 58 − 23 = 35. After losing
      2 more, he had 35 − 2 = 33 golf balls.
A: 33

Q: Olivia had 23 dollars. 5 bagels for 3 dollars each will be 5 x 3 = 15 dollars. So she has 23 − 15
     = 8 dollars left.
A: 8


G.6   O PEN D OMAIN QA

The prompts in this section implement Decomposed Prompting approach to open-domain multihop
QA. For brevity we’ve included prompts for 5 of 20 randomly sampled questions. The full prompts
are attached with the submission and will also be released with the code. Note that we selected a
set of 100 questions from the development set to tune the hyperparameter (number of paragraphs to
retrieve for all of the retrieval-based approaches).

                                       hotpotqa: decomp
QC: In which country did this Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp
     and published ”Guantanamo: My Journey” receive para−military training?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention
      camp and published ”Guantanamo: My Journey”?
A: {”titles”: [”Guantanamo: My Journey”, ”Bismullah v. Gates”, ”Guantanamo Bay detention
     camp”], ”answer”: [”David Hicks”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] In which country did David Hicks receive his para−military training?
A: {”titles”: [”John Adams Project”, ”Camp Echo (Guantanamo Bay)”, ”Guantanamo Bay
     Museum of Art and History”, ”David Hicks”], ”answer”: [”Afghanistan”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Guantanamo: My Journey”, ”Bismullah v. Gates”, ”
     Guantanamo Bay detention camp”, ”John Adams Project”, ”Camp Echo (Guantanamo Bay)”,
     ”Guantanamo Bay Museum of Art and History”, ”David Hicks”]. Question: In which country
     did this Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published ”
     Guantanamo: My Journey” receive para−military training?
A: [”Afghanistan”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: How many awards did the ”A Girl Like Me” singer win at the American Music Awards of
     2012?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the singer of ”A Girl Like Me”?
A: {”titles”: [”American Music Award”, ”Rihanna”], ”answer”: [”Rihanna”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] How many awards did Rihana won in the American Music Awards of
     2012?
A: {”titles”: [”American Music Awards of 2012”, ”APRA Music Awards of 2012”, ”List of awards
      and nominations received by TLC”, ”Native American Music Awards”], ”answer”: [”one”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”American Music Award”, ”Rihanna”, ”American Music
     Awards of 2012”, ”APRA Music Awards of 2012”, ”List of awards and nominations received
     by TLC”, ”Native American Music Awards”]. Question: How many awards did the ”A Girl
     Like Me” singer win at the American Music Awards of 2012?
A: [”one”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: who is older Jeremy Horn or Renato Sobral ?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When was Jeremy Horn born?


                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: {”titles”: [”Zaza Tkeshelashvili”, ”Jeremy Horn”, ”Jeremy Horn (singer)”, ”Ricardo Arona”], ”
     answer”: [”August 25, 1975”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When was Renato Sobral born?
A: {”titles”: [”Brian Warren”, ”Renato Sobral”], ”answer”: [”September 7, 1975”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Zaza Tkeshelashvili”, ”Jeremy Horn”, ”Jeremy Horn (
     singer)”, ”Ricardo Arona”, ”Brian Warren”, ”Renato Sobral”]. Question: who is older Jeremy
     Horn or Renato Sobral ?
A: [”Jeremy Horn”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What was the 2014 population of the city where Lake Wales Medical Center is located?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Lake Wales Medical Center is located in what city?
A: {”titles”: [”Baylor College of Medicine”, ”Lake Wales Medical Center”, ”Tufts University
     School of Medicine”, ”Hanford Community Medical Center”], ”answer”: [”Polk County,
     Florida”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What was the population of Polk County in 2014?
A: {”titles”: [”Banner University Medical Center Tucson”, ”Lake Wales, Florida”], ”answer”:
     [”15,140”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Baylor College of Medicine”, ”Lake Wales Medical Center
     ”, ”Tufts University School of Medicine”, ”Hanford Community Medical Center”, ”Banner
     University Medical Center Tucson”, ”Lake Wales, Florida”]. Question: What was the 2014
     population of the city where Lake Wales Medical Center is located?
A: [”15,140”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon and released on what album that was issued
     by Apple Records, and was written, recorded, and released during his 18 month separation
     from Yoko Ono?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What album was issued by Apple Records, and written, recorded, and
     released during John Lennon’s 18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
A: {”titles”: [”John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band”, ”Milk and Honey (album)”, ”Walls and Bridges”],
     ”answer”: [”Walls and Bridges”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon on what album?
A: {”titles”: [”John Lennon Museum”, ”Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down and Out)”], ”
     answer”: [”Walls and Bridges”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band”, ”Milk and Honey (album)
     ”, ”Walls and Bridges”, ”John Lennon Museum”, ”Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down
     and Out)”]. Question: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon and released on what
     album that was issued by Apple Records, and was written, recorded, and released during his
     18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
A: [”Walls and Bridges”]
QS: [EOQ]

                                 hotpotqa: retrieve odqa
QC: Who is the Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published ”
     Guantanamo: My Journey”?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp
      and published ”Guantanamo: My Journey”?
A: [”Guantanamo: My Journey”, ”Bismullah v. Gates”, ”Guantanamo Bay detention camp”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Guantanamo: My Journey”, ”Bismullah v. Gates”, ”
     Guantanamo Bay detention camp”]. Question: Who is the Australian who was detained in
     Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published ”Guantanamo: My Journey”?
A: {”titles”: [”Guantanamo: My Journey”, ”Bismullah v. Gates”, ”Guantanamo Bay detention
     camp”], ”answer”: [”David Hicks”]}
QS: [EOQ]


                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: In which country did David Hicks receive his para−military training?
QS: (select) [retrieve] In which country did David Hicks receive his para−military training?
A: [”John Adams Project”, ”Camp Echo (Guantanamo Bay)”, ”Guantanamo Bay Museum of Art
     and History”, ”David Hicks”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”John Adams Project”, ”Camp Echo (Guantanamo Bay)”, ”
     Guantanamo Bay Museum of Art and History”, ”David Hicks”]. Question: In which country
     did David Hicks receive his para−military training?
A: {”titles”: [”John Adams Project”, ”Camp Echo (Guantanamo Bay)”, ”Guantanamo Bay
     Museum of Art and History”, ”David Hicks”], ”answer”: [”Afghanistan”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the singer of ”A Girl Like Me”?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the singer of ”A Girl Like Me”?
A: [”American Music Award”, ”Rihanna”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”American Music Award”, ”Rihanna”]. Question: Who is
     the singer of ”A Girl Like Me”?
A: {”titles”: [”American Music Award”, ”Rihanna”], ”answer”: [”Rihanna”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: How many awards did Rihana won in the American Music Awards of 2012?
QS: (select) [retrieve] How many awards did Rihana won in the American Music Awards of 2012?
A: [”American Music Awards of 2012”, ”APRA Music Awards of 2012”, ”List of awards and
     nominations received by TLC”, ”Native American Music Awards”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”American Music Awards of 2012”, ”APRA Music Awards
      of 2012”, ”List of awards and nominations received by TLC”, ”Native American Music
     Awards”]. Question: How many awards did Rihana won in the American Music Awards of
     2012?
A: {”titles”: [”American Music Awards of 2012”, ”APRA Music Awards of 2012”, ”List of awards
      and nominations received by TLC”, ”Native American Music Awards”], ”answer”: [”one”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When was Jeremy Horn born?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When was Jeremy Horn born?
A: [”Zaza Tkeshelashvili”, ”Jeremy Horn”, ”Jeremy Horn (singer)”, ”Ricardo Arona”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Zaza Tkeshelashvili”, ”Jeremy Horn”, ”Jeremy Horn (
     singer)”, ”Ricardo Arona”]. Question: When was Jeremy Horn born?
A: {”titles”: [”Zaza Tkeshelashvili”, ”Jeremy Horn”, ”Jeremy Horn (singer)”, ”Ricardo Arona”], ”
     answer”: [”August 25, 1975”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When was Renato Sobral born?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When was Renato Sobral born?
A: [”Brian Warren”, ”Renato Sobral”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Brian Warren”, ”Renato Sobral”]. Question: When was
     Renato Sobral born?
A: {”titles”: [”Brian Warren”, ”Renato Sobral”], ”answer”: [”September 7, 1975”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Lake Wales Medical Center is located in what city?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Lake Wales Medical Center is located in what city?
A: [”Baylor College of Medicine”, ”Lake Wales Medical Center”, ”Tufts University School of
     Medicine”, ”Hanford Community Medical Center”]


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Baylor College of Medicine”, ”Lake Wales Medical
     Center”, ”Tufts University School of Medicine”, ”Hanford Community Medical Center”].
     Question: Lake Wales Medical Center is located in what city?
A: {”titles”: [”Baylor College of Medicine”, ”Lake Wales Medical Center”, ”Tufts University
     School of Medicine”, ”Hanford Community Medical Center”], ”answer”: [”Polk County,
     Florida”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What was the population of Polk County in 2014?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What was the population of Polk County in 2014?
A: [”Banner University Medical Center Tucson”, ”Lake Wales, Florida”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Banner University Medical Center Tucson”, ”Lake Wales,
     Florida”]. Question: What was the population of Polk County in 2014?
A: {”titles”: [”Banner University Medical Center Tucson”, ”Lake Wales, Florida”], ”answer”:
     [”15,140”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What album was issued by Apple Records, and written, recorded, and released during John
     Lennon’s 18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What album was issued by Apple Records, and written, recorded, and
     released during John Lennon’s 18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
A: [”John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band”, ”Milk and Honey (album)”, ”Walls and Bridges”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band”, ”Milk and Honey (album
     )”, ”Walls and Bridges”]. Question: What album was issued by Apple Records, and written,
     recorded, and released during John Lennon’s 18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
A: {”titles”: [”John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band”, ”Milk and Honey (album)”, ”Walls and Bridges”],
     ”answer”: [”Walls and Bridges”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon on what album?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon on what album?
A: [”John Lennon Museum”, ”Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down and Out)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”John Lennon Museum”, ”Nobody Loves You (When You’
     re Down and Out)”]. Question: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon on what
     album?
A: {”titles”: [”John Lennon Museum”, ”Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down and Out)”], ”
     answer”: [”Walls and Bridges”]}
QS: [EOQ]

                            hotpotqa:       singlehop titleqa
Wikipedia Title: David Hicks
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Guantanamo: My Journey
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Murat Kurnaz
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published ”
     Guantanamo: My Journey”?
A: [”David Hicks”]

Q: In which country did David Hicks receive his para−military training?
A: [”Afghanistan”]



                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wikipedia Title: American Music Award
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Rihanna
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: American Music Awards of 2012
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the singer of ”A Girl Like Me”?
A: [”Rihanna”]

Q: How many awards did Rihana won in the American Music Awards of 2012?
A: [”one”]


Wikipedia Title: Renato Sobral
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Zaza Tkeshelashvili
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Jeremy Horn
<hidden for brevity>

Q: When was Jeremy Horn born?
A: [”August 25, 1975”]

Q: When was Renato Sobral born?
A: [”September 7, 1975”]


Wikipedia Title: Lake Wales Medical Center
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Lake Wales, Florida
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Tufts University School of Medicine
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Lake Wales Medical Center is located in what city?
A: [”Polk County, Florida”]

Q: What was the population of Polk County in 2014?
A: [”15,140”]


Wikipedia Title: Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down and Out)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Walls and Bridges
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Mother (John Lennon song)
<hidden for brevity>


                                               50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: What album was issued by Apple Records, and written, recorded, and released during John
     Lennon’s 18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
A: [”Walls and Bridges”]

Q: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon on what album?
A: [”Walls and Bridges”]

                      hotpotqa:        multihop titleqa (direct)
Wikipedia Title: David Hicks
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Guantanamo: My Journey
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Murat Kurnaz
<hidden for brevity>

Q: In which country did this Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and
     published ”Guantanamo: My Journey” receive para−military training?
A: [”Afghanistan”]


Wikipedia Title: American Music Award
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Rihanna
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: American Music Awards of 2012
<hidden for brevity>

Q: How many awards did the ”A Girl Like Me” singer win at the American Music Awards of
     2012?
A: [”one”]


Wikipedia Title: Renato Sobral
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Zaza Tkeshelashvili
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Jeremy Horn
<hidden for brevity>

Q: who is older Jeremy Horn or Renato Sobral ?
A: [”Jeremy Horn”]


Wikipedia Title: Lake Wales Medical Center
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Lake Wales, Florida
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Tufts University School of Medicine
<hidden for brevity>

Q: What was the 2014 population of the city where Lake Wales Medical Center is located?


                                                 51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: [”15,140”]


Wikipedia Title: Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down and Out)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Walls and Bridges
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Mother (John Lennon song)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon and released on what album that was issued by
     Apple Records, and was written, recorded, and released during his 18 month separation from
     Yoko Ono?
A: [”Walls and Bridges”]

                        hotpotqa:       multihop titleqa (cot)
Wikipedia Title: David Hicks
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Guantanamo: My Journey
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Murat Kurnaz
<hidden for brevity>

Q: In which country did this Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and
     published ”Guantanamo: My Journey” receive para−military training?
A: The Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published ”
     Guantanamo: My Journey” is David Hicks. David Hicks received his para−military training in
      Afghanistan. So the answer is: Afghanistan.


Wikipedia Title: American Music Award
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Rihanna
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: American Music Awards of 2012
<hidden for brevity>

Q: How many awards did the ”A Girl Like Me” singer win at the American Music Awards of
    2012?
A: The singer of ”A Girl Like Me” singer is Rihanna. In the American Music Awards of 2012,
    Rihana won one award. So the answer is: one.


Wikipedia Title: Renato Sobral
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Zaza Tkeshelashvili
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Jeremy Horn
<hidden for brevity>

Q: who is older Jeremy Horn or Renato Sobral ?


                                                 52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: Jeremy Horn was born on August 25, 1975. Renato Sobral was born on September 7, 1975.
     Thus, Jeremy Horn is older. So the answer is: Jeremy Horn.


Wikipedia Title: Lake Wales Medical Center
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Lake Wales, Florida
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Tufts University School of Medicine
<hidden for brevity>

Q: What was the 2014 population of the city where Lake Wales Medical Center is located?
A: Lake Wales Medical Center is located in the city of Polk County, Florida. The population of
    Polk County in 2014 was 15,140. So the answer is: 15,140.


Wikipedia Title: Nobody Loves You (When You’re Down and Out)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Walls and Bridges
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Mother (John Lennon song)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon and released on what album that was issued by
     Apple Records, and was written, recorded, and released during his 18 month separation from
    Yoko Ono?
A: The album issued by Apple Records, and written, recorded, and released during John Lennon’s
    18 month separation from Yoko Ono is Walls and Bridges. Nobody Loves You was written by
     John Lennon on Walls and Bridges album. So the answer is: Walls and Bridges.

                                 2wikimultihopqa: decomp
QC: Do director of film Coolie No. 1 (1995 Film) and director of film The Sensational Trial have
     the same nationality?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the director of the film Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)?
A: {”titles”: [”Hanro Smitsman”, ”Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)”], ”answer”: [”David Dhawan”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the director of the film The Sensational Trial?
A: {”titles”: [”Rachel Feldman”, ”The Sensational Trial”], ”answer”: [”Karl Freund”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What is David Dhawan’s nationality?
A: {”titles”: [”David Dhawan”, ”Brian Johnson (special effects artist)”], ”answer”: [”India”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What is Karl Freund’s nationality?
A: {”titles”: [”Karl Freund”, ”Ian Barry (director)”], ”answer”: [”Germany”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Hanro Smitsman”, ”Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)”, ”Rachel
     Feldman”, ”The Sensational Trial”, ”David Dhawan”, ”Brian Johnson (special effects artist)”,
     ”Karl Freund”, ”Ian Barry (director)”]. Question: Do director of film Coolie No. 1 (1995 Film
     ) and director of film The Sensational Trial have the same nationality?
A: [”no”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Which film has the director died later, The Gal Who Took the West or Twenty Plus Two?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the director of the film Twenty Plus?
A: {”titles”: [”Riki Gal”, ”Twenty Plus Two”], ”answer”: [”Joseph M. Newman”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the director of the film The Gal Who Took the West?
A: {”titles”: [”Querelle”, ”The Gal Who Took the West”], ”answer”: [”Frederick de Cordova”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When did Joseph M. Newman die?


                                               53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: {”titles”: [”Joseph M. Newman”, ”Thulasi (1987 film)”], ”answer”: [”January 23, 2006”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When did Fred de Cordova die?
A: {”titles”: [”Fred de Cordova”, ”Le Masque de la Meduse”], ”answer”: [”September 15, 2001”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Riki Gal”, ”Twenty Plus Two”, ”Querelle”, ”The Gal Who
     Took the West”, ”Joseph M. Newman”, ”Thulasi (1987 film)”, ”Fred de Cordova”, ”Le
     Masque de la Meduse”]. Question: Which film has the director died later, The Gal Who Took
     the West or Twenty Plus Two?
A: [”Twenty Plus Two”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the grandchild of Krishna Shah (Nepalese Royal)?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the child of Krishna Shah?
A: {”titles”: [”Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn”, ”Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)”, ”Diana Weston”, ”
     Albina du Boisrouvray”], ”answer”: [”Rudra Shah”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the child of Rudra Shah?
A: {”titles”: [”Jim Ramel Kjellgren”, ”Constance Anne Herschel”, ”Rudra Shah”], ”answer”: [”
     Prithvipati Shah”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn”, ”Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)
     ”, ”Diana Weston”, ”Albina du Boisrouvray”, ”Jim Ramel Kjellgren”, ”Constance Anne
     Herschel”, ”Rudra Shah”]. Question: Who is the grandchild of Krishna Shah (Nepalese Royal
     )?
A: [”Prithvipati Shah”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Where did the director of film Maddalena (1954 Film) die?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the director of the film Maddalena?
A: {”titles”: [”Ian Barry (director)”, ”Maddalena (1954 film)”, ”Brian Kennedy (gallery director)
     ”], ”answer”: [”Augusto Genina”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Where did Augusto Genina die?
A: {”titles”: [”Dana Blankstein”, ”Augusto Genina”, ”Peter Levin”, ”Olav Aaraas”], ”answer”: [”
     Rome”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Ian Barry (director)”, ”Maddalena (1954 film)”, ”Brian
     Kennedy (gallery director)”, ”Dana Blankstein”, ”Augusto Genina”, ”Peter Levin”, ”Olav
     Aaraas”]. Question: Where did the director of film Maddalena (1954 Film) die?
A: [”Rome”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who was born first out of Martin Hodge and Ivania Martinich?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When was Martin Hodge born?
A: {”titles”: [”Greg A. Hill (artist)”, ”Martin Hodge”, ”John Allen (Oxford University cricketer)”],
      ”answer”: [”4 February 1959”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When was Ivania Martinich born?
A: {”titles”: [”Tom Dickinson”, ”Ivania Martinich”, ”Wesley Barresi”, ”Henry Moore (cricketer)
     ”], ”answer”: [”25 July 1995”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Greg A. Hill (artist)”, ”Martin Hodge”, ”John Allen (
     Oxford University cricketer)”, ”Tom Dickinson”, ”Ivania Martinich”, ”Wesley Barresi”, ”
     Henry Moore (cricketer)”]. Question: Who was born first out of Martin Hodge and Ivania
     Martinich?
A: [”Martin Hodge”]
QS: [EOQ]


                           2wikimultihopqa: retrieve odqa
QC: Who is the director of the film Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the director of the film Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)?
A: [”Hanro Smitsman”, ”Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)”]


                                                 54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Hanro Smitsman”, ”Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)”]. Question:
     Who is the director of the film Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)?
A: {”titles”: [”Hanro Smitsman”, ”Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)”], ”answer”: [”David Dhawan”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the director of the film The Sensational Trial?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the director of the film The Sensational Trial?
A: [”Rachel Feldman”, ”The Sensational Trial”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Rachel Feldman”, ”The Sensational Trial”]. Question:
     Who is the director of the film The Sensational Trial?
A: {”titles”: [”Rachel Feldman”, ”The Sensational Trial”], ”answer”: [”Karl Freund”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What is David Dhawan’s nationality?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What is David Dhawan’s nationality?
A: [”David Dhawan”, ”Brian Johnson (special effects artist)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”David Dhawan”, ”Brian Johnson (special effects artist)”].
     Question: What is David Dhawan’s nationality?
A: {”titles”: [”David Dhawan”, ”Brian Johnson (special effects artist)”], ”answer”: [”India”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What is Karl Freund’s nationality?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What is Karl Freund’s nationality?
A: [”Karl Freund”, ”Ian Barry (director)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Karl Freund”, ”Ian Barry (director)”]. Question: What is
     Karl Freund’s nationality?
A: {”titles”: [”Karl Freund”, ”Ian Barry (director)”], ”answer”: [”Germany”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the director of the film Twenty Plus?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the director of the film Twenty Plus?
A: [”Riki Gal”, ”Twenty Plus Two”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Riki Gal”, ”Twenty Plus Two”]. Question: Who is the
     director of the film Twenty Plus?
A: {”titles”: [”Riki Gal”, ”Twenty Plus Two”], ”answer”: [”Joseph M. Newman”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the director of the film The Gal Who Took the West?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the director of the film The Gal Who Took the West?
A: [”Querelle”, ”The Gal Who Took the West”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Querelle”, ”The Gal Who Took the West”]. Question:
     Who is the director of the film The Gal Who Took the West?
A: {”titles”: [”Querelle”, ”The Gal Who Took the West”], ”answer”: [”Frederick de Cordova”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When did Joseph M. Newman die?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When did Joseph M. Newman die?
A: [”Joseph M. Newman”, ”Thulasi (1987 film)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Joseph M. Newman”, ”Thulasi (1987 film)”]. Question:
     When did Joseph M. Newman die?
A: {”titles”: [”Joseph M. Newman”, ”Thulasi (1987 film)”], ”answer”: [”January 23, 2006”]}
QS: [EOQ]



                                                 55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: When did Fred de Cordova die?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When did Fred de Cordova die?
A: [”Fred de Cordova”, ”Le Masque de la Meduse”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Fred de Cordova”, ”Le Masque de la Meduse”]. Question:
     When did Fred de Cordova die?
A: {”titles”: [”Fred de Cordova”, ”Le Masque de la Meduse”], ”answer”: [”September 15, 2001”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the child of Krishna Shah?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the child of Krishna Shah?
A: [”Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn”, ”Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)”, ”Diana Weston”, ”Albina du
     Boisrouvray”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn”, ”Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal
     )”, ”Diana Weston”, ”Albina du Boisrouvray”]. Question: Who is the child of Krishna Shah?
A: {”titles”: [”Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn”, ”Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)”, ”Diana Weston”, ”
     Albina du Boisrouvray”], ”answer”: [”Rudra Shah”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the child of Rudra Shah?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the child of Rudra Shah?
A: [”Jim Ramel Kjellgren”, ”Constance Anne Herschel”, ”Rudra Shah”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Jim Ramel Kjellgren”, ”Constance Anne Herschel”, ”
     Rudra Shah”]. Question: Who is the child of Rudra Shah?
A: {”titles”: [”Jim Ramel Kjellgren”, ”Constance Anne Herschel”, ”Rudra Shah”], ”answer”: [”
     Prithvipati Shah”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the director of the film Maddalena?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the director of the film Maddalena?
A: [”Ian Barry (director)”, ”Maddalena (1954 film)”, ”Brian Kennedy (gallery director)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Ian Barry (director)”, ”Maddalena (1954 film)”, ”Brian
     Kennedy (gallery director)”]. Question: Who is the director of the film Maddalena?
A: {”titles”: [”Ian Barry (director)”, ”Maddalena (1954 film)”, ”Brian Kennedy (gallery director)
     ”], ”answer”: [”Augusto Genina”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Where did Augusto Genina die?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Where did Augusto Genina die?
A: [”Dana Blankstein”, ”Augusto Genina”, ”Peter Levin”, ”Olav Aaraas”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Dana Blankstein”, ”Augusto Genina”, ”Peter Levin”, ”
     Olav Aaraas”]. Question: Where did Augusto Genina die?
A: {”titles”: [”Dana Blankstein”, ”Augusto Genina”, ”Peter Levin”, ”Olav Aaraas”], ”answer”: [”
     Rome”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When was Martin Hodge born?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When was Martin Hodge born?
A: [”Greg A. Hill (artist)”, ”Martin Hodge”, ”John Allen (Oxford University cricketer)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Greg A. Hill (artist)”, ”Martin Hodge”, ”John Allen (
     Oxford University cricketer)”]. Question: When was Martin Hodge born?
A: {”titles”: [”Greg A. Hill (artist)”, ”Martin Hodge”, ”John Allen (Oxford University cricketer)”],
     ”answer”: [”4 February 1959”]}
QS: [EOQ]


                                                56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: When was Ivania Martinich born?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When was Ivania Martinich born?
A: [”Tom Dickinson”, ”Ivania Martinich”, ”Wesley Barresi”, ”Henry Moore (cricketer)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Tom Dickinson”, ”Ivania Martinich”, ”Wesley Barresi”, ”
     Henry Moore (cricketer)”]. Question: When was Ivania Martinich born?
A: {”titles”: [”Tom Dickinson”, ”Ivania Martinich”, ”Wesley Barresi”, ”Henry Moore (cricketer)
     ”], ”answer”: [”25 July 1995”]}
QS: [EOQ]

                       2wikimultihopqa:            singlehop titleqa
Wikipedia Title: David Dhawan
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Howard W. Koch
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: The Sensational Trial
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Karl Freund
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the director of the film Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)?
A: [”David Dhawan”]

Q: Who is the director of the film The Sensational Trial?
A: [”Karl Freund”]

Q: What is David Dhawan’s nationality?
A: [”India”]

Q: What is Karl Freund’s nationality?
A: [”Germany”]


Wikipedia Title: Fred de Cordova
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Thulasi (1987 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Joseph M. Newman
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: The Gal Who Took the West
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Twenty Plus Two
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the director of the film Twenty Plus?
A: [”Joseph M. Newman”]

Q: Who is the director of the film The Gal Who Took the West?


                                                  57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: [”Frederick de Cordova”]

Q: When did Joseph M. Newman die?
A: [”January 23, 2006”]

Q: When did Fred de Cordova die?
A: [”September 15, 2001”]


Wikipedia Title: Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Rudra Shah
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the child of Krishna Shah?
A: [”Rudra Shah”]

Q: Who is the child of Rudra Shah?
A: [”Prithvipati Shah”]


Wikipedia Title: Augusto Genina
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Ian Barry (director)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Maddalena (1954 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the director of the film Maddalena?
A: [”Augusto Genina”]

Q: Where did Augusto Genina die?
A: [”Rome”]


Wikipedia Title: Martin Hodge
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Ivania Martinich
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Tom Dickinson
<hidden for brevity>

Q: When was Martin Hodge born?
A: [”4 February 1959”]

Q: When was Ivania Martinich born?
A: [”25 July 1995”]

                 2wikimultihopqa:          multihop titleqa (direct)
Wikipedia Title: David Dhawan
<hidden for brevity>


                                                 58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wikipedia Title: Howard W. Koch
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: The Sensational Trial
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Karl Freund
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Do director of film Coolie No. 1 (1995 Film) and director of film The Sensational Trial have the
     same nationality?
A: [”no”]


Wikipedia Title: Fred de Cordova
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Thulasi (1987 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Joseph M. Newman
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: The Gal Who Took the West
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Twenty Plus Two
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Which film has the director died later, The Gal Who Took the West or Twenty Plus Two?
A: [”Twenty Plus Two”]


Wikipedia Title: Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Rudra Shah
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the grandchild of Krishna Shah (Nepalese Royal)?
A: [”Prithvipati Shah”]


Wikipedia Title: Augusto Genina
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Ian Barry (director)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Maddalena (1954 film)
<hidden for brevity>



                                                 59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: Where did the director of film Maddalena (1954 Film) die?
A: [”Rome”]


Wikipedia Title: Martin Hodge
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Ivania Martinich
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Tom Dickinson
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who was born first out of Martin Hodge and Ivania Martinich?
A: [”Martin Hodge”]

                   2wikimultihopqa:            multihop titleqa (cot)
Wikipedia Title: David Dhawan
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Howard W. Koch
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: The Sensational Trial
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Coolie No. 1 (1995 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Karl Freund
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Do director of film Coolie No. 1 (1995 Film) and director of film The Sensational Trial have the
     same nationality?
A: Coolie No. 1 (1995 film) was directed by David Dhawan. The Sensational Trial was directed by
     Karl Freund. David Dhawan’s nationality is India. Karl Freund’s nationality is Germany.
    Thus, they do not have the same nationality. So the answer is: no.


Wikipedia Title: Fred de Cordova
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Thulasi (1987 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Joseph M. Newman
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: The Gal Who Took the West
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Twenty Plus Two
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Which film has the director died later, The Gal Who Took the West or Twenty Plus Two?
A: The film Twenty Plus Two was directed by Joseph M. Newman. The Gal Who Took the West
    was directed by Frederick de Cordova. Joseph M. Newman died on January 23, 2006. Fred de
     Cordova died on September 15, 2001. Thus, the person to die later from the two is Twenty
    Plus Two. So the answer is: Twenty Plus Two.


                                                60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wikipedia Title: Ana Gruzinsky−Golitsyn
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Rudra Shah
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Krishna Shah (Nepalese royal)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the grandchild of Krishna Shah (Nepalese Royal)?
A: Krishna Shah has a child named Rudra Shah. Rudra Shah has a child named Prithvipati Shah.
    Thus, Krishna Shah has a grandchild named Prithvipati Shah. So the answer is: Prithvipati
    Shah.


Wikipedia Title: Augusto Genina
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Ian Barry (director)
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Maddalena (1954 film)
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Where did the director of film Maddalena (1954 Film) die?
A: The film Maddalena is directed by Augusto Genina. Augusto Genina died in Rome. So the
    answer is: Rome.


Wikipedia Title: Martin Hodge
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Ivania Martinich
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Tom Dickinson
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who was born first out of Martin Hodge and Ivania Martinich?
A: Martin Hodge was born on 4 February 1959. Ivania Martinich was born on 25 July 1995. Thus,
    Martin Hodge was born first. So the answer is: Martin Hodge.

                                    musique ans: decomp
QC: When did the first large winter carnival take place in the city where CIMI−FM is licensed to
     broadcast?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What city is CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast in?
A: {”titles”: [”KWMZ−FM”, ”CIMI−FM”, ”KSAO (FM)”, ”WTTL−FM”, ”KOLU”, ”WORW”, ”
     WLRX (FM)”], ”answer”: [”Quebec City”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When did the first large winter carnival in Quebec City take place?
A: {”titles”: [”WRQY”, ”Quebec Winter Carnival”, ”KBCR−FM”], ”answer”: [”1894”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”KWMZ−FM”, ”CIMI−FM”, ”KSAO (FM)”, ”WTTL−FM
     ”, ”KOLU”, ”WORW”, ”WLRX (FM)”, ”WRQY”, ”Quebec Winter Carnival”, ”KBCR−FM
     ”]. Question: When did the first large winter carnival take place in the city where CIMI−FM is
      licensed to broadcast?
A: [”1894”]
QS: [EOQ]



                                                 61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QC: What is the headquarters for the organization who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: {”titles”: [”ISO 3166−2:BM”, ”ISO 3166−2:IS”, ”ISO 3166−2:IT”, ”ISO 3166−2:BB”, ”ISO
     21500”, ”ISO 3166−2:ET”, ”ISO 3166−2:AT”, ”ISO 3166−2:CG”, ”ISO 22000”], ”answer”:
     [”International Organization for Standardization”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Where is the headquarters for International Organization for
     Standardization?
A: {”titles”: [”International Organization for Standardization”, ”ISO 4031”, ”ISO 3166−2:CN”, ”
     Unicode”, ”ISO 3166−2:GH”, ”ISO 3166−2:AO”, ”ISO/TC 68”, ”ISO 7001”, ”ISO 3307”], ”
     answer”: [”Geneva”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”ISO 3166−2:BM”, ”ISO 3166−2:IS”, ”ISO 3166−2:IT”, ”
     ISO 3166−2:BB”, ”ISO 21500”, ”ISO 3166−2:ET”, ”ISO 3166−2:AT”, ”ISO 3166−2:CG”, ”
     ISO 22000”, ”International Organization for Standardization”, ”ISO 4031”, ”ISO 3166−2:CN
     ”, ”Unicode”, ”ISO 3166−2:GH”, ”ISO 3166−2:AO”, ”ISO/TC 68”, ”ISO 7001”, ”ISO
     3307”]. Question: What is the headquarters for the organization who sets the standards for
     ISO 21500?
A: [”Geneva”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: How long is the US border with the country that borders the state where Finding Dory takes
     place?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] In which state does Finding Dory take place?
A: {”titles”: [”Finding Dory”, ”Latvia”, ”List of countries that border only one other country”, ”
     Removal of Hungary’s border fence with Austria”], ”answer”: [”California”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Which country shares a border with California?
A: {”titles”: [”Mexico−United States border”, ”Kingdom of Gera”, ”Pesticide”, ”Currie Cup”], ”
     answer”: [”Mexico”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What is the length of the US border with Mexico?
A: {”titles”: [”Piscataqua River border dispute”, ”Share a Coke”, ”Mexico−United States border”,
     ”Hotel Arbez”], ”answer”: [”1,989 mi”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Finding Dory”, ”Latvia”, ”List of countries that border
     only one other country”, ”Removal of Hungary’s border fence with Austria”, ”Mexico−
     United States border”, ”Kingdom of Gera”, ”Pesticide”, ”Currie Cup”, ”Piscataqua River
     border dispute”, ”Share a Coke”, ”Mexico−United States border”, ”Hotel Arbez”]. Question:
     How long is the US border with the country that borders the state where Finding Dory takes
     place?
A: [”1,989 mi”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When was Neville A. Stanton’s employer founded?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the employer of Neville A. Stanton?
A: {”titles”: [”Harriot Stanton Blatch”, ”Robichaud v Canada (Treasury Board)”, ”The Peggy
     Neville Show”, ”Stanton Township, Champaign County, Illinois”, ”Women’s suffrage in the
     United States”, ”Neville A. Stanton”], ”answer”: [”University of Southampton”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] When was the University of Southampton founded?
A: {”titles”: [”Southampton”, ”Presley Neville”], ”answer”: [”1862”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Harriot Stanton Blatch”, ”Robichaud v Canada (Treasury
     Board)”, ”The Peggy Neville Show”, ”Stanton Township, Champaign County, Illinois”, ”
     Women’s suffrage in the United States”, ”Neville A. Stanton”, ”Southampton”, ”Presley
     Neville”]. Question: When was Neville A. Stanton’s employer founded?
A: [”1862”]
QS: [EOQ]


QC: In which county was the birthplace of the Smoke in tha City performer?
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Who is the performer of Smoke in the City?


                                                62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: {”titles”: [”Nicotine marketing”, ”Khabarovsky District”, ”Beyonce”, ”Asthma”, ”Smoke in tha
      City”], ”answer”: [”MC Eiht”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] What is the birthplace of MC Eiht?
A: {”titles”: [”Cherokee City, Arkansas”, ”MC Eiht”, ”Biysky District”], ”answer”: [”Compton”]}
QS: (select) [retrieve odqa] Compton is located in which county?
A: {”titles”: [”Vilnius County”, ”Biblioteca Ayacucho”, ”Compton, California”], ”answer”: [”Los
     Angeles County”]}
QS: (select) [multihop titleqa] Titles: [”Nicotine marketing”, ”Khabarovsky District”, ”Beyonce”,
     ”Asthma”, ”Smoke in tha City”, ”Cherokee City, Arkansas”, ”MC Eiht”, ”Biysky District”, ”
     Vilnius County”, ”Biblioteca Ayacucho”, ”Compton, California”]. Question: In which county
     was the birthplace of the Smoke in tha City performer?
A: [”Los Angeles County”]
QS: [EOQ]


                               musique ans: retrieve odqa
QC: What city is CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast in?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What city is CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast in?
A: [”KWMZ−FM”, ”CIMI−FM”, ”KSAO (FM)”, ”WTTL−FM”, ”KOLU”, ”WORW”, ”WLRX (
     FM)”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”KWMZ−FM”, ”CIMI−FM”, ”KSAO (FM)”, ”WTTL−FM
     ”, ”KOLU”, ”WORW”, ”WLRX (FM)”]. Question: What city is CIMI−FM is licensed to
     broadcast in?
A: {”titles”: [”KWMZ−FM”, ”CIMI−FM”, ”KSAO (FM)”, ”WTTL−FM”, ”KOLU”, ”WORW”, ”
     WLRX (FM)”], ”answer”: [”Quebec City”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When did the first large winter carnival in Quebec City take place?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When did the first large winter carnival in Quebec City take place?
A: [”WRQY”, ”Quebec Winter Carnival”, ”KBCR−FM”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”WRQY”, ”Quebec Winter Carnival”, ”KBCR−FM”].
     Question: When did the first large winter carnival in Quebec City take place?
A: {”titles”: [”WRQY”, ”Quebec Winter Carnival”, ”KBCR−FM”], ”answer”: [”1894”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: [”ISO 3166−2:BM”, ”ISO 3166−2:IS”, ”ISO 3166−2:IT”, ”ISO 3166−2:BB”, ”ISO 21500”, ”
     ISO 3166−2:ET”, ”ISO 3166−2:AT”, ”ISO 3166−2:CG”, ”ISO 22000”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”ISO 3166−2:BM”, ”ISO 3166−2:IS”, ”ISO 3166−2:IT”, ”
     ISO 3166−2:BB”, ”ISO 21500”, ”ISO 3166−2:ET”, ”ISO 3166−2:AT”, ”ISO 3166−2:CG”, ”
     ISO 22000”]. Question: Who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: {”titles”: [”ISO 3166−2:BM”, ”ISO 3166−2:IS”, ”ISO 3166−2:IT”, ”ISO 3166−2:BB”, ”ISO
     21500”, ”ISO 3166−2:ET”, ”ISO 3166−2:AT”, ”ISO 3166−2:CG”, ”ISO 22000”], ”answer”:
     [”International Organization for Standardization”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Where is the headquarters for International Organization for Standardization?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Where is the headquarters for International Organization for Standardization
     ?
A: [”International Organization for Standardization”, ”ISO 4031”, ”ISO 3166−2:CN”, ”Unicode”,
     ”ISO 3166−2:GH”, ”ISO 3166−2:AO”, ”ISO/TC 68”, ”ISO 7001”, ”ISO 3307”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”International Organization for Standardization”, ”ISO
     4031”, ”ISO 3166−2:CN”, ”Unicode”, ”ISO 3166−2:GH”, ”ISO 3166−2:AO”, ”ISO/TC 68”,
     ”ISO 7001”, ”ISO 3307”]. Question: Where is the headquarters for International Organization
      for Standardization?


                                                63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: {”titles”: [”International Organization for Standardization”, ”ISO 4031”, ”ISO 3166−2:CN”, ”
     Unicode”, ”ISO 3166−2:GH”, ”ISO 3166−2:AO”, ”ISO/TC 68”, ”ISO 7001”, ”ISO 3307”], ”
     answer”: [”Geneva”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: In which state does Finding Dory take place?
QS: (select) [retrieve] In which state does Finding Dory take place?
A: [”Finding Dory”, ”Latvia”, ”List of countries that border only one other country”, ”Removal of
     Hungary’s border fence with Austria”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Finding Dory”, ”Latvia”, ”List of countries that border
     only one other country”, ”Removal of Hungary’s border fence with Austria”]. Question: In
     which state does Finding Dory take place?
A: {”titles”: [”Finding Dory”, ”Latvia”, ”List of countries that border only one other country”, ”
     Removal of Hungary’s border fence with Austria”], ”answer”: [”California”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Which country shares a border with California?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Which country shares a border with California?
A: [”Mexico−United States border”, ”Kingdom of Gera”, ”Pesticide”, ”Currie Cup”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Mexico−United States border”, ”Kingdom of Gera”, ”
     Pesticide”, ”Currie Cup”]. Question: Which country shares a border with California?
A: {”titles”: [”Mexico−United States border”, ”Kingdom of Gera”, ”Pesticide”, ”Currie Cup”], ”
     answer”: [”Mexico”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What is the length of the US border with Mexico?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What is the length of the US border with Mexico?
A: [”Piscataqua River border dispute”, ”Share a Coke”, ”Mexico−United States border”, ”Hotel
     Arbez”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Piscataqua River border dispute”, ”Share a Coke”, ”
     Mexico−United States border”, ”Hotel Arbez”]. Question: What is the length of the US
     border with Mexico?
A: {”titles”: [”Piscataqua River border dispute”, ”Share a Coke”, ”Mexico−United States border”,
     ”Hotel Arbez”], ”answer”: [”1,989 mi”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the employer of Neville A. Stanton?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the employer of Neville A. Stanton?
A: [”Harriot Stanton Blatch”, ”Robichaud v Canada (Treasury Board)”, ”The Peggy Neville Show
     ”, ”Stanton Township, Champaign County, Illinois”, ”Women’s suffrage in the United States”,
      ”Neville A. Stanton”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Harriot Stanton Blatch”, ”Robichaud v Canada (Treasury
     Board)”, ”The Peggy Neville Show”, ”Stanton Township, Champaign County, Illinois”, ”
     Women’s suffrage in the United States”, ”Neville A. Stanton”]. Question: Who is the
     employer of Neville A. Stanton?
A: {”titles”: [”Harriot Stanton Blatch”, ”Robichaud v Canada (Treasury Board)”, ”The Peggy
     Neville Show”, ”Stanton Township, Champaign County, Illinois”, ”Women’s suffrage in the
     United States”, ”Neville A. Stanton”], ”answer”: [”University of Southampton”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: When was the University of Southampton founded?
QS: (select) [retrieve] When was the University of Southampton founded?
A: [”Southampton”, ”Presley Neville”]



                                                64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Southampton”, ”Presley Neville”]. Question: When was
     the University of Southampton founded?
A: {”titles”: [”Southampton”, ”Presley Neville”], ”answer”: [”1862”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Who is the performer of Smoke in the City?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Who is the performer of Smoke in the City?
A: [”Nicotine marketing”, ”Khabarovsky District”, ”Beyonce”, ”Asthma”, ”Smoke in tha City”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Nicotine marketing”, ”Khabarovsky District”, ”Beyonce”,
     ”Asthma”, ”Smoke in tha City”]. Question: Who is the performer of Smoke in the City?
A: {”titles”: [”Nicotine marketing”, ”Khabarovsky District”, ”Beyonce”, ”Asthma”, ”Smoke in tha
      City”], ”answer”: [”MC Eiht”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: What is the birthplace of MC Eiht?
QS: (select) [retrieve] What is the birthplace of MC Eiht?
A: [”Cherokee City, Arkansas”, ”MC Eiht”, ”Biysky District”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Cherokee City, Arkansas”, ”MC Eiht”, ”Biysky District”].
     Question: What is the birthplace of MC Eiht?
A: {”titles”: [”Cherokee City, Arkansas”, ”MC Eiht”, ”Biysky District”], ”answer”: [”Compton”]}
QS: [EOQ]


QC: Compton is located in which county?
QS: (select) [retrieve] Compton is located in which county?
A: [”Vilnius County”, ”Biblioteca Ayacucho”, ”Compton, California”]
QS: (select) [singlehop titleqa] Titles: [”Vilnius County”, ”Biblioteca Ayacucho”, ”Compton,
     California”]. Question: Compton is located in which county?
A: {”titles”: [”Vilnius County”, ”Biblioteca Ayacucho”, ”Compton, California”], ”answer”: [”Los
     Angeles County”]}
QS: [EOQ]

                        musique ans:           singlehop titleqa
Wikipedia Title: CIMI−FM
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Quebec Winter Carnival
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: KELD−FM
<hidden for brevity>

Q: What city is CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast in?
A: [”Quebec City”]

Q: When did the first large winter carnival in Quebec City take place?
A: [”1894”]


Wikipedia Title: ISO/TC 68
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: ISO 21500
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: ISO 3166−2:GH
<hidden for brevity>


                                                65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q: Who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: [”International Organization for Standardization”]

Q: Where is the headquarters for International Organization for Standardization?
A: [”Geneva”]


Wikipedia Title: Mexico−United States border
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Mexico−United States border
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Finding Dory
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: India
<hidden for brevity>

Q: In which state does Finding Dory take place?
A: [”California”]

Q: Which country shares a border with California?
A: [”Mexico”]

Q: What is the length of the US border with Mexico?
A: [”1,989 mi”]


Wikipedia Title: Southampton
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Jonathan Stanton
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Neville A. Stanton
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the employer of Neville A. Stanton?
A: [”University of Southampton”]

Q: When was the University of Southampton founded?
A: [”1862”]


Wikipedia Title: Compton, California
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Smoke in tha City
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: MC Eiht
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Eastern Bengal and Assam
<hidden for brevity>

Q: Who is the performer of Smoke in the City?


                                                  66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A: [”MC Eiht”]

Q: What is the birthplace of MC Eiht?
A: [”Compton”]

Q: Compton is located in which county?
A: [”Los Angeles County”]

                    musique ans:          multihop titleqa (direct)
Wikipedia Title: CIMI−FM
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Quebec Winter Carnival
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: KELD−FM
<hidden for brevity>

Q: When did the first large winter carnival take place in the city where CIMI−FM is licensed to
     broadcast?
A: [”1894”]


Wikipedia Title: ISO/TC 68
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: ISO 21500
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: ISO 3166−2:GH
<hidden for brevity>

Q: What is the headquarters for the organization who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: [”Geneva”]


Wikipedia Title: Mexico−United States border
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Mexico−United States border
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Finding Dory
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: India
<hidden for brevity>

Q: How long is the US border with the country that borders the state where Finding Dory takes
     place?
A: [”1,989 mi”]


Wikipedia Title: Southampton
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Jonathan Stanton
<hidden for brevity>



                                                67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wikipedia Title: Neville A. Stanton
<hidden for brevity>

Q: When was Neville A. Stanton’s employer founded?
A: [”1862”]


Wikipedia Title: Compton, California
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Smoke in tha City
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: MC Eiht
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Eastern Bengal and Assam
<hidden for brevity>

Q: In which county was the birthplace of the Smoke in tha City performer?
A: [”Los Angeles County”]

                      musique ans:         multihop titleqa (cot)
Wikipedia Title: CIMI−FM
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Quebec Winter Carnival
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: KELD−FM
<hidden for brevity>

Q: When did the first large winter carnival take place in the city where CIMI−FM is licensed to
    broadcast?
A: CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast in Quebec City. The first large winter carnival in Quebec
    City took place in 1894. So the answer is: 1894.


Wikipedia Title: ISO/TC 68
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: ISO 21500
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: ISO 3166−2:GH
<hidden for brevity>

Q: What is the headquarters for the organization who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: The standards for ISO 21500 were set by International Organization for Standardization. The
    International Organization for Standardization has headquarters in Geneva. So the answer is:
    Geneva.


Wikipedia Title: Mexico−United States border
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Mexico−United States border
<hidden for brevity>



                                                68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wikipedia Title: Finding Dory
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: India
<hidden for brevity>

Q: How long is the US border with the country that borders the state where Finding Dory takes
     place?
A: Finding Dory is supposed to take place in California. The country that shares a border with
     California is Mexico. The length of the us border with Mexico is 1,989 mi. So the answer is:
     1,989 mi.


Wikipedia Title: Southampton
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Jonathan Stanton
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Neville A. Stanton
<hidden for brevity>

Q: When was Neville A. Stanton’s employer founded?
A: The employer of Neville A. Stanton is University of Southampton. The University of
    Southampton was founded in 1862. So the answer is: 1862.


Wikipedia Title: Compton, California
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Smoke in tha City
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: MC Eiht
<hidden for brevity>

Wikipedia Title: Eastern Bengal and Assam
<hidden for brevity>

Q: In which county was the birthplace of the Smoke in tha City performer?
A: The performer of Smoke in tha City is MC Eiht. MC Eiht’s birthplace is Compton. Compton is
     located in the county of Los Angeles County. So the answer is: Los Angeles County.


                                                69
