Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G AME -T HEORETIC U NDERSTANDING O F M ISCLASSI -
FICATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         This paper analyzes various types of image misclassiﬁcation from a game-
         theoretic view. Particularly, we consider the misclassiﬁcation of clean, adver-
         sarial, and corrupted images and characterize it through the distribution of multi-
         order interactions. We discover that the distribution of multi-order interactions
         varies across the types of misclassiﬁcation. For example, misclassiﬁed adversar-
         ial images have a higher strength of high-order interactions than correctly classi-
         ﬁed clean images, which indicates that adversarial perturbations create spurious
         features that arise from complex cooperation between pixels. By contrast, mis-
         classiﬁed corrupted images have a lower strength of low-order interactions than
         correctly classiﬁed clean images, which indicates that corruptions break the local
         cooperation between pixels. We also provide the ﬁrst analysis of Vision Trans-
         formers using interactions. We found that Vision Transformers show a different
         tendency in the distribution of interactions from that in CNNs, and this implies
         that they exploit the features that CNNs do not use for the prediction. Our study
         demonstrates that the recent game-theoretic analysis of deep learning models can
         be broadened to analyze various malfunctions of deep learning models including
         Vision Transformers by using the distribution, order, and sign of interactions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning models misclassify images for various reasons. They fail to classify some clean
images in a dataset, and they also misclassify because of adversarial perturbations and common cor-
ruption. Understanding the causes of misclassiﬁcations in deep learning models is vital for their safe
applications in society. Several recent studies provided new directions for understanding deep learn-
ing models from game-theoretic viewpoints (Cheng et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). For example, adversarial images (Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Szegedy et al., 2014)—the images that are slightly but maliciously perturbed to fool deep learning
models—were characterized using the interaction (Ren et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021), which is
originally used as a measure of the synergy of two players in game theory (Grabisch & Roubens,
1999). In image classiﬁcation, the average interaction I of an image is a measure of the average
change in the conﬁdence score （i.e., the softmax value of logits of the true class）by the coopera-
tion of various pairs of pixels.
                                          I = E(i,j) [I(i, j)].
Here, I(i, j) denotes the interaction of the i- and j-th pixels, which is, roughly speaking, deﬁned by
the difference in their contributions to the conﬁdence score:
                              I(i, j) = g(i, j) − g(i) − g(j) + const.,
where g(k) relates to the contribution of the k-th pixel to the conﬁdence score. The formal deﬁnition
of I(i, j) will be provided later in this paper.
When I(i, j) ≈ 0 for a pixel pair, it indicates that the two pixels contribute to the model prediction
almost independently. By contrast, a large interaction indicates that the combination of pixels (e.g.,
edges) contributes to the model prediction in synergy.
                                                   P (s) An interaction can be presented as an average
                                                1
of interactions of different orders, I(i, j) = n−1    sI   , where I (s) and n denote the interaction of

order s and the number of the pixels, respectively. The decomposition into I (s) s gives a more de-
tailed view of the cooperation of pixels; low-order interactions measure simple cooperation between


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


pixels, whereas high-order interactions measure relatively global and complex concepts. In other
words, low- and high-order interactions correspond to different categories of features. Cheng et al.
(2021) investigated the link between the order of interactions and the image features. They showed
that in general, low-order interactions reﬂect local shapes and textures, whereas high-order interac-
tions reﬂect global shapes and textures that frequently appear in training samples. Ren et al. (2021)
showed that adversarial perturbations affect high-order interactions and adversarially trained mod-
els are robust to perturbations to the features related to high-order interactions. Zhang et al. (2021)
found that the dropout regularizes the low-order interactions. These results suggest that interactions
can characterize how deep learning models view images; thus, one can obtain a deeper understand-
ing of the cause of the model predictions through interactions.
In this study, we investigate one of the most fundamental issues of deep learning models, misclas-
siﬁcation, through the lens of interactions. We examine various types of misclassiﬁcations; we
consider misclassiﬁcation of clean, adversarial, and corrupted images, and characterize them by the
distribution, order, and sign of the interactions. In the experiments, we contrasted the distribution of
interactions of misclassiﬁed images to that of successfully classiﬁed clean images, thereby revealing
which types of features are more exploited to make a prediction for each set of images. The re-
sults show that these three types of misclassiﬁcations have a distinct tendency in interactions, which
indicates that each of them arises from different causes. The summarized results are as follows:

Misclassiﬁcation of clean images. The distributions of interactions did not present a large dif-
ference between misclassiﬁed clean images and those successfully classiﬁed. This result indicates
that the misclassiﬁcation is not triggered by distracting the model from the useful features, and the
model relies on similar features in images regardless of the correctness of the prediction.

Misclassiﬁcation of adversarial images. We observed a sharp increase in the strength of inter-
actions in high order, indicating that for adversarial images, the model exploits more features that
relate to interactions in these orders. Namely, the misclassiﬁcation is triggered by the destruction of
the model from the useful cooperation of pixels in low order to the spurious one in other orders.

Misclassiﬁcation of corruption images. We observed that while the interactions moderately in-
creased in high order, they also decrease in low- and middle-order interactions. This indicates that
the model can no longer use the originally observed pixel cooperations because of the corruption
and gain useless or even harmful pixel cooperations in high order to make a prediction.
The abovementioned results were observed on convolutional neural networks (CNNs; He2). We
investigated whether these results generalize to Vision Transformers, which recently shows a better
performance in image recognition tasks over CNNs. For DeiT-Ti (Touvron et al., 2021) and Swin-
T Transformer (Liu et al., 2021), most results hold but with stronger contrast. Besides, for the
misclassiﬁcation of clean images, where CNNs showed no particular difference in the distribution
of the interactions between correctly classiﬁed and misclassiﬁed images, the Vision Transformers
showed a striking difference. This suggests that the characteristics of the predictions are more
clearly exhibited for Vision Transformers than CNNs, and thus, the analysis with interactions can
be exploited even after the shift from CNNs to Vision Transformers.
We also conducted experiments on adversarial attacks and transferability as they have been discussed
extensively in the literature (Croce & Hein, 2020; Dong et al., 2018; Ilyas et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2021; Yang et al., 2021). We discovered that when images are adversarially perturbed, the distribu-
tion of interactions shifts to negative values. This reveals that adversarial perturbations break the
features that the model exploits or even alter them to misleading ones. We also discovered that
the adversarial transferability depends on the order of interaction; adversarial images with higher
interactions in high order transfer better when adversarially perturbed using ResNet-18, whereas,
interestingly, they transfer less when Swin-T is used. This contrastive tendency is analogous to the
recent observations that the adversarial images are more perturbed in the high-frequency domain
with CNNs and in the low-frequency domain with Vision Transformers (Kim & Lee, 2022).
The contributions of our study can be summarized as follows:
       • This study investigates various types of misclassiﬁcations from a game-theoretic perspec-
         tive for the ﬁrst time. In particular, we characterize the misclassiﬁcation of clean, adversar-
         ial, and corrupted images with the distribution, order, and sign of the interactions.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • We discover that the three types of misclassiﬁcations have different tendencies in interac-
         tions, which indicates that each type of misclassiﬁcation is triggered by different causes.
         Particularly, the dominant order of interactions suggests which category of features affects
         the prediction more, which is different between the three types of misclassiﬁcation.
       • We provide the ﬁrst analysis of Vision Transformers by using interactions and found that
         the difference in distributions of interactions between misclassiﬁed and correctly classiﬁed
         images are clearer and also different from the case with CNNs. We also ﬁnd that the im-
         ages that are more adversarially transferable have the opposite tendency in the interactions
         between Vision Transformers and CNNs.

2   R ELATED WORK
Recent studies have shown that interactions give a new perspective to understanding the machine
vision of deep learning models (Cheng et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021). For example, Wang et al. (2021) showed that the transferability of ad-
versarial images has a negative correlation to the interactions and provided a uniﬁed explanation
of the effectiveness of various methods proposed to enhance the transferability. Ren et al. (2021)
also characterized adversarial images using interactions. They showed that adversarial perturbations
decrease the high-order interactions and the adversarially trained models are robust against such
changes. The low-order and high-order interactions are considered to correspond to different types
of image features. This was investigated by (Cheng et al., 2021). Generally, low-order interactions
reﬂect local shapes and textures that frequently appear in training samples, while high-order interac-
tions reﬂect global shapes and textures in training samples. Furthermore, Deng et al. (2022) argued
that humans gain more information than deep learning models when a given image is moderately
masked, while it is the opposite when the image is masked much more or less. Interactions also
relate to dropout regularization. Zhang et al. (2021) showed the similarity between the computation
of interactions (particularly, a variant of the Banzhaf values) and dropout regularization. In addition,
they showed that the dropout regularizes the low-order interactions and argued that this is why it
leads to a better generalization error when a model equips it.
The abovementioned studies have considered what features in clean images are focused on by deep
learning models and/or how the interactions are changed by adversarial perturbations. By contrast,
our study newly discusses and characterizes misclassiﬁcation using interactions. Particularly, we
focus on misclassiﬁed images in noise-free, adversarially perturbed, and corrupted cases. Unlike the
existing study, we also consider Vision Transformers, which are known to use low-frequency and
shape-related features more than CNNs and thus expected to have a different nature in interactions.

3   P RELIMINARIES
Shapley value. Shapley value was proposed in game theory to measure the contribution of each
player to the total reward that is obtained by multiple players working cooperatively (Shapley, 1953),
thereby fairly distributing the reward to each player. Let N = {1, 2, . . . , n} be the set of n players.
                                         def
We denote the power set of N by 2N = {S | S ⊆ N }. Let f : 2N → R be a reward function.
Then, the Shapley value of player i with a context N , ϕ(i | N ), is deﬁned as follows.
                           def
                                 X |S|!(n − |S| − 1)!
                 ϕ(i | N ) =                                (f (S ∪ {i}) − f (S)),
                                                n!
                                  S⊆N \{i}

where | · | denotes the cardinality of set. As the deﬁnition demonstrates, ϕ(i | N ) considers the
change in the reward when player i joins a set of players S ⊆ N \ {i} and averages it over all S.

Interaction. Interaction measures the contribution made by the corporation of two players to the
total reward. The following deﬁnes the interaction between i- and j-th players.

                    I(i, j) = ϕ(Sij | N ′ ) − (ϕ(i | N \ {j}) + ϕ(j | N \ {i})),
                            def


where two players i, j are regarded as a single player Sij = {i, j} and N ′ = N \{i, j}∪{Sij } (note
that |N ′ | = n − 1). The ﬁrst term ϕ(Sij | N ′ ) corresponds to the cooperative contribution of the


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


two players, whereas the second and the third terms, ϕ(i | N \ {j}) and ϕ(j | N \ {i}), correspond
to the individual contributions of players i and j, respectively. Next, we introduce I (s) (i, j), which
is the interaction between players i, j of order s.
                                       def
                             I (s) (i, j) = ES⊆N \{i,j},|S|=s [∆f (i, j, S)] ,
                    def
where ∆f (i, j, S) = f (S ∪ {i, j}) − f (S ∪ {j}) − f (S ∪ {i}) + f (S). Note that the size of the
context S is ﬁxed to s in the calculation of I (s) (i, j). A low-order (high-order) interaction measures
the impact of the cooperation between two players when a small (large) number of players join the
                                                                                      Pn−2 (s)
game. The average of I (s) (i, j) over s = 0, 1, . . . , n − 2 satisﬁes I(i, j) = n−1
                                                                                   1
                                                                                        s=0 I    (i, j).


4     I NTERPRETATION OF INTERACTION

Here, we describe how the interaction is deﬁned in the image domain and how it can be interpretd.

4.1   I NTERACTION IN IMAGE DOMAIN

Image x is considered as a set of players N , where each pixel is viewed as a player. The reward
function f (·) can be deﬁned by any scalar function based on the output of a deep learning model.
In our study, we consider a standard multi-class classiﬁcation and deﬁne the reward function as
              P (y|x)
f (x) = log 1−P  (y|x) , where x and y denote the input image and its class, respectively, and P (y | x)
denotes the conﬁdence score of y given by the model with input x. Here, S ⊂ N corresponds to an
image whose pixels not included in S are all masked, and f (S) is the conﬁdence score of y given by
the model with this masked image. This choice of the reward function is also adopted in (Deng et al.,
2022). With this reward function, Shapley value ϕ(i | N ) represents the average contribution of the
i-th pixel to the network output. Interaction I(i, j) represents cooperation between the i- and j-
th pixels. The value ∆f (i, j, S) can be interpreted as the cooperative contribution of the i- and
j-th pixels with context S to the conﬁdence score. For example, ∆f (i, j, S) ≈ 0 indicates that
the two pixels contribute to the conﬁdence score almost independently, whereas ∆f (i, j, S) ≫ 0
(∆f (i, j, S) ≪ 0) indicates that the two pixels cooperatively increase (decrease) the conﬁdence
score. Zhang et al. (2021) visualized that the pixel pairs with strong interactions in facial images
cluster around the face parts, which demonstrates that the pixels that contribute to the model predic-
tion do not work independently but in synergy.

4.2   O RDER OF INTERACTION

Order s of the interactions I (s) (i, j) represents the size of context S, where S can be any subset of
N \{i, j} of size s. A multi-order interaction reﬂects the cooperation of pixels in certain complexity.
When s is small, I (s) (i, j) reﬂects the cooperation between the i and j-th pixels without considering
most of the other pixels, whereas when s is large, the cooperation between the i and j-th pixels is
measured by considering most other pixels. Cheng et al. (2021) investigated how the multi-order
interactions reﬂect the shape and texture of images, arguing that low-order interactions reﬂect local
colors and shapes that frequently appear in the training samples while high-order interactions reﬂect
the global textures and shapes that frequently appear in the training samples.

4.3   S IGN OF INTERACTION

The sign of the interactions also has important implications, although most existing studies did
not consider this and only consider the strength (i.e., absolute value) of interactions. For example,
∆f (i, j, S) > 0 indicates that the cooperation between i- and j-th pixels (with context S) increases
the conﬁdence score, whereas ∆f (i, j, S) < 0 indicates that the cooperation decreases it. Therefore,
we can consider that misclassiﬁcation occurs when ∆f (i, j, S) are negative for most (i, j, S). In fact,
as we will show later in the experiment, the distribution of ∆f (i, j, S) (for various (i, j, S) triplets)
shifts to negative values after adversarial perturbations (cf. Fig. 4). Although the perturbations
are very small, the shift is large, indicating that adversarial perturbations efﬁciently break or even
deteriorate the cooperation between pixels.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       (a) strongly positive              (b) strongly negative                (c) almost zero


Figure 1: Visualization of pixel pairs (marked in black) with (a) strongly positive, (b) strongly
negative, and (c) almost zero values for ∆f (i, j, S) for different orders.



Figure 1 shows the pixel pairs (marked in black) with interactions that are (a) large positive values,
(b) large negative values, and (c) almost zero values. In Fig. 1(a), most of the marked pixels cluster
around the shark body, indicating that the object’s shape and texture closely relate to the shark label
and increase the conﬁdence score. In Fig. 1(b), the marked pixels also cluster around the shark
body in the middle-order case, implying that those pixel pairs do not work cooperatively to increase
the conﬁdence score. We consider that this is because of an overﬁtting of the model to the non-
generalizable features in training samples, which has a negative effect on the prediction. In Fig. 1(c)
most pixels distribute over the sea (i.e., background), indicating that the cooperation between these
pixels does not directly relate to the shark label.


5   I NTERACTION ANALYSIS OF VARIOUS TYPES OF MISCLASSIFICATION

In this section, we analyze three types of misclassiﬁcation from the perspective of interactions. We
consider three types of images that are commonly misclassiﬁed.

Clean images. Typical clean images are unperturbed and they present objects to be classiﬁed
clearly. Nevertheless, deep learning models can misclassify them because the models do not learn
the class-discriminative features that generalize perfectly. Namely, the misclassiﬁcation of clean
images occurs because of the overﬁtting and underﬁtting to training samples. Our analysis considers
the misclassiﬁcation of clean images since this is one of the most fundamental issues of image
recognition tasks.

Adversarial images. Adversarial images are the images slightly but maliciously perturbed to fool
deep learning models. Although the perturbations are almost imperceptible to humans, they greatly
impact the prediction by deep learning models. This shows the discrepancy between human and
machine vision and has been studied extensively (Buckner, 2020; Ilyas et al., 2019; Tsipras et al.,
2019). To give further insight into the counter-intuitive misclassiﬁcation that adversarial images
cause, we include them in our analysis.

Corrupted images. In contrast to adversarial perturbations, common corruptions (e.g., fog, bright-
ness, Gaussian noise, etc.) occur more commonly in standard settings. Interestingly, adversari-
ally robust models are not robust against some common corruptions (e.g., fog and brightness) and
even perform worse than normally trained models (Yin et al., 2019). In other words, the robustness
against adversarial perturbations and common corruptions relates to different nature types in the
classiﬁers, which motivated us to include corrupted images in our analysis. Note that obtaining a
robust classiﬁer against both of them—or achieving general robustness—is an unresolved challenge
that is addressed in recent studies (Laugros et al., 2019; 2020; Tan et al., 2022).
In particular, we investigate misclassiﬁed ones among these images through the distribution, order,
and sign of interactions, thereby elucidating what kind of features (in a high-level sense) the deep
learning models exploit and make them give incorrect predictions.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Setup. We compare the distribution of interactions of misclassiﬁed clean, adversarial, and cor-
rupted images with that of successfully classiﬁed clean images. Here, the distribution of interactions
means the distribution of ∆f (i, j, S) for various (i, j, S) and images1 . As the order of interactions
grasps the high-level category of image features, we compute the distributions of interactions for
different orders. As in Fig. 2, we plot the second quartile (i.e., median) by using a solid line with a
shade covering the range between the ﬁrst and third quartiles. In the plot, the result for the correctly
classiﬁed images is also superposed for comparison. Intuitively, the second quartile reﬂects a bias
or whether cooperation across pixels contributes to the prediction positively or negatively, and the
area of the shade can be (roughly) considered as its strength. As in other studies, we conducted
our experiments on ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009). We sampled ﬁfty images to consist of
a set of clean images. We generated adversarial images by applying the L∞ -untargeted Iterative-
Fast Gradient Sign Method (I-FGSM) with ϵ = 16/255 to the clean images. For the corrupted
images, we used ImageNet-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019) dataset. We sampled ﬁfty images
from the images under level-5 fog corruption. We used two CNNs and two Vision Transformers
pretrained on ImageNet2 , including ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016), AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
Swin-T (Liu et al., 2021) and DeiT-Ti (Touvron et al., 2021). More detail on the settings (e.g., image
sampling, approximate computation of interactions) is given in Appendix B.1.
In the following, we focus on ResNet-18 and Swin-T. See Appendix B.4 for more results.

5.1    M ISCLASSIFICATION OF CLEAN IMAGES

Here, we consider the misclassiﬁcation of clean images. Figure 2(left) shows the distribution of
interactions for each order. As can be seen, ResNet-18 did not present a signiﬁcant difference in the
distributions between the images misclassiﬁed and those successfully classiﬁed. This result indicates
that the misclassiﬁcation is not triggered by the inability of the deep learning models to obtain
beneﬁcial cooperation, suggesting that deep learning models gain similar cooperation regardless of
the correctness of the classiﬁcation. As we will show shortly, this is not the case for adversarial
and corrupted images. In contrast to ResNet-18, Swin-T has a different tendency for low-order
interactions (particularly, at 0.0n): the interactions from correctly classiﬁed images are signiﬁcantly
biased toward positive values, whereas for the misclassiﬁed images, these are biased toward negative
values. This indicates that for Swin-T, the successfully classiﬁed images have local cooperation
between pixels that increase the conﬁdence score, whereas the misclassiﬁed images do not have
such cooperation, leading to the deterioration in the conﬁdence score.

5.2    M ISCLASSIFICATION OF ADVERSARIAL IMAGES

Next, we consider the misclassiﬁcation of adversarial images. For each model, the adversarial im-
ages are generated by applying I-FGSM to clean images that are correctly classiﬁed. Figure 2(center)
shows the distribution of interactions for misclassiﬁcation of adversarial images. ResNet-18 has
strongly negative interactions of high order around 0.8n–1.0n. This result indicates that adversarial
perturbations in ResNet-18 create spurious cooperation for the model by global shapes and textures.
Namely, misclassiﬁcation by adversarial perturbations is caused by the destruction of the model
from the meaningful cooperation between pixels to the spurious one, which is useless or harmful
to make a prediction. However, unlike ResNet-18, Swin-T only shows a slight shift of the interac-
tions to negative values, and the large interquartile range covers positive and negative sides almost
evenly from middle to high orders. This may explain the empirical robustness of Swin-T compared
to ResNet-18 (cf. Table 1 in Appendix A). It is worth noting that this difference between ResNet-18
and Swin-T was observed because we take the sign into account, unlike most of the existing studies.
Refer to Appendix B.2 for another example.

5.3    M ISCLASSIFICATION OF CORRUPTED IMAGES

We now consider corrupted images. Yin et al. (2019) discovered that adversarially trained models
are less robust than normally trained ones under the perturbations in a low-frequency domain (e.g.,
   1
     Although the interaction is deﬁned as Eq. (3), in this paper, we also refer to ∆f (i, j, S) as interaction for
convenience when we are not interested in speciﬁc (i, j, S).
   2
     https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4431043 (CNNs),
     https://github.com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models (Vision Transformers)


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                        clean (correctly classified)   adversarial (misclassified)
   (a) ResNet-18                                        clean (misclassified)          corrupted (misclassified)


   (b) Swin-T


Figure 2: The distribution of interactions (i.e., the distribution of ∆f (i, j, S) for various pixel pairs
(i.j), context S, and images). The horizontal axis represents the order of interactions (n denotes the
number of pixels in an image). The solid lines represent the median of the interactions. The shades
represent the interquartile range. The interactions for misclassiﬁed clean (left, blue), adversarial
(center, red), and corrupted (right, purple) images are contrasted to those for correctly classiﬁed
images (green), respectively. One can observe that the three types of misclassiﬁed images give
different tendencies in the distributions of interactions for each order. The tendency also differs
between (a) ResNet-18 and (b) Swin-T.



fog corruption). Figure 2(right) visualizes the distribution of interactions for misclassiﬁcation of the
fog-corrupted images. The strength of the interactions for adversarial images is lower at low order
and higher at high order than in the case of clean images. This result shows that the corrupted images
destroy the local cooperation of pixels that deep learning models were originally able to exploit, and
instead, they create spurious global cooperation that is not useful for prediction. Note that compared
to the case of adversarial images (Fig. 2; center), the strength of interactions for corrupted images
is moderate, particularly in high order, which suggests that as widely known, corruption is less
harmful than adversarial perturbations. Swin-T showed a similar but clearer contrast between the
distributions of the two image sets than ResNet. In particular, the interactions have a large difference
at low orders 0.05n–0.1n．Swin-T shows that local cooperation of fog images is difﬁcult to obtain.

5.4   C OMPARISON OF MODELS

In Sections 5.1–5.3, Swin-T exhibits different distributions of interactions from ResNet-18. This
indicates that Swin-T (Vision Transformer) exploits the different image features from those used
by ResNet-18 (CNN). To further investigate this, we compare Swin-T and ResNet-18 by using the
distribution of interactions in the clean images that are classiﬁed successfully. The result is shown in
Fig. 3. ResNet-18 and Swin-T do not show a signiﬁcant difference in terms of the median; however,
at order 0.0n, the interquartile range includes negative and positive interactions for ResNet-18 but
for Swin-T, it only includes positive ones. Thus, the obtained features from cooperation are different
for each model, and Swin-T takes advantage more of the local cooperation of pixels than ResNet-18
does. These results may partially explain the higher classiﬁcation accuracy of Swin-T.
It is worth noting that in Sections 5.1–5.3, one can see that for Swin-T, the distributions of interac-
tions between correctly classiﬁed and misclassiﬁed images have a clearer difference than those for
ResNet-18. This suggests that the characteristics of the predictions can be more clearly exhibited
in the case of the Vision Transformer than CNNs, which encourages the further study of Vision
Transformers based on interactions.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Swin-T                                                    Swin-T
                                         ResNet-18                                                 ResNet-18


                                                            frequency
Figure 3: (Left) The distribution of interactions. The horizontal axis represents the order of inter-
actions (n denotes the number of pixels in an image). The two solid lines respectively represent
the median of the interactions for clean images that Swin-T (green) and ResNet-18 (red) correctly
classiﬁed. The shades represent the interquartile range. (Right) at order 0.0n, the interquartile range
for ResNet-18 includes negative and positive interactions; for Swin-T, it only includes positive ones.

                                      clean (correctly classified)      clean (misclassified)          adversarial (misclassified)
frequency


                      (a) ResNet-18                                                       (b) Swin-T


Figure 4: The distribution of average interactions (i.e., the distribution of Ei,j [I(i, j)] for all the
pixel pairs (i, j)). The distributions for misclassiﬁed clean (blue) and adversarial (red) images are
contrasted to those for correctly classiﬁed clean images (green). The distribution for misclassiﬁed
clean images is similar to that for correctly classiﬁed images, while that for misclassiﬁed adversarial
images shows a negative transition. This tendency is observed for both (a) ResNet-18 and (b) Swin-
T, while the transition is moderate in the latter case.


6           A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS ON ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
In Section 5, we observed that adversarial perturbations have signiﬁcant effects on the distributions
of interactions in middle and high order. In this section, we further analyze adversarial images and
their transferability by using the interactions. To this end, we consider for each image Ei,j [I(i, j)] as
the average of the interaction I(i, j) over all the possible pixel pairs in the image. For the adversarial
attacks, we used the same methods and parameters as those used in Section 5.2. Other setups (e.g.,
dataset and image sampling) are also the same as those in Section 5.

Negative transition by adversarial attack. Here, we compare the distribution of average inter-
actions between correctly classiﬁed clean images and misclassiﬁed (clean or adversarial) images.
Figure 4 shows the histograms of the average interactions of images in the dataset. As demonstrated
in Fig. 4(a), where ResNet-18 is considered, the distribution of average interactions is similar be-
tween the two clean image sets (correctly classiﬁed clean images and misclassiﬁed ones), whereas
there is a large shift to negative values for adversarial images. The same observation holds for Swin-
T as shown in Fig. 4(b). The negative shift of average interactions for adversarial images means that
the pixel cooperations that models use to increase the conﬁdence score are damaged or lost. Note
that the negative shift is more moderate for Swin-T than ResNet-18. This indicates that although
the images are misclassiﬁed, the damage in the cooperation of pixels is moderate for Swin-T. We
consider that this reﬂects the fact that Swin-T is more robust than ResNet-18 (cf. Table 1 in Ap-
pendix A).

Transferability and interactions We investigate  adversarial      transferability from the perspective
of multi-order interactions. We consider E(i,j) I (s) (i, j) , which is the average of interactions of


                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                            Swin-T
                                                                                            ResNet-18
                                                                                            VGG
                                                                                            AlexNet
                                                                                            MobileNet
                                                                                            ShuffleNet


               (a) ResNet-18                              (b) Swin-T

Figure 5: The difference in attack success rates between the sets of images with high and low average
interactions (i.e., a1 − a2 ). The horizontal axis represents the order of interactions (n denotes the
number of pixels in an image). (a) For ResNet-18, adversarial images with higher interactions in
high order transfer better, whereas those with lower interactions transfer less. (b) For Swin-T, the
trend is opposite to that for ResNet-18.



order s over all the pixel pairs. As in Section 5.2, we generate two sets of adversarial images on Im-
ageNet using ResNet-18 and Swin-T, respectively. We ﬁrst focus on ResNet-18. We divided the set
of the adversarial images into two sets, D1 and D2 , by the average interactions. The ﬁrst set D1 con-
tains the adversarial images whose average interactions are higher than the median, while the second
set D2 contains the rest. We then measure the transferability of adversarial images in each set Di by
the attack success rate ai , which is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of successfully attacked images
in a source model to that in a target model. We used ResNet-18 and Swin-T as source models and
ResNet-18, Swin-T, AlexNet, ShufﬂeNet (Ma et al., 2018), and MobileNet (Sandler et al., 2018) as
target models. These models were pretrained on ImageNet3 . In Fig. 5, the difference in attack suc-
cess rates, a1 − a2 , between the sets of images with high and low average interactions is plotted
along the orders. As shown in Fig 5(a), for D1 (i.e., adversarial images with high average interac-
tions), the transferability increases as the order increases. Interestingly, as shown in Fig 5(b), for
D2 (i.e., adversarial images with low average interactions), the trend is the opposite: the traceability
decreases along the order. To summarize, adversarial images with higher interactions in high order
transfer better when these are generated by using ResNet-18 but transfer less when Swin-T is used,
and vice versa. This contrastive tendency is similar to the recent observation that the adversarial im-
ages generated by CNNs are more perturbed in the high-frequency domain, whereas those generated
by Vision Transforms are more perturbed in the low-frequency domain (Kim & Lee, 2022).


7       C ONCLUSION

This study conducted the ﬁrst analysis of the misclassiﬁcation of various types of images from a
game-theoretic perspective. We considered clean, adversarial, and corrupted images and character-
ized each of them using the distribution, order, and sign of interactions. Our extensive experiments
revealed that each type of misclassiﬁcation has a different tendency in the distribution of interac-
tions, suggesting that the model relies on different categories of image features to make an incorrect
prediction for each image type. We also analyzed Vision Transformers using interactions for the ﬁrst
time, ﬁnding that they give a distribution of interactions that is different from that of CNNs in some
cases, which conﬁrms the recent observations that Vision Transforms exploit more robust features
than CNNs do from a new perspective. Our experiments also provide a new result that contrasts Vi-
sion Transformers to CNNs: CNNs generate more transferable adversarial images from those with
high interactions in high order, but the trend is the opposite for Vision Transformers. This paper
reported various observations on CNNs and Vision Transformers based on interactions. We believe
that this will contribute to deepening the understanding of machine vision.

    3
        https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4431043 (CNNs),
        https://github.com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models (Vision Transformers)


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES


Cameron Buckner. Understanding adversarial examples requires a theory of artefacts for deep learn-
  ing. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(12):731–736, 2020.
Xu Cheng, Chuntung Chu, Yi Zheng, Jie Ren, and Quanshi Zhang. A game-theoretic taxonomy of
  visual concepts in DNNs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10938, 2021.
Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensem-
  ble of diverse parameter-free attacks. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2206–2216, 2020.
Huiqi Deng, Qihan Ren, Hao Zhang, and Quanshi Zhang. Discovering and explaing the representa-
  tion bottleneck of DNNs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, pp. 248–255, 2009.
Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. Boost-
  ing adversarial attacks with momentum. pp. 9185–9193, 2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Michel Grabisch and Marc Roubens. An axiomatic approach to the concept of interaction among
 players in cooperative games. International Journal of Game Theory, 28:547–565, 1999.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common cor-
  ruptions and perturbations. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2019.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. In Processing of the Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Gihyun Kim and Jong-Seok Lee. Analyzing adversarial robustness of vision transformers against
  spatial and spectral attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09602, 2022.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
Alfred Laugros, Alice Caplier, and Matthieu Ospici. Are adversarial robustness and common pertur-
  bation robustness independent attributes? In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision Workshop, pp. 1045–1054, 2019.
Alfred Laugros, Alice Caplier, and Matthieu Ospici. Addressing neural network robustness with
  mixup and targeted labeling adversarial training. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
  Computer Vision Workshop, pp. 178–195, 2020.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Ningning Ma, Xiangyu Zhang, Hai-Tao Zheng, and Jian Sun. ShufﬂeNet V2: Practical guidelines
  for efﬁcient CNN architecture design. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 116–131, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jie Ren, Die Zhang, Yisen Wang, Lu Chen, Zhanpeng Zhou, Yiting Chen, Xu Cheng, Xin Wang,
   Meng Zhou, Jie Shi, and Quanshi Zhang. Towards a uniﬁed game-theoretic view of adversarial
   perturbations and robustness. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, pp. 3797–3810, 2021.
Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4510–4520, 2018.
Lloyd S. Shapley. A value for n-person games. In Contributions to the Theory of Games, pp.
  307–317, 1953.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Goodfel-
  low, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Chun Yang Tan, Kazuhiko Kawamoto, and Hiroshi Kera. Adversarial amplitude swap towards robust
  image classiﬁers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07138, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Herve Jegou. Training data-efﬁcient image transformers & distillation through attention. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10347–10357, 2021.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.
Xin Wang, Jie Ren, Shuyun Lin, Xiangming Zhu, Yisen Wang, and Quanshi Zhang. A uniﬁed ap-
  proach to interpreting and boosting adversarial transferability. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Zhuolin Yang, Linyi Li, Xiaojun Xu, Shiliang Zuo, Qian Chen, Pan Zhou, Benjamin Rubinstein,
  Ce Zhang, and Bo Li. TRS: Transferability reduced ensemble via promoting gradient diversity
  and model smoothness. Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 17642–17655, 2021.
Dong Yin, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Jon Shlens, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Justin Gilmer. A Fourier
  perspective on model robustness in computer vision. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 13276–13286, 2019.
Hao Zhang, Sen Li, YinChao Ma, Mingjie Li, Yichen Xie, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting and
  boosting dropout from a game-theoretic view. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.


A     A DVERSARIAL ROBUSTNESS EVALUATION
We evaluated the adversarial robustness of ResNet-18 and Swin-T by the success rate of the L∞ -
untargeted I-FGSM attack with various perturbation strength (ϵ = 0.5/255, 1/255, 2/255, · · · ). For
each model, we selected 1,000 clean images that are classiﬁed correctly. The result is shown in
Table 1. Swin-T has a lower attack success rate than ResNet-18 for all ϵ, showing that the former is
more adversarially robust than the latter.

B     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP AND ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
B.1   E XPERIMENT DETAILS

As the computation of interactions is known as an NP-Hard problem, we reduce the computa-
tional cost as follows. We divided each image into 16 × 16 patches and measured the inter-
actions between the patches. Instead of using the full dataset, we randomly sampled ﬁfty im-
ages of different classes. For each image, 200 patch pairs are randomly selected, and for each


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: The success rate of the I-FGSM attack with various perturbation strengths. Swin-T shows
a lower attack success rate than ResNet-18.
                                      ϵ   ResNet-18 Swin-T
                                    0.25    0.652       0.545
                                    0.5     0.924       0.767
                                     1      0.996       0.937
                                     2       1.0        0.993
                                     4       1.0         1.0
                                     16      1.0         1.0


                                                                     Swin-T
                                                                     ResNet-18
                                                                     AlexNet
                                                                     DeiT-Ti


Figure 6: The median of interaction strength Eq. (B.2) along the order. The solid lines represent the
median. The trend is similar across models. Compare to Figs. 2(left) and 8(left).


patch pair, 100 contexts are randomly selected. Here, each patch pair is randomly sampled so
that one patch is within a radius of two patches from the other patch. For order, we consider
s = 0.0n, 0.05n, 0.1n, 0.2n, · · · , 0.8n, 0.9n, 0.95n, 1.0n. The abovementioned setup is the same
as in (Deng et al., 2022). In addition, when we compute an interaction I(i, j), we average I (s) (i, j)
for s = 0.0n, 0.1n, · · · , 1.0n.

B.2   S TRENGTH OF INTERACTIONS

Most of the existing studies used the strength of an interaction, which is computed as fol-
lows (Cheng et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022).

                                          Ex⊂Ω Ei,j I (m) (i, j)
                            J (m)
                                  =
                                       Em′ Ex⊂Ω Ei,j I (m′ ) (i, j)
By contrast, our study considers the sign of interactions. As we discussed in 4.3, the sign tells us
whether the pixel pair interacts positively or not, and there are several trends that cannot be grasped
if one only considers the strength of interactions. Fig. 6 shows an example, where we plotted the
median of interactions for clean images along the order. As can be seen, for all the models, the trend
of interaction strength is similar (i.e., high interaction strength at low and high orders). However, as
shown in Figs. 2(left) and 8(left), the four models present different trends when singed interactions
are used.

B.3   C ORRUPTED IMAGES (Gaussian noise)

In Section 5.3, we used fog corruption because this is known as the low-frequency corruption, in
which adversarially trained models are less robust than normally trained ones. Here, we conduct
the same experiments with Gaussian noise corruption, for which adversarially trained models are
known to perform better than normally trained ones. The result is shown in Fig. 7. One can see that


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 clean (correctly classified)         corrupted (misclassified)

   (a) ResNet                                           (c) AlexNet


   (c) Swin-T                                           (d) DeiT-Ti


Figure 7: The distribution of interactions for misclassiﬁed images under Gaussian noise. Compare
to Figs. 2(right) and 8(right).


for all the models except AlexNet, the strength of low-order interactions is low, while the strength
of high-order interactions is high. This trend is similar to that for fog corruption (cf. Figs. 2(right)
and 8(right)); thus, the misclassiﬁcations under fog and Gaussian noise can be considered similar in
a sense.

B.4   R ESULTS FOR A LEXN N ET AND D EI T-T I

We investigated whether our experiments in Section 5 generalize to other models. We used AlexNet
and DeiT-Ti that are pretrained on ImageNet. The experimental setup is the same as in Section 5
The result is shown in Fig. 8. The tendency of interactions for AlexNet was the same as that for
ResNet-18. DeiT-Ti also presented almost the same tendency as Swin-T. However, the tendency in
the low-order interactions for clean images was different. Swin-T showed a striking difference in
the sign of the interactions between correctly classiﬁed and misclassiﬁed images; Deit-Ti showed
no distinct difference. This result indicates that the importance of low-order interactions for the
prediction differs between models.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                        clean (correctly classified)   adversarial (misclassified)
   (a) AlexNet                                          clean (misclassified)          corrupted (misclassified)


   (b) DeiT-Ti


Figure 8: The distribution of interactions (i.e., the distribution of ∆f (i, j, S) for various pixel pairs
(i.j), context S, and images). The horizontal axis represents the order of interactions (n denotes the
number of pixels in an image). The solid lines represent the median of the interactions. The shades
represent the interquartile range. The interactions for misclassiﬁed clean (left, blue), adversarial
(center, red), and corrupted (right, purple) images are contrasted to those for correctly classiﬁed
images (green), respectively. One can observe that the three types of misclassiﬁed images give
different tendencies in the distributions of interactions for each order. Compare to Fig. 2.


                                                   14
