Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M A SS: M ULTI - ATTRIBUTE S ELECTIVE S UPPRESSION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The recent rapid advances in machine learning technologies largely depend on
         the vast richness of data available today. Along with the new services and appli-
         cations enabled by those machine learning models, various governmental policies
         are put in place to regulate such data usage and protect people’s privacy and rights.
         As a result, data owners often opt for simple data obfuscation (e.g., blur people’s
         faces in images) or withholding data altogether, which leads to severe data quality
         degradation and greatly limits the data’s potential utility. Aiming for a sophisti-
         cated mechanism which gives data owners fine-grained control while retaining the
         maximal degree of data utility, We propose Multi-attribute Selective Suppression,
         or MaSS, a general framework for performing precisely targeted data surgery to
         simultaneously suppress any selected set of attributes while preserving the rest
         for downstream machine learning tasks. MaSS learns a data modifier through ad-
         versarial games between two sets of networks, where one is aimed at suppressing
         selected attributes, and the other ensures the retention of the rest of the attributes.
         We carried out an extensive evaluation of our proposed method using multiple
         datasets from different domains including facial images, voice audio, and video
         clips, and obtained highly promising results in MaSS’ generalizability and ca-
         pability of drastically suppressing targeted attributes while imposing virtually no
         impact on the data’s usability in other downstream machine learning tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The recent rapid advances in machine learning (ML) can be largely attributed to powerful comput-
ing infrastructures as well as the availability of large-scale datasets, such as ImageNet1K (Deng
et al., 2009) for computer vision, WMT (Foundation, 2019) for neural machine translation, and Lib-
riLight (Kahn et al., 2020) for speech recognition. Studies have shown that ML models trained on
large-scale datasets can usually prove effective in many additional downstream tasks (Brown et al.,
2020). On the other hand, ethical concerns have been raised surrounding proper data usage in issues
like data privacy (Liu et al., 2021), data minimization (Goldsteen et al., 2021), etc. Therefore, if
there are more data available and can be used without worrying whether or not the data is handled
properly, the ML models can be further improved by more data and help the ML community to
advance on many domains.
Attempting to balance between model performance and proper data usages, a common approach
usually taken is to simply modify the data to remove its “sensitive” attributes, and experimentally
demonstrate that the targeted sensitive attributes are indeed removed. What’s crucially important
but usually omitted here, however, is the preservation of the “total utility” of the data, because
the suppression operation oftentimes also negatively impact, or even completely destroy, the other
“non-sensitive” attributes, hence greatly damaging the dataset’s potential future utility. For example,
DeepPrivacy (Hukkelås et al., 2019) is able to demonstrate its privacy protection capability, but the
modified data it produces can no longer be utilized for additional downstream tasks like sentiment
analysis, age detection, or gender classification. Since data is one of the main driving forces for the
rapid advancement of machine learning research, we argue that the ideal scenario would be to have
the flexibility of selecting an arbitrary set of attributes and only suppressing them while leaving all
the other attributes completely intact. In this way, the community could unleash the potential utility
of the modified data to develop more advanced algorithms.
Towards this exact goal, we present Multi-attribute Selective Suppression (or MaSS) in this paper, to
enable such capability of precise attributes suppression for multi-attribute datasets. The high-level


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                 Model
                                                                                 Attr. 0        ?
                 • Attr. 0                                         • Attr. 0
                 • Attr. 1         MaSS                            • Attr. 1     Model
                                                                                                ✓
                 • Attr. 2                                         • Attr. 2     Attr. 1
                               Suppress Attr. 0
    Original Dataset                                    Transformed Dataset
                                                                                 Model
                                                                                 Attr. 2        ✓
Figure 1: MaSS is able to precisely target any selected attributes in a multi-attribute dataset for
suppression while leaving the rest of the attributes intact for any potential downstream ML-based
analytic tasks. For example as illustrated by the diagram, when operating on the original multi-
attribute dataset and configured to suppress Attr. 0, MaSS is able to transform the dataset such that
the model for detecting Attr. 0 is unable to reliably detect Attr. 0 from the transformed data, while
the models for Attr. 1 and 2 are not affected.

objective of MaSS is also illustrated in Figure 1, where MaSS is configured to suppress Attr. 0
without knowing in advance that Attr. 1 and 2 will be used for downstream tasks. After the data
transformation performed by MaSS, Attr. 0 becomes suppressed, nondetectable by its corresponding
machine learning model, but at the same time, Attr. 1 and 2 are left intact, and still can be extracted
by their corresponding ML models. As a concrete example, suppose we are working with a facial-
image dataset which contains attributes like age, gender, and sentiment, where, let us assume, age
and gender are considered sensitive. Then, MaSS would transform this facial-image dataset such that
age and gender information could no longer be not be inferred by the corresponding ML models,
whereas sentiment information could still be extracted from the transformed data.
The contributions of our work are threefolds,

       1. We propose the novel MaSS framework to enable the powerful flexibility of precise sup-
          pression of arbitrary, selective data attributes.
       2. We employ multiple learning mechanisms in MaSS to enable its attribute-specific as well
          as generic feature preservation capabilities, which help it achieve satisfactory data utility
          protection both with and without the prior knowledge about downstream tasks.
       3. We thoroughly validate MaSS using a wide range of multi-attribute datasets, including
          image, audio, and video. All our results demonstrate MaSS’ strong performance in its
          intended selective attribute suppression and preservation.


2     R ELATED W ORKS

Data Privacy. A large body of work has studied methods applying generative adversarial networks
(GANs) to generate and modify facial features in images, so these identity-related sensitive features
can be de-identified. DeepPrivacy (Hukkelås et al., 2019) proposed to use a conditional generative
adversarial network to generate realistic anonymized faces, while considering the existing back-
ground and a sparse pose annotation. To further ensure the face anonymization using GAN-based
methods, CIAGAN (Maximov et al., 2020) proposed an identity control discriminator to control
which fake identity is used in the anonymizaiton process by introducing an identity control vector.
Instead of generating the entire faces for anonymization, Li et al. proposed to apply conditional GAN
to only identify and modify the five identity-sensitive attributes. To also enable face anonymization
with the selected semantic attributes manipulation, PI-Net (Chen et al., 2021) proposed to generate
realistic looking faces with the selected attributes preserved. The above works usually focuses on
suppression only while the future data utilities are not considered. Our approach not only suppresses
the attributes but also preserves the data utility concurrently. On the other hand, SPAct tried to sup-
press the multiple attributes in a video through contrastive learning while preserving the utility for
action recognition; however, their approach lacks the flexibility to handle individual attributes but
can only process all attributes at once and limits to the action recognition dataset; while our method
is fully configurable and validated in different data domains. Moriarty et al. proposed the method to
suppress the biometric information while preserving its utility; however, their approach requires the
information of downstream task while our method does not.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Multi-Attribute Learning. Data could contain multiple attributes. For recognition, using one
model for each attribute might provide good recognition accuracy but might not scale. Multi-
attribute learning aims for resolving this problem by learning underlying relationship among at-
tributes such that the model can adaptively handle different attributes (Huang et al., 2018; Cheng
et al., 2018). In this paper, we validated our method with the single-attribute models. The multi-
attribute model can also be used in our method by replacing multiple single-attribute models.

Dataset Distillation/Condensation. Dataset distillation and condensation aim to create a smaller
version of a large dataset which can be used to train a model whose performance can be as good
as training on the original large dataset. Therefore, training can be relatively quicker, e.g., Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) methods require a lot of iterations of a whole dataset to find out the
best model. Otherwise, NAS usually needs to use a proxy dataset/model for the approximation
results from large dataset/model (Zhao et al., 2021; Cazenavette et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022). On
the other hand, a recent work shows the condensed dataset also conceals some attributes from the
original data (Dong et al., 2022) but still remains effective for the original task. In contrast to these
approaches, our proposed method tries to keep the truthfulness of data as much as possible, so we
do not reduce the amount of data. Moreover, our method is designed to preserve the generic features
rather than the specific task, which could be covered by the generic feature we preserved.

Self-supervised/Contrastive Learning. Self-supervised learning has been explored by the com-
munity to allow a machine learning model to learn a good data representation by designing pretext
tasks instead of human annotations (Feng et al., 2019), or contrastive learning which tries to maxi-
mize the agreement between positive pairs (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020), or
clustering-based methods to generate pseudo labels for data (Caron et al., 2020; 2018), or mask au-
toencoder to predict the masked patches by the remaining patches (He et al., 2022). Then, they show
that the feature representations are usually good for many different downstream tasks. Our goal is to
keep as much information when suppressing the selected attributes without having prior knowledge;
thus, self-supervised and contrastive learning methods facilitate our requirement to extract generic
features without label information from downstream tasks.


3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD

3.1   P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Consider a multi-attribute dataset X with size 𝑁, and the set 𝐴 of different attributes, where each
data point x’s value for attribute 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 is 𝑎 x . Each of the different attributes can be learned by
inferencing on X, hence our objective is to transform X to suppress any selective subset of attributes
𝑆 ⊆ 𝐴 such that no attributes in 𝑆 can be reliably inferred from the transformed dataset X′. At the
same time, we need to make sure the rest of the attributes 𝑅 = 𝐴 \ 𝑆 are preserved and can still be
inferred from X′.
In practice, when a data owner would like to transform their data, we assume the subset 𝑆 of at-
tributes targeted for suppression is always predetermined. However, it is not always known in ad-
vance what the entire set 𝐴 of attributes are, and consequently which set 𝑅 of attributes need to be
preserved. Therefore, for generalizability, we consider the case of an unknown 𝑅 at the time of data
transformation. Of course, if 𝑅 happens to be given, our solution needs to be able to take advantage
of this extra information as well.

3.2   P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK

We propose a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based solution in tackling the data transfor-
mation problem. Our framework consists of three major components: a Data Modifier, a Suppres-
sion Branch, and a Preservation Branch, as depicted in Fig. 2. The data modifier 𝐺 is the generator
while both branches are the discriminators in the GAN framework. The data modifier tries to gen-
erate new data such that the similarity between original data and modified data are maximized and
minimized via the suppression branch and the preservation branch, respectively. In a nutshell, the
data modifier learns a transformation that is to be applied to the original data vectors, where the
learned transformation is jointly regularized by both the suppression and preservation branches to


                                                   3
                                       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Supression Branch                                                                             Preservation Branch


                                                                                                                Data Modifier
                                             Attribute-Specific         Prediction                                                                                Attribute-Specific
                                               Attribute-Specific
                                              Similiarity Loss            Prediction
                                                                       Entropy Loss       Reconstruction                                Attribute-Agnostic     Attribute-Specific
                                                                                                                                                                   Similiarity Loss
              S


                                                  Attribute-Specific
                                                 Similiarity Loss           Prediction
                                                                        Entropy  Loss         Loss                                             Loss          Attribute-Specific
                                                                                                                                                                 Similiarity Loss
                                                   Similiarity Loss        Entropy Loss                                                                       Similiarity Loss


                                                                                                           Back-propagate the losses
                   Modified Data, x'
Original Data, x


                                                                                                             to train Data Modifier



                                       Figure 2: Overview of MaSS. MaSS contains three components: the data modifier, the suppression
                                       branch, and the preservation branch. The data modifier 𝐺 is trained by optimizing the losses in both
                                       the suppression and the preservation branches.

                                       ensure all targeted attributes in 𝑆 are indeed suppressed in the transformed data, while all other at-
                                       tributes, explicitly specified or not, are left intact as much as possible. We next discuss all three
                                       components in more detail.


                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                       3.2.1      DATA M ODIFIER
                                       We design the data modifier to be conditional on its original input in learning instance-specific trans-
                                       formations via a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with a residual shortcut. In other words, based on
                                       its input x, the data modifier 𝐺 learns an additive modification to be applied to x. Therefore, the
                                       transformed data stays in the same embedding space as the original, which leads to faster optimiza-
                                       tion convergence. Specifically, for a normalized original data vector x, its normalized transformed
                                       version is computed as
                                                                         x′ = 𝐺 (x) := 𝑛(x + 𝑛(MLP(x))),                                    (1)
                                                                                        (
                                                                                            v
                                                                                                , ||v|| ≠ 0
                                       where 𝑛(·) is the normalization function 𝑛(v) = | |v | |             .
                                                                                          0,      o.w.
                                       During the optimization, the parameters in the data modifier are trained by back-propagating the
                                       losses designed in both branches.

                                       3.2.2      S UPPRESSION B RANCH
                                       The suppression branch is designed to make the targeted attributes in 𝑆 as unrecognizable as possi-
                                       ble. It utilizes the corresponding set of inference models pretrained on the original dataset X. Each
                                       pretrained model corresponds to a specific attribute 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆 and is composed of a feature extractor
                                       𝐹 𝑠 , which converts raw input data to a feature  vector zx𝑠 = 𝐹 𝑠 (x), and a projector 𝑃 𝑠 , which maps
                                       the features to the attribute’s label px𝑠 = 𝑃 𝑠 zx𝑠 , where zx𝑠 is the feature representation and px𝑠 is the
                                       prediction logit.
                                       During the training of the data modifier, the suppression branch guides the data modifier to degrade
                                       these pretrained models’ recognition accuracies on the transformed data X′. It does so by either
                                       measuring the similarity of features from the pretrained models or by comparing the prediction
                                       results against the ground truth labels, and then adding a corresponding penalty. Specifically, for
                                       each targeted attribute 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆, the feature-similarity loss function is defined as
                                                                                         1 ∑︁
                                                                              𝑠
                                                                            𝐿 sim = 𝑤𝑠 ·       sim𝑠 (x′, x),                            (2)
                                                                                         𝑁 x∈X

                                       where 𝑤 𝑠 is the weight for attribute 𝑠 and sim𝑠 (·, ·) defines a similarity measure.  For example, we
                                       can use the cosine similarity between feature vectors simcos  𝑠
                                                                                                        (x′, x) = cos zx𝑠′ , zx𝑠 , or the  negative

                                       KL-divergence between the original and the transformed logits simKL𝑠
                                                                                                             (x′, x) = −𝐷 KL px𝑠′ px𝑠 ,
                                       or the cross-entropy loss
                                                               between
                                                                       the transformed logits and the attribute’s ground truth value
                                           𝑠
                                       simCE (x′, x) = −𝐷 KL px𝑠′ 1𝑠x , where 𝑠x is x’s ground truth value for attribute 𝑠 and 1𝑠x is the
                                       corresponding one-hot vector.


                                                                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The above similarity-based metrics only help guide the data modifier to lead the pretrained mod-
els towards incorrect predictions about 𝑆 on the transformed data. However, in terms of attribute
suppression, an even stronger condition would be to reduce such predictions to random guesses.
Therefore, we introduce an additional loss term to maximize the entropy 𝐻 of the predictions about
𝑆 on the transformed data such that the predictions look like random guesses. Combined with Eq. 2,
the total loss on the suppression branch is
                                     1 ∑︁                        1 ∑︁
                                            sim𝑠 (x′, x) − ℎ 𝑠 ·

                          𝐿𝑠 = 𝑤𝑠 ·                                    𝐻 px𝑠′ ,                (3)
                                     𝑁 x∈X                       𝑁 x∈X
where ℎ 𝑠 is the weight for the entropy loss.
Moreover, to regularize the learned data transformation to be as small as possible, we also add an
𝐿2 reconstruction loss term in the suppression branch
                                                   1 ∑︁ ′
                                   𝐿 rec = 𝑤 rec ·       ||x − x|| 2 .                         (4)
                                                   𝑁 x∈X

3.2.3   P RESERVATION B RANCH
While the suppression branch guides the data modifier to decrease the confidence of machine learn-
ing models on certain attributes 𝑆 from the data, the preservation branch is responsible for guarding
the data against said suppression and erasure such that maximum utility can be preserved through
the transformation, in the sense that all the attributes 𝑅 = 𝐴 \ 𝑆 not targeted by the suppression
branch should remain recognizable from the transformed data X′, just as they were from the original
data X. In the proposed method, we design two types of losses: one is attribute-agnostic in the
preservation branch, which is applicable to any attribute as the loss is defined in an agnostic way;
another one is attribute-specific, which if the downstream tasks have been defined and we know the
set of 𝑅, then we embedded them into the loss.

Attribute-Agnostic. As previously discussed, it is oftentimes difficult to identify in advance the
set 𝐴 of all attributes associated with a dataset, which means the set 𝑅 might not necessarily be
defined even when 𝑆 is specified. The absence of 𝑅 indicates that we have no knowledge about what
attributes downstream tasks might want to detect from the transformed dataset.
To tackle this attribute-agnostic scenario, we employ self-supervised techniques, where a generic
feature representation of the data is learned without any specific attribute or task information. For
our preservation branch in particular, we adopt the SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) contrastive-learning-
based approach to pretrain an extractor 𝐹 𝑟∗ and a projector 𝑃𝑟∗ that maximize the similarity between
embedding pairs originated from the same data point (i.e., positive pairs) and minimize that of dif-
ferent data points (i.e., negative pairs). Instead of considering two different transformations like
SimCLR does, we treat an original data point x and its transformed version x′ as a positive pair,
and all the rest as negative. We enforce this relationship by applying normalized temperature-scaled
cross entropy (NT-Xent) loss function introduced in SimCLR; therefore, semantically, the trans-
formed data could preserve more generic features. For the original data point x-based positive pair
(x, x′), the NT-Xent loss 𝑙x𝑟∗ is

                                                                       cos p𝑟x∗ ,p𝑟x∗′ /𝜏
                                                                   𝑒
                       𝑙 x𝑟∗ = − log                                                                                 ,   (5)
                                       Í                 cos p𝑟x∗ ,p𝑟y∗′ /𝜏                 cos ( p𝑟x∗ ,p𝑟y∗ ) /𝜏
                                           y∈X       𝑒                        + 𝟙y≠x · 𝑒

and similarly for the transformed data point x′-based positive pair (x′, x), the NT-Xent loss 𝑙 x𝑟∗′ is

                                                                       cos p𝑟x∗′ ,p𝑟x∗ /𝜏
                                                                   𝑒
                       𝑙x𝑟∗′ = − log                                                                           ,         (6)
                                       Í                 cos p𝑟x∗′ ,p𝑟y∗ /𝜏                 cos p𝑟x∗′ ,p𝑟y∗′ /𝜏
                                           y∈X 𝑒                              + 𝟙y≠x · 𝑒

where p𝑟x∗ = 𝑃𝑟∗ (𝐹 𝑟∗ (x)) and p𝑟x∗′ = 𝑃𝑟∗ (𝐹 𝑟∗ (x′)) are the attribute-agnostic logits computed from the
original and transformed data points, respectively; 𝜏 controls the contribution proportion between
the positive and the negative samples, with a higher 𝜏 value indicating a bigger contribution from


                                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                      1,   y≠x
the positive samples, and vice versa; and 𝟙y≠x is the indicator function 𝟙y≠x =                 . The total
                                                                                      0,   o.w.
loss for the preservation branch is thus aggregated across all data points
                                                    1 ∑︁ 𝑟∗ 𝑟∗
                                     𝐿 𝑟∗ = 𝑤 𝑟∗ ·       (𝑙 + 𝑙 x′ ),                                   (7)
                                                   2𝑁 x∈X x

which enables the preservation branch to enforce the underlying representations of the transformed
data points in X′ to reach maximal agreement with their corresponding origins from X while main-
taining their discriminative characteristics with each other.

Attribute-Specific. In addition to the attribute-agnostic case discussed above, there could also be
attribute-specific situations, where the set 𝑅 of attributes that needs to be preserved is explicitly
defined in advance for the data transformation. Therefore, we can pretrain the inference models on
the original dataset X like in the suppression branch. To account for this extra information, 𝑅, we
formulate the loss function similar to Eq. 2, except that here we want to maximize the similarities as
opposed to minimizing them, as follows,
                                                 1 ∑︁
                                    𝐿 𝑟 = −𝑤 𝑟 ·       sim𝑟 (x′, x),                               (8)
                                                 𝑁 x∈X

where 𝑤 𝑟 is the weight for each attribute 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅.
Finally, collecting all the loss terms from the data modifier, the suppression branch, as well as the
attribute-agnostic and attribute-specific components of the preservation branch, we have the overall
optimization loss                       ∑︁                      ∑︁
                                    𝐿=     𝐿 𝑠 + 𝐿 rec + 𝐿 𝑟∗ +    𝐿𝑟 .                           (9)
                                       𝑠 ∈𝑆                  𝑟 ∈𝑅


4     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We next present and discuss our experimental evaluation of MaSS on its ability to perform selective
attribute suppression and preservation when carrying out data transformations.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We evaluated MaSS on three multi-attribute datasets of different domains, namely Adience (Ei-
dinger et al., 2014) for facial images, AudioMNIST (Becker et al., 2018) for voice recordings, and
PA-HMDB (Wu et al., 2020) for video clips. For all datasets, we converted all their raw data points
to feature embeddings via state-of-the-art neural networks as the input X. Table 1 lists the feature ex-
tractors used for each dataset, as well as the corresponding feature dimension and the architecture of
MLP used in the data modifier. All our experiments were designed to examine MaSS’ performance
on attribute suppression and preservation quality, and not whether it could generate high quality
synthetic data. Therefore, each transformed x′ would stay in the same feature space as its corre-
sponding x. We next briefly introduce the datasets, as well as the training and evaluation protocols.
More details can be found in Appx. A and B.

Adience. The Adience image dataset was originally published to help study the recognition of age
and gender. Each image is also associated with a DataID. In total, the dataset used in our experiment
contains 1,089 different DataIDs, 8 age groups, and 2 gender classes. We split the dataset into 2,815
for training and 2,525 for validation.

AudioMNIST. The AudioMNIST dataset contains audio recordings of spoken digits (0-9) in En-
glish from 60 speakers.
In addition to speakerID and spoken digits, the dataset also contain accent and gender attributes.
Therefore, we use AudioMNIST as a 4-attribute dataset, namely speakerID, spoken digits, accent,
and gender, with 60, 10, 18, and 2 classes, respectively. There are 30,000 audio clips in total. We
split the data into 18,000, 6,000, and 6,000 for training, validation, and testing, respectively.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Table 1: Model configuration for each dataset.
           Dataset               Feature Extractor              Feature Dimension      MLP in Data Modifier
         Adience           FaceNet (Schroff et al., 2015)               512           512-256-128-256-512
         AudioMNIST        HuBERT-L (Hsu et al., 2021)                 1024          1024-256-128-256-1024
         PA-HMDB           R3D-18 (Tran et al., 2018)                   512           512-256-128-256-512


Table 2: Results on Adience under different configurations. The checkmark (✓) denotes that the
particular loss is used in the optimization. DataID is selected as the suppression target.
                              Loss Configuration                              Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                      𝐿 rec     𝐿 𝑠1    𝐿 𝑟∗   𝐿 𝑟1    𝐿 𝑟2         DataID (𝑠1 )    Age (𝑟 1 )   Gender (𝑟 2 )
         Original      -         -       -       -          -          90.8           89.1           97.4
                       ✓         ✓      -       -       -               0.0           33.8           73.5
                       ✓         ✓      ✓       -       -               0.6           78.5           95.7
         MaSS          ✓         ✓      ✓       ✓       -               0.7           86.1           95.9
                       ✓         ✓      ✓       ✓       ✓               0.6           86.9           96.7


PA-HMDB. The PA-HMDB51 dataset is subset of HMDB51 and it contains 6 attributes: action,
skin color, face, gender, nudity, and relationship (Kuehne et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2020). The action
label is annotated at video-level while the other non-action attributes are at frame-level. Nonetheless,
PA-HMDB51 only contains about 500 videos, it is only used for evaluation. There are 51 different
action classes. The other 5 non-action attributes are all binary. As there is no training data for the
non-action attributes in PA-HDMB51, we used VISPR (Orekondy et al., 2017) for training them,
and used HMDB51 for the action attribute. MaSS was evaluated on both VISPR and PA-HMDB51.

Training and Evaluation Protocols. Before we can start training MaSS’ data modifier 𝐺, we first
need to train the models for the attributes we intend to suppress in the suppression branch, as well
as the attribute-agnostic model for the preservation branch, and potentially also the attribute-specific
models if the corresponding labels for those attributes are available. The training details for those
pretrained models are in Appx. B.1 and B.2. Subsequently, each of these pre-trained models is
used in either the suppression or the preservation branch during the training of the data modifier 𝐺
via optimizing Eq. 9 defined in Sec. 3. The details of training MaSS are described in Appx. B.3,
including the similarity measurements, hyperparameters, loss weights, etc. Note that during training
𝐺, the pre-trained models in both branches are fixed without any update. For evaluation, we use the
trained data modifier to generate new data and feed them through the pre-trained models and examine
their performance. For both Adience and AudioMNIST, we use top-1 accuracy as the metric and
report the results on each attribute. For PA-HMDB51, we follow the same practice as PA-HMDB51
to aggregate the performance of the 5 non-action attributes via macro-average of classwise mean
average precision (cMAP) and use top-1 accuracy for action.

4.2   C OMPARISON TO BASELINES

First, we examine the effects of each of the loss terms for each of the datasets. Table 2 shows
the performance on Adience where DataID is targeted for suppresion, and the others are expected
to be preserved. When only imposing attribute suppression (𝐿 rec and 𝐿 𝑠1 ), MaSS did successfully
degrade the performance of DataID. But at the same time, the performance on age and gender
deteriorated significantly. When we added the attribute-agnostic loss (𝐿 𝑟∗ ), MaSS still achieved
good suppression on DataID. But at the same time it greatly improved the recognition accuracy on
age and gender. Note that, we do not use any information from age and gender attributes during the
training. Moreover, when the age information (𝐿 𝑟1 ) was incorporated in MaSS, the performance of
age detection on the transoformed dataset almost returned to the same level as that of the original
dataset. The same trend can be observed for the gender attribute (𝐿 𝑟2 ) as well.
A similar outcome can also be observed for the AudioMNIST dataset (Table 3), where SpeakerID
was treated as the suppression target, and all the rest of the attributes were expected to be preserved.
When MaSS only used suppression (𝐿 rec and 𝐿 𝑠1 ), SpeakerID score did reduce, but so did the
other attributes. Adding the attribute-agnostic loss (𝐿 𝑟∗ ) brought significant improvement for the


                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Results on AudioMNIST under different configurations. The checkmark (✓) denotes that
the particular loss term is used in the optimization. SpeakerID is selected as the suppression target.
                          Loss Configuration                                            Top-1 Accuracy (%)
             𝐿 rec     𝐿 𝑠1    𝐿 𝑟∗      𝐿 𝑟1     𝐿 𝑟2       𝐿 𝑟3   SpeakerID (𝑠1 )     Digit (𝑟 1 )    Accent (𝑟 2 )   Gender (𝑟 3 )
 Original     -           -        -        -          -      -            95.6            99.8             99.3            96.5
              ✓           ✓        -        -        -       -              0.0            26.2             45.3            53.5
              ✓           ✓        ✓        -        -       -              1.7            67.4             68.7            88.2
 MaSS         ✓           ✓        ✓        ✓        -       -              1.7            99.7             68.4            80.0
              ✓           ✓        ✓        ✓        ✓       -              1.7            99.7             95.1            86.6
              ✓           ✓        ✓        ✓        ✓       ✓              1.7            99.6             95.7            98.4

Table 4: Results on VISPR and PA-HMDB under different configurations. The checkmark (✓)
denotes that the particular loss term is used in the optimization. Metrics for the action attribute
is Top-1 Accuracy (%) while cMAP (%) is used for the other 5 non-action attributes. MaSS is
configured to suppress the non-action attributes.
                       Loss Configuration                           VISPR                              PA-HMDB
                     𝐿 rec    𝐿 𝑠1     𝐿 𝑟∗     𝐿 𝑟1       Non-action Attrs. (𝑠1 )    Action (𝑟 1 )     Non-action Attrs. (𝑠1 )
      Original        -        -        -        -                  81.8                 58.7                    79.7
                      ✓       ✓        -        -                   41.8                 12.6                    70.3
      MaSS            ✓       ✓        ✓        -                   36.3                 52.1                    63.2
                      ✓       ✓        ✓        ✓                   38.6                 58.0                    63.4



performance of all the other three attributes. Finally, when the attribute information were available
(𝐿 𝑟1 , 𝐿 𝑟2 and 𝐿 𝑟3 ), MaSS was able to boost the preservation performance to near perfection without
reducing the suppression quality on SpeakerID.
Table 4 shows the performance of MaSS on the video dataset. With only suppression (𝐿 rec and
𝐿 𝑠1 ), MaSS indeed lowered the cMAP on both VISPR and PA-HMDB. However, the performance
on the action attribute also dropped significantly. By adding the attribute-agnostic loss (𝐿 𝑟∗ ), MaSS
was able to significantly improve the accuracy of the action attribute without utilizing any label
information. We do notice a slight decrease in the performance of other attributes, which also aligns
with the observation in SPAct (Dave et al., 2022), When the action label (𝐿 𝑟1 ) was incorporated,
MaSS was able to preserve the same action accuracy while suppressing the other attributes.
All experimental results above show that MaSS is highly configurable and effective even without
knowing the downstream tasks in advance. Moreover, when the information of downstream task is
available, MaSS can boost the performance on the corresponding specific attributes.

4.3   C OMPARISON TO OTHER M ETHODS

As MaSS includes both suppression and preservation, there is limited prior work for direct com-
parison since most of them focus on suppression only. Therefore, we first compared MaSS with
the heuristic methods, e.g., perturbation on the original data, additive noise in the feature space for
both the Adience and AudioMNIST datasets. For Adience, we further compared MaSS to CIA-
GAN (Maximov et al., 2020), DeepPrivacy (Hukkelås et al., 2019) and Fawkes (Shan et al., 2020)
even though they only performed suppression. Lastly, we compared MaSS to SPAct on PA-HMDB.
More details on the comparisons can be found in Appx. D.
Table 5 shows the comparison on Adience. As most methods were designed to suppress DataID,
we configured MaSS to suppress DataID and preserve the others with attribute-agnostic setting
for comparison. First, adding noise in the feature domain lowered the accuracy on the DataID
attribute but it also degraded the performance on age and gender. On the other hand, for all the
methods which manipulate data in the original domain, including Gaussian blurring with different
kernel sizes and standard deviations, downsampling and upsampling back to the original size, and
obfuscating the various face area where the face is detected by MTCNN (Schroff et al., 2015), they
led to similar results since they did not learn what features should be preserved for downstream tasks.
By modifying faces in the image space, CIAGAN (Maximov et al., 2020), DeepPrivacy (Hukkelås


                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Comparison to other methods on Adience. Top-1 accuracy (%) is reported. Features and
Raw Data denote that the changes are made on the feature level and the image level, respectively.
                                 Method                            DataID (↓)           Age (↑)    Gender (↑)
                             Features, 𝜎 = 0.5                            50.8           56.8            88.1
         Gaussian Noise
                             Features, 𝜎 = 1.0                             0.5           26.8            54.9
                             Raw Data, 𝑘 = 11, 𝜎 = 10.0                   39.4           49.0            86.5
         Guassian Blur
                             Raw Data, 𝑘 = 21, 𝜎 = 15.0                    1.0           19.3            66.2
                             Raw Data, 8×                                 11.0           30.3            78.7
         Downsample
                             Raw Data, 4×                                 79.3           74.7            94.3
                             Raw Data, Face area, ratio = 1.0              0.8           17.1            59.5
         Obfuscation         Raw Data, Face area, ratio = 0.36             4.0           29.8            81.6
                             Raw Data, Face area, ratio = 0.09            57.7           64.1            93.9
         CIAGAN                                                           1.1            17.8            66.9
         DeepPrivacy                                                      5.9            32.2            84.0
         Fawkes                                                           24.7           47.6            87.8
         MaSS                𝐿 𝑟 𝑒𝑐 + 𝐿 𝑠1 + 𝐿 𝑟∗                         0.6            78.5            95.7

    Table 6: Comparison with other methods on AudioMNIST. Top-1 accuracy (%) is reported.
              Method                          SpeakerID (↓)   Digit (↑)     Accent (↑)      Gender (↑)
              White Noise (Raw Data)                4.7         23.3             23.4             32.2
              Masking (Raw Data)                    1.8         10.6              3.9             80.0
              MaSS (𝐿 𝑟 𝑒𝑐 + 𝐿 𝑠1 + 𝐿 𝑟∗ )          1.7         67.4             68.7             88.2


et al., 2019) and Fawkes (Shan et al., 2020) were able to lower the performance on DataID again.
However, they still weren’t capable of preserving any features for the other attributes. In contrast,
MaSS not only suppressed DataID but also preserved much more data utility such that the data could
still perform well on age and gender detection tasks, even though no additional information on age
or gender was made available to MaSS.
The comparative study results on AudioMNIST are listed in Table 6. The heuristic approaches were
capable of suppressing SpeakerID, as well as the other attributes indiscriminatively. Nonetheless,
MaSS can retain the other attributes without knowing the downstream tasks while still achieving
SpeakerID suppression. Lastly, comparing to SPAct (Dave et al., 2022) on PA-HMDB1 , MaSS
achieved competitive suppression ratio of cMAP on both datasets (VISPR: 55.6% vs. 57% and PA-
HMDB: 20.7% vs. 16%) for the other 5 non-action attributes. In addition, MaSS also provides the
flexibility to configure which attributes to suppress while SPAct can only target all five attributes at
the same time.
Additional ablation studies of MaSS, including suppressing different/multiple attributes, effects of
loss weights and different similarity measurements, can be found in Appx. C.

5    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed MaSS to selectively suppress attributes while preserving other attributes;
moreover, with the proposed attribute-agnostic approach, the preservation can be achieved without
foreseeing the downstream tasks, which expands the usability of the proposed algorithm. We val-
idated our method in three datasets in different domains, including facial images, voice audio and
video clips, and all results showed that our method is promising in attribute suppression and preser-
vation. Lastly, we would like to point out that we validated MaSS in the feature space rather than the
original data space; an interesting future direction, which is beyond the scope of this paper, would
be to integrate MaSS with generative models, such as GAN or diffusion models to further convert
the transformed feature vectors back into their original representation space (image, audio, etc.).

   1 We compared SPAct based on their Table 8 in the paper, which is the closest to our setting. Because the
baseline performance is different, we show here the relative suppression results. See Table 16 for details.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Code of Ethics and Ethics statement. Our work is to selectively suppress the attributes in multi-
attribute data while preserving their potential utility such that the sensitive information in the data
could be minimized and hence the data could be used to benefit the community. We believe that
there are no ethical concerns related to this work.

Reproducibility Statement. We provided the training and evaluation details in the main paper
and appendix. Our source codes and models will be publicly available to help better understand the
settings of training and evaluation.

R EFERENCES
Sören Becker, Marcel Ackermann, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech
   Samek. Interpreting and explaining deep neural networks for classification of audio signals. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1807.03418, 2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Matthijs Douze. Deep clustering for unsu-
 pervised learning of visual features. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
 Vision (ECCV), September 2018.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
George Cazenavette, Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Alexei A. Efros, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dataset
  distillation by matching training trajectories. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10718–10727, June 2022.
Jia-Wei Chen, Li-Ju Chen, Chia-Mu Yu, and Chun-Shien Lu. Perceptual indistinguishability-net
   (pi-net): Facial image obfuscation with manipulable semantics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6478–6487, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html.
Zhi-Qi Cheng, Xiao Wu, Siyu Huang, Jun-Xiu Li, Alexander G. Hauptmann, and Qiang Peng.
  Learning to transfer: Generalizable attribute learning with multitask neural model search. In
  Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’18, pp. 90–98,
  New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450356657. doi:
  10.1145/3240508.3240518. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3240508.3240518.
Ishan Rajendrakumar Dave, Chen Chen, and Mubarak Shah. Spact: Self-supervised privacy preser-
   vation for action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tian Dong, Bo Zhao, and Lingjuan Lyu. Privacy for free: How does dataset condensation help
  privacy? In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
  Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5378–5396. PMLR, 17–23 Jul
  2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/dong22c.html.
Eran Eidinger, Roee Enbar, and Tal Hassner. Age and gender estimation of unfiltered faces. IEEE
  Transactions on information forensics and security, 9(12):2170–2179, 2014.
Zeyu Feng, Chang Xu, and Dacheng Tao. Self-supervised representation learning by rotation feature
  decoupling. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 10356–10366, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.01061.
Wikimedia Foundation. Acl 2019 fourth conference on machine translation (wmt19), shared
 task: Machine translation of news, 2019. URL http://www.statmt.org/wmt19/
 translation-task.html.
Abigail Goldsteen, Gilad Ezov, Ron Shmelkin, Micha Moffie, and Ariel Farkash. Data minimization
  for gdpr compliance in machine learning models. AI and Ethics, pp. 1–15, 2021.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:21271–21284, 2020.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2021.3122291.
Siyu Huang, Xi Li, Zhi-Qi Cheng, Zhongfei Zhang, and Alexander Hauptmann. Gnas: A greedy
  neural architecture search method for multi-attribute learning. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
  International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’18, pp. 2049–2057, New York, NY, USA, 2018.
  Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450356657. doi: 10.1145/3240508.3240588.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3240508.3240588.
Håkon Hukkelås, Rudolf Mester, and Frank Lindseth. Deepprivacy: A generative adversarial net-
  work for face anonymization. In George Bebis, Richard Boyle, Bahram Parvin, Darko Koracin,
  Daniela Ushizima, Sek Chai, Shinjiro Sueda, Xin Lin, Aidong Lu, Daniel Thalmann, Chaoli
  Wang, and Panpan Xu (eds.), Advances in Visual Computing, pp. 565–578, Cham, 2019. Springer
  International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-33720-9.
J. Kahn, M. Rivière, W. Zheng, E. Kharitonov, Q. Xu, P. E. Mazaré, J. Karadayi, V. Liptchinsky,
   R. Collobert, C. Fuegen, T. Likhomanenko, G. Synnaeve, A. Joulin, A. Mohamed, and E. Dupoux.
   Libri-light: A benchmark for asr with limited or no supervision. In ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE
   International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 7669–7673,
   2020. https://github.com/facebookresearch/libri-light.
Davis E King. Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  10:1755–1758, 2009.
Hildegard Kuehne, Hueihan Jhuang, Estı́baliz Garrote, Tomaso Poggio, and Thomas Serre. Hmdb: a
  large video database for human motion recognition. In 2011 International conference on computer
  vision, pp. 2556–2563. IEEE, 2011.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jingzhi Li, Lutong Han, Ruoyu Chen, Hua Zhang, Bing Han, Lili Wang, and Xiaochun Cao.
   Identity-preserving face anonymization via adaptively facial attributes obfuscation. In Proceed-
   ings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 3891–3899, 2021.
Bo Liu, Ming Ding, Sina Shaham, Wenny Rahayu, Farhad Farokhi, and Zihuai Lin. When machine
  learning meets privacy: A survey and outlook. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(2):1–36,
  2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   Bkg6RiCqY7.
Edward Ma. Nlp augmentation. https://github.com/makcedward/nlpaug, 2019.
Maxim Maximov, Ismail Elezi, and Laura Leal-Taixe. Ciagan: Conditional identity anonymiza-
 tion generative adversarial networks. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
Bill Moriarty, Chun-Fu Richard Chen, Shaohan Hu, Sean Moran, Marco Pistoia, Vincenzo Piuri,
  and Pierangela Samarati. Utility-preserving biometric information anonymization. In European
  Symposium on Research in Computer Security, pp. 24–41. Springer, 2022.
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Bernt Schiele, and Mario Fritz. Towards a visual privacy advisor: Un-
  derstanding and predicting privacy risks in images. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 3686–3695, 2017.
Rui Qian, Tianjian Meng, Boqing Gong, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Huisheng Wang, Serge Belongie,
  and Yin Cui. Spatiotemporal contrastive video representation learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6964–6974,
  June 2021.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion (CVPR), pp. 815–823, 2015. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298682.
Shawn Shan, Emily Wenger, Jiayun Zhang, Huiying Li, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y. Zhao. Fawkes:
  Protecting privacy against unauthorized deep learning models. In Proceedings of the 29th USENIX
  Conference on Security Symposium, SEC’20, USA, 2020. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-
  939133-17-5.
Du Tran, Heng Wang, Lorenzo Torresani, Jamie Ray, Yann LeCun, and Manohar Paluri. A closer
  look at spatiotemporal convolutions for action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.
Kai Wang, Bo Zhao, Xiangyu Peng, Zheng Zhu, Shuo Yang, Shuo Wang, Guan Huang, Hakan
  Bilen, Xinchao Wang, and Yang You. Cafe: Learning to condense dataset by aligning features. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 12196–12205, June 2022.
Zhenyu Wu, Haotao Wang, Zhaowen Wang, Hailin Jin, and Zhangyang Wang. Privacy-preserving
  deep action recognition: An adversarial learning framework and a new dataset. IEEE Transactions
  on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2020.
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=mSAKhLYLSsl.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX
In the appendix, we provided the supplemented materials, including data preprocessing in Sec. A. In
Sec. B, we described model pre-training for contrastive learning, model training for single attribute
and MaSS. We included the ablation studies in Sec. C and how to generate compared results in
Table 5 and Table 6 in Sec. D. Our source code and models will be publicly available to help better
understand the settings of training and evaluation.

A     DATA PREPROCESSING
As briefly discussed in the main manuscript, MaSS takes a feature vector in and then generates a
feature vector instead of operating on the raw data. Therefore, for each dataset, we convert the
data into feature vectors via state-of-the-art neural networks and then normalize the vector by its
L2-norm.

Adience. We first resize the image into 160 × 160 and normalize the image by the mean and the
standard deviation used in the FaceNet (Schroff et al., 2015). Then, we feed the normalized image
into FaceNet to get a 512-d feature vector.

AudioMNIST. The majority of the information in audio signal resides at the beginning, and the
average length of a waveform is 30,844 samples and the upper quartile is 34,380. Therefore, we
either truncate and pad (zeros) the waveform to the length of 30,000 at the end such that the data
loader can form them as a batch to speed up the training. Then, we feed the truncated/padded
waveform into Hubert-L (Hsu et al., 2021) to get a 1024-d feature vector after performing average
pooling on the output of Hubert-L along the time dimension.

VISPR and PA-HMDB. R3D-18 is trained with the clip size of 16 × 112 × 112 and generates
a 512-d feature vector; therefore, we resize the spatial dimension of a video into 112 × 112 and
then sample 16 frames (every other frame) out of a video to form a clip. For VISPR, since it is
an image dataset, we generate a 16-frame clip by duplicating the same image and then pass it to
R3D-18 to extract features. On the other hand, for the action attribute in PA-HMDB, we convert
each video into frame-level feature vectors by R3D-18. More specifically, for each timestamp, we
take its neighboring frame (every other frames) to form a 16-frame clip and then feed it to R3D-18.
E.g., for a video with 100 frames, we will get 100 512-d feature vectors. For the other attributes in
PA-HMDB, since those labels are image-level instead of video-level, we simply assign the labels to
the frame-level features extracted above.

B     M ODEL T RAINING
B.1   ATTRIBUTE -AGNOSTIC M ODEL P RE - TRAINING

For all datasets, we follow similar practices to train attribute-agnostic models via SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020). First, we generate two views of data by different data augmentation in the raw data
domain, and then the two views of data are passed through the fixed feature extractor to get its
feature representation. After that, we train a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) as an encoder to learn a
generic feature representation over the features extracted by the fixed feature extractor. The MLP
is composed of two fully-connected layers with the same dimension as the input feature dimension,
and 1-D batch normalization layer and ReLU are added between fully-connected layers. The trained
MLP is served as attribute-agnostic model in MaSS. Note that we also adopt the MLP-projector
in the contrastive learning to achieve better performance. We train the model for 100 epochs with
temperature 0.07 via the stochastic gradient decent (SGD) optimizer. The weight decay is set to
0.0001 and the learning rate starts from 0.05 and then it is annealed with cosine schedule. In the
follow paragraphs, we describe how to generate different views for each dataset.

Adience. To generate two views, we first resize images to 160 × 160 and then randomly flip the
image horizontally; after that, we randomly perform color jitter via torchvision package with 80%
probability and then convert the image into gray scale with 20% probability.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Table 7: Model training settings for each dataset in Table 2, 3 and 4.
      Dataset   #GPUs    Batch Size per GPU   Learning Rate    Loss Weights
                                                               𝑤 rec = 1, 𝑤 𝑠1 = 5, ℎ 𝑠1 = 1
   Adience         1             64             0.00125
                                                               𝑤 𝑟∗ = 40, 𝑤 𝑟1 = 1, 𝑤 𝑟2 = 1
                                                               𝑤 rec = 10, 𝑤 𝑠1 = 0.001, ℎ 𝑠1 = 0.1
 AudioMNIST        4            128               0.01
                                                               𝑤 𝑟∗ = 15, 𝑤 𝑟1 = 0.01, 𝑤 𝑟2 = 0.001, 𝑤 𝑟3 = 0.001
                                                               𝑤 rec = 1, 𝑤 𝑠1 = 1, ℎ 𝑠1 = 0.1
  PA-HMDB          4            128               0.01
                                                               𝑤 𝑟∗ = 1000, 𝑤 𝑟1 = 50


Table 8: Results on Adience with different suppressed attribute, the experiments are completed
under the loss setting of 𝐿 𝑟 𝑒𝑐 + 𝐿 𝑠1 + 𝐿 𝑟∗ , where 𝑠1 is the suppressed attribute.
                                                              Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                               Suppressed Attribute
                                                          DataID       Age       Gender
                                      DataID                0.6        78.5        95.7
                       MaSS            Age                 81.2        13.7        94.5
                                      Gender               77.2        75.3         8.3



AudioMNIST. In this work, we apply two different augmentations (Ma, 2019): random crop on
the entire audio with a coverage of 0.4 and mask with a coverage of 0.5 to each view respectively.
The crop augmentation removes the selected part from the audio, whereas mask substitutes it with
zeros.
We limited the data augmentations used in our methods to crop and mask because other augmenta-
tion like pitch, loudness, speed, etc. would affect the structure of audio signal and potentially won’t
be able to retain attributes like gender, accent, and age.


PA-HMDB. We generate two views of data by following the practice in CVRL (Qian et al., 2021),
i.e., for a positive pair, two views are extracted from different time instance of a video and the
temporal-consistent data augmentation is performed on each view. The data augmentation is com-
posed of resizing the spatial dimension into 112 × 112, guassian blurring, randomly converting color
image into gray image.


B.2     ATTRIBUTE -S PECIFIC M ODEL P RE - TRAINING

For all attributes in all datasets, we train the attribute-specific model by using the cross-entropy loss
against the given label to compute the gradient for all parameters through back-propagation. The
model contains three fully-connected layers and with the dimension: input dim-512-256-number
of classes, and the 1-D batch normalization layer and ReLU are added between layers. We use a
batch size of 256 with the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) to train the model for
100 epochs. The weight-decay is fixed to 0.05 and the initial learning rate is set to 0.01 and then the
learning rate is annealed with the cosine scheduler.


B.3     M A SS T RAINING

The training on different datasets follows similar settings but with different loss weights. When train-
ing the data modifier 𝐺 in MaSS, all models in the suppression and preservation branches are fixed
without any update. We train all models with 100 epochs with the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2019) The weight-decay is 0.05 and we adopt cosine learning scheduler to anneal the
learning rate. For the loss type, in most of cases, we use cosine similarity measurement for the to-
be-suppressed attribute and KL divergence for the attribute-specific preservation. Table 7 described
other training details for different datasets.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Results on Adience with different weights on 𝐿 𝑟∗ , the experiments are completed under the
loss setting of 𝐿 𝑟 𝑒𝑐 + 𝐿 𝑠1 + 𝐿 𝑟∗ . We used 𝑤 𝑟∗ = 40 in our main results.
                                                  Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                                         𝑤 𝑟∗
                                                 DataID     Age     Gender
                                         10       0.0       69.4      73.5
                                         20       0.0       75.0      94.8
                              MaSS       40       0.6       78.5      95.7
                                         80       3.2       82.1      96.4
                                        160       13.5      83.5      96.4

Table 10: Results on Adience with different similarity measurements in 𝐿 𝑠1 , the experiments are
completed under the loss setting of 𝐿 𝑟 𝑒𝑐 + 𝐿 𝑠1 + 𝐿 𝑟∗ . 𝑠1 is DataID.
                                                          Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                                     Similarity
                                                     DataID        Age    Gender
                                     Cosine               0.6      78.5      95.7
                        MaSS      KL divergence           0.2      76.2      95.8
                                       CE                 0.1      76.7      94.9

Table 11: Results on Adience under multiple suppressed attributes. The DataID and gender are
selected to be suppressed. MaSS is configured with 𝐿 𝑟∗ and 𝐿 𝑟1 .
                                              Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                                      DataID (𝑠1 ) Gender (𝑠2 ) Age (𝑟 1 )
                          Original        90.8             97.4           89.1
                          MaSS             0.9              5.0           83.8


C    A BLATION S TUDIES
In ablation studies, we use the Adience dataset for all experiments and we discuss MaSS in three
perspectives, including suppressing different attributes, effects of loss weights, effects of similarity
measurement.

Suppression Target. In the main manuscript, we always suppress DataID in all experiments; how-
ever, MaSS is configurable to suppress any attribute while still preserving others. Table 8 shows the
results by suppressing different attributes. Only the performance of the selected attribute is degraded
while other attributes are still good. Note that those results do not include any attribute-specific mod-
els in the preservation branch. The result shows that MaSS is flexible to configure to suppress any
attribute and preserve others.

Loss Weights. Intuitively, the loss weight controls which loss term should be focused on more
during the optimization. In this ablation study, we vary the weights for the attribute-agnostic model
and the results are shown in Table 9. Since 𝐿 𝑟∗ controls how generic the feature representation is,
the higher weights preserve more generic features; therefore, the transformed dataset could perform
better for all attributes. However, when 𝐿 𝑟∗ is 160, the accuracy of DataID is also increased because
the strength of suppression is not strong enough since the weight of 𝐿 𝑟∗ is too high.

Different Similarity Measurement for Suppression. We proposed three different measurements
for the similarity in the main manuscript. Those measurements provided similar functionalities
conceptually but they might work different empirically. Table 10 shows the results with different
measurements, and all results are close to each other. Therefore, for suppression, we use cosine for
all experiments.

Multiple Suppressed Attributes. Table 11 shows the results when we configured MaSS to sup-
press multiple attributes, DataID and gender. The accuracy of both DataID and gender attributes are


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 12: Ablation studies of losses in the suppression branch on Adience. DataID is selected as the
suppression target.
                     Loss Configuration                                                                              Top-1 Accuracy (%)
              𝐿 𝑠1        𝐿 𝑟 𝑒𝑐         Entropy Loss                           L2 Loss          Entropy      DataID (𝑠1 )         Gender         Age
                 ✓          -                           -                        0.003             5.4               0.0              28.6        68.9
   MaSS
                 ✓          ✓                           -                        0.002             5.4               0.0              27.4        68.1
                 ✓          ✓                           ✓                        0.002             6.6               0.0              33.8        73.5

Table 13: Results on Adience under different configurations. DataID is selected as the suppression
target.
                                    Loss Configuration                                                   Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                          𝐿 rec          𝐿 𝑠1           𝐿 𝑟∗           𝐿 𝑟1      𝐿 𝑟2       DataID (𝑠1 )       Age (𝑟 1 )       Gender (𝑟 2 )
         Original             -              -               -          -         -               90.8              89.1              97.4
                            ✓                ✓              ✓          ✓          ✓               0.6               86.9              96.7
         MaSS
                            ✓                ✓              -          ✓          ✓               0.0               84.5              96.3

Table 14: Results on AudioMNIST under different configurations. The checkmark (✓) denotes that
the particular loss term is used in the optimization. SpeakerID is selected as the suppression target.
                      Loss Configuration                                                                  Top-1 Accuracy (%)
            𝐿 rec    𝐿 𝑠1         𝐿 𝑟∗           𝐿 𝑟1        𝐿 𝑟2       𝐿 𝑟3      SpeakerID (𝑠1 )         Digit (𝑟 1 )     Accent (𝑟 2 )     Gender (𝑟 3 )
 Original    -        -            -              -              -          -              95.6              99.8              99.3               96.5
             ✓       ✓            ✓              ✓               ✓       ✓                 1.7               99.6              95.7               98.4
 MaSS
             ✓       ✓            -              ✓               ✓       ✓                 1.6               99.7              95.0               97.7


Table 15: Results on VISPR and PA-HMDB under different configurations. The checkmark (✓)
denotes that the particular loss term is used in the optimization. Metrics for the action attribute
is Top-1 Accuracy (%) while cMAP (%) is used for the other 5 non-action attributes. MaSS is
configured to suppress the non-action attributes.
                 Loss Configuration                                              VISPR                                     PA-HMDB
             𝐿 rec     𝐿 𝑠1            𝐿 𝑟∗           𝐿 𝑟1           Non-action Attrs. (𝑠1 )              Action (𝑟 1 )      Non-action Attrs. (𝑠1 )
 Original        -        -              -              -                         81.8                       58.7                          79.7
              ✓           ✓            ✓                ✓                         38.6                       58.0                          63.4
 MaSS
              ✓           ✓            -                ✓                         38.3                       52.2                          63.6



suppressed successfully but the age attribute can still be recognized even without age labels. With
age label, MaSS can further improve its accuracy.

Losses in Suppression Branch. Here, we further explore the effects of L2 reconstruction loss and
prediction entropy loss applied in the suppression branch.
We add the L2 reconstruction loss to minimize changes in the data while suppressing the targeted
attributes; thus, we are able to keep the data as truthful as possible. The prediction entropy loss is
added to increase the entropy of the predicted probability such that the prediction of the modified
data becomes closer to a random guess; thus, there is less information in the prediction.
Table 12 shows the effects of these two loss terms when only suppression is considered, i.e., no
preservation branch. With L2 reconstruction loss, the overall performance of attribute recognition
does not affected; however, it reduced the overall L2 loss. After adding prediction entropy loss, the
accuracy of DataID is still 0% but its entropy is increased, which makes the prediction closer to a
random guess, as desired.


                                                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 16: Comparison to SPAct (Dave et al., 2022), Metrics for the action attribute is Top-1 Accu-
racy (%) while cMAP (%) is used for the other 5 non-action attributes. Non-action attributes are
suppressed in the experiment, and MaSS is configured without 𝐿 𝑟1 .
                             VISPR                                     PA-HMDB
                             Non-action Attrs. (𝑠1 )   Action (𝑟 1 )    Non-action Attrs. (𝑠1 )
         Original            81.8                      58.7             79.7
         MaSS                36.3 (↓55.6%)             52.1             63.2 (↓20.7%)
         Original (SPAct)    64.4                      -                70.1
         SPAct               27.4 (↓57%)               -                58.9 (↓16%)


Effects of 𝐿 𝑟∗ with All Labels. In Table 2, 3 and 4, we have shown that the benefits to have
attribute-agnostic loss (𝐿 𝑟∗ ) compared to suppression only. Here, we discussed the contribution
of 𝐿 𝑟∗ when all to-be-preserved attributes are available, and the results are shown in Table 13, 14
and 15. Without 𝐿 𝑟∗ , it achieved competitive performance on to-be-preserved attributes to the one
with 𝐿 𝑟∗ on Adience and AudioMNIST for all attributes. Moreover, for PA-HMDB, without 𝐿 𝑟∗ , the
accuracy of action is degraded 5.8%, we conjecture that even though the generic feature retained by
enforcing 𝐿 𝑟∗ help the data utilities of the modified data.

D    C OMPARED R ESULTS
Adience. We compared many approaches in Table 5 and here we describe the details for how
to generate those results. First, for Gaussian noise, we added zero-mean with different standard
deviations (𝜎) into the original feature vectors to manipulate data. For Gaussian blur, downsample
and obfuscation are all performed in the raw data domain, and then the modified data are passed
through FaceNet to get the feature representation. For Gaussian blur, we apply zero-mean with
various standard deviations (𝜎) with different kernel sizes (𝑘) to blur the image. For downsample,
we downsample the data with different ratios and then upsample it back to original size. Lastly, for
obfuscation, we use MTCNN to detect the location of the face and then remove the face region with
different ratios.
For CIAGAN (Maximov et al., 2020), we first followed CIAGAN’s method to pre-extract the
masked face and the facial landmark information for the Adience dataset by using the Dlib-ml li-
brary (King, 2009). And then, the CIAGAN model takes in the Adience images, their landmarks,
masked faces and the desired target. For DeepPrivacy (Hukkelås et al., 2019) and Fawkes (Shan
et al., 2020), we adjusted the released codes and ran over the Adience dataset to generate new im-
ages.
After we obtain the transformed Adience images, we use the same procedure as ours for evaluation:
using FaceNet (Schroff et al., 2015) to extract the feature vector of an image.

AudioMNIST. We compared two methods in AudioMNIST, including adding white noise and
masking out a portion of waveform based on the nlpaug library (Ma, 2019). We use the default
parameter for white noise and set the masking ratio to 50% of the waveform.

SPAct. We tried our best to compare with SPAct (Dave et al., 2022) under the same experimental
condition; however, our absolute performance over the raw data is significantly better than their
paper; therefore, we only compare the relative gains to them. Moreover, under this setting, they do
not show the accuracy of the action attribute. Table 16 shows the comparison to SPAct and baselines.
When comparing to its own baseline, our method is competitive in suppressing non-action attributes
while keeping good accuracy in the action attribute.


                                                 17
