Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N OISE I S N OT THE M AIN FACTOR B EHIND THE G AP
B ETWEEN S GD AND A DAM ON T RANSFORMERS , B UT
S IGN D ESCENT M IGHT B E
 Frederik Kunstner, Jacques Chen, J. Wilder Lavington & Mark Schmidt†
 University of British Columbia, Canada CIFAR AI Chair (Amii)†
 {kunstner,jola2372,schmidtm}@cs.ubc.ca
 jacquesc@students.cs.ubc.ca



                                            A BSTRACT
         The success of the Adam optimizer on a wide array of architectures has made it
         the default in settings where stochastic gradient descent (SGD) performs poorly.
         However, our theoretical understanding of this discrepancy is lagging, preventing
         the development of significant improvements on either algorithm. Recent work
         advances the hypothesis that Adam and other heuristics like gradient clipping
         outperform SGD on language tasks because the distribution of the error induced by
         sampling has heavy tails. This suggests that Adam outperform SGD because it uses
         a more robust gradient estimate. We evaluate this hypothesis by varying the batch
         size, up to the entire dataset, to control for stochasticity. We present evidence that
         stochasticity and heavy-tailed noise are not major factors in the performance gap
         between SGD and Adam. Rather, Adam performs better as the batch size increases,
         while SGD is less effective at taking advantage of the reduction in noise. This raises
         the question as to why Adam outperforms SGD in the full-batch setting. Through
         further investigation of simpler variants of SGD, we find that the behavior of Adam
         with large batches is similar to sign descent with momentum.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) and its derivatives have been so successful in training deep learning
models that they have become the default optimizer for some architectures. Adam often outperforms
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) by such a margin that SGD is considered incapable of training
certain models, to the point of being omitted from performance comparisons (e.g. Liu et al., 2020;
Anil et al., 2019). Despite this success, we still do not understand why Adam works, much less why
it can outperform SGD by such a wide margin. We have made progress understanding why it should
not, as in the work of Reddi et al. (2018) who pointed out that Adam does not converge even on
convex problems, but this does not answer why Adam outperforms SGD.
The limited effectiveness of standard theory. We usually analyse optimization algorithms under
assumptions like Lipschitz continuous function/gradient and convexity (e.g. Nesterov, 2018, Chapters
2–3). Many works have focused on improving the analysis of Adam and its variants under those same
assumptions. But these assumptions are only models of how losses behave. They do not convey the
complexity of the optimization process in complex architectures, and are limited to showing that
Adam does not do much worse than gradient descent (Défossez et al., 2022; Alacaoglu et al., 2020).
Analyses in online learning also struggle to illuminate the gap. The assumption that the gradients
come from an adversary requires decreasing step-sizes (e.g. Hazan, 2022, Thm 3.1), which decrease
too quickly to perform well in practice. Our theoretical understanding is thus still limited in that we
cannot describe the empirical behavior we observe—that Adam outperforms SGD in many settings.
As a result, there is a sentiment in the community that the success of these heuristics need not be
due to robust theoretical underpinnings, but rather to social dynamics and a co-evolution of deep
learning architectures and optimization heuristics (see for example Orabona, 2020). These “adaptive”
algorithms might actually be adapted to type of problems where they outperform SGD. But this
suggests that they are leveraging some problem structure that our current theory and theory-derived
algorithms are missing. Understanding this structure may be key to develop better practical algorithms.


                                                   1
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 15
                             MNIST             CIFAR-10                          PTB                    WikiText-2                         SQuAD
                                                                  200                      100
                                         40                                                                                    500
                 10
     Counts                                                       100            10          50               10                           10
                   5                     20                                                                                    250
                                                                                  0                            0                            0
                   0                       0                        0                           0                                0
                       0.1       0.2           25        30                 0.7 0.8 0.9                 1.0            1.2           2.5        5.0
                       Gradient error          Gradient error           Gradient error              Gradient error                    Gradient error
                                                                    8                                                          101
                100                     101                                                101
Training loss


                                                                    6
                10 3                    10 2                        4                                                          100
                                                                                           100

                                     10 5                           2
                10 6                                                                      10 1                                 10 1
                       0     Epoch 100 0            Epoch 100           0        Epoch 100          0         Epoch          40     0      Epoch      5
                                           SGD(+m)              Adam(+m)              SGD( m)                      Adam( m)
    Figure 1: The Heavy-Tail hypothesis: the gap between SGD and Adam is caused by a heavier tail
    in the distribution of the stochastic gradient error. The performance gap between SGD and Adam
    is larger and more consistent on transformers on text data (right: PTB, Wikitext2, SQuAD) than on
    CNNs on image data (left: MNIST, CIFAR-10), which coincides with a heavier tail in the distribution
    of the stochastic gradient error. J. Zhang et al. (2020b) hypothesize that heavier tails might be the
    cause of this gap. Top: Distribution of errors in stochastic gradients at initialization (∥g − g̃∥ where
    g̃ is stochastic and g is a full gradient) compared against a Gaussian (QQ-plot). Bottom: SGD and
    Adam with and without momentum (+m/−m) with small batch sizes.


    The heavy-tailed assumption. Recent works have proposed alternative assumptions to model the
    behavior of optimizers on neural networks. One such assumption comes from J. Zhang et al. (2020b),
    who hypothesize that the gap in performance might arise from a heavy-tailed distribution of the error
    induced by stochasticity. They notice a larger and more consistent gap in the performance of SGD
    and Adam on language models than on image models, which coincides with a heavier tail in the
    distribution of the stochastic gradient error.1 We reproduce their observation in Figure 1. The proposed
    mechanism is that heavy-tailed errors have a larger impact on SGD than on Adam or gradient clipping,
    as the introduction of bias in the estimation of the gradient reduces its variance. This hypothesis
    suggests that a path to designing better algorithms is to improve robustness to heavy-tailed noise. For
    example, Gorbunov et al. (2020) combine acceleration and gradient clipping, while Srinivasan et al.
    (2021) leverage estimators tailored to heavy-tailed noise.
    Inconsistency with large batch results. J. Zhang et al. (2020b) note a correlation between heavy-
    tailedness and cases where Adam outperforms SGD, and give a mechanism to link heavy-tailed errors
    to this gap. However, the type of noise is not the only difference between image and language tasks.
    There is limited empirical evidence that stochasticity is the root cause of this gap. In fact, there are
    reasons to believe noise might not be a major contributor. For example, the lack of variance in the
    behavior of the optimizers on language tasks in Figure 1 suggests they are less sensitive to noise than
    image tasks. Moreover, we would expect the gap to diminish as the noise is reduced by increasing
    the batch size. However, methods such as LAMB (You et al., 2020) or plain Adam find success in
    large batch settings (Nado et al., 2021), suggesting a competitive advantage even with reduced noise.
    Studies of batch size scaling also find that Adam scales better with batch size (G. Zhang et al., 2019).
    Alternative explanations. These empirical results cast doubt on the idea that robustness to heavy-
    tailed noise is the primary factor behind the performance improvement of Adam over SGD. Hypothe-
    ses based on deterministic properties might provide better descriptions of the cause of this gap — we
    discuss them in more details in Sections 4 and 5. One such interpretation is the view of Adam as a
    variant of sign descent, which was a motivation of RMSprop (Tieleman and Hinton, 2012), as studied
    by Balles and Hennig (2018) and Bernstein et al. (2018). However, it remains unclear whether the
    performance of Adam can be explained by its similarities to a simpler algorithm, or if the additional
    changes needed to obtain Adam are necessary to obtain good performance.
       1
         The distribution of errors between stochastic gradients g̃ and full gradients g, ∥g̃ − g∥, is well approximated
    by a Gaussian for image models but closer to an α-stable distribution for language models.


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           MNIST              CIFAR-10                   PTB                WikiText-2 101           SQuAD
                100                101                       8
                                                                                  101
Training loss
                                                             6
                10 3               10 2                      4                                            100
                                                                                  100
                                                             2
                10 6               10 5                                          10 1                     10 1
                       0   Epoch 800      0      Epoch 800       0       Epoch 3200     0     Epoch 320          0   Epoch   80
                                       SGD(+m)         Adam(+m)             SGD( m)            Adam( m)
Figure 2: The gap does not disappear when training in full batch. Repeating the training procedure
of Figure 1 in full batch reveals a similar—or larger—gap between SGD and Adam.


1.1 C ONTRIBUTIONS
The key question we wish to address is whether the gap between SGD and Adam on transformer
models, as studied by J. Zhang et al. (2020b), is really caused by noise, or whether there already is a
large difference in the deterministic setting. Our key observations are
1. Noise is not the key contributor to the performance gap between SGD and Adam on trans-
    formers. Removing noise by running in full batch does not reduce the gap (Figure 2).
2. SGD benefits less from the reduction in noise than Adam. Increasing the batch size actually
    increases the gap between the methods when controlling for the step-size and number of iterations
    (§3, Figure 3). The performance of SGD does not seem dominated by noise, as its progress per
    iteration does not improve with batch size as much as it does for Adam (§3.1, Figure 4).
That the performance gap between SGD and Adam grows when noise is removed suggests that
the benefit of Adam over SGD can not primarily be due to a robustness to noise. This raises the
question as to which component of Adam enables its good performance in the deterministic setting
and whether a simpler algorithm can display similar behavior. We show that
3. Sign descent can close most of the gap between SGD and Adam in full batch. While sign
    descent performs poorly with small batch sizes, it improves drastically with larger batch sizes
    and can bridge most of the gap between gradient descent and Adam (§4, Figure 5–7).
We also present results using normalized gradient updates, which improves on the performance of
SGD and scales better to large batch sizes. However, in full batch, sign descent outperforms plain
normalization and approaches the performance of Adam. Momentum improves the performance of
both Adam and sign descent, and they are similar when both run with- or without momentum.
Despite sign descent being one of the key motivations behind RMSprop, and Adam by extension, the
similarity to sign descent in full batch had not been shown empirically. Although this does not give
an explanation for why Adam outperforms SGD, it might give an indication of how. As sign descent
is a simpler algorithm, understanding its behavior in the deterministic setting might prove a useful
tool to understand the success of Adam and the properties of the problem classes where it works well.

2               E XPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Our first experiments focus on the performance of SGD and Adam as the batch size increases, and
the noise induced by subsampling decreases. Our goal is to check whether the gap between SGD
and Adam persists as noise is removed. We touch on the experimental design decisions necessary to
interpret the results here. Note that there are practical limitations when comparing optimizers with
large batch sizes due to computational challenges, which we discuss in Section 5.1 and Appendix A.
Problems. We consider two image and three language tasks.
  • Image classification on MNIST and CIFAR-10 using a small CNN and ResNet18.
  • Language modeling on PTB and WikiText-2 using a small transformer and Transformer-XL.
  • Question answering on SQuAD by fine-tuning a pre-trained DistillBERT model.
Focusing on the heavy-tail hypothesis of J. Zhang et al. (2020b), our attention is on the behavior of
the optimizers on language tasks. Image tasks are included for comparison.
Training performance. Our goal is to study optimization dynamics in cases where SGD fails to make
sufficient progress. Our results focus on the training loss, and we use it to select hyperparameters.


                                                                     3
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             MNIST               CIFAR-10          6
                                                                           PTB         101
                                                                                             WikiText-2            SQuAD

at comparable iter
                     10 1                  100
  Training loss                                                    4                                        100
                     10 3                 10 3                                         100
                                                                    2                                      10 1
                     10 5                  10 6                                        10 1
                         102 Batch size 105     102 Batch size 105    101 Batch size 105 101 Batch size104     101 Batch size 105
                                            SGD(+m)           Adam(+m)          SGD( m)         Adam( m)
    Figure 3: The gap between SGD and Adam increases with batch size. Performance after a similar
    number of iterations across batch sizes. The gap between Adam and SGD grows with batch size on
    language models, confirming the trend observed in Figures 1 and 2. Due to practical implementation
    issues, smaller batch sizes still run for more iterations on the larger datasets (WikiText-2, SQuAD)
    despite being stopped after one epoch (see Appendix A). The degradation in performance as the
    batch size increases is explained by this decrease in number of iterations. We still observe that the
    gap grows with batch size despite this bias favoring small batches. To show the effect of batch size
    beyond the first epoch, we show the full runs in Figure 4.


    Results on hold-out data are given in Appendix C, but generalization at large batch sizes is known to
    require additional tuning and regularization (Shallue et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2022).
    Batch sizes and reducing noise. To check if less noisy gradient estimates reduce the gap between
    SGD and Adam, we measure progress per iteration as we increase the batch size. The batch sizes
    used, labelled S, M, L and XL, correspond to a ≈4× relative increase. Larger batch sizes are run
    for more epochs, but the increase in batch size leads to fewer iterations (detailed in Tables 1 and 2,
    Appendix A). For the full batch runs, we remove a small percentage of the data (≤0.5%) to ensure
    the dataset is divided evenly in batches. We check that the observed trends also hold when disabling
    dropout, the other source of randomness on transformers, in Appendix B.4.
    Simple training procedure. We use a constant step-size tuned by grid search. While better per-
    formance can be obtained with step-size schedules, our primary objective is to gain insight on the
    behavior of simple updates rather than reproduce state-of-the-art performance.
    Hyperparameter tuning. Increasing the batch size can allow for larger step-sizes to be stable, and
    previous work has reported that the best step-size across batch size settings need not be monotonic
    (Shallue et al., 2019). To account for these effects, we tune the step-size for each batch size individually
    by grid search. We start with a sparse grid and increase the density around the best step-size. We
    repeat each run for 3 random seeds. Grid-search validation results are given in Appendix C. We use
    each method with and without momentum, indicated by (+m) and (−m). When using momentum, we
    fix it to 0.9 (β for SGD, β1 for Adam). Other parameters are set to defaults (β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 10−8 ) .

    3                B EHAVIOR OF SGD AND A DAM IN LARGE BATCH
    Comparing SGD and Adam in small and full batch in Figures 1 and 2, we observe the following.
    3.a Adam outperforms SGD by a large margin on language tasks, as expected from previous
        observations (J. Zhang et al., 2020b).
    3.b Despite removing stochasticity, the gap between SGD and Adam is not reduced. It even
        increases on some problems, especially on the language tasks. On CIFAR-10 and PTB, the
        performance of Adam improves while the performance of SGD worsens on PTB and WikiText-2.
    The importance of momentum is also increased in full batch, as the gap between the same optimizer
    with and without momentum is larger in Figure 2. But Adam without momentum still outperforms
    SGD with momentum in large batch on the language tasks.
    However, it is not clear that this comparison of the small and full batch settings is a good indicator of
    the performance per iteration. Although run for more epochs, the optimizers take far fewer steps in
    the full batch setting. To account for this confounding factor, in Figure 3 we introduce intermediate
    batch sizes and show the loss in each setting when stopped at a comparable number of iterations. The
    observations from Figures 1 and 2 carry over to Figure 3, which shows the trend across batch sizes
    more clearly; the gap between Adam and SGD grows with batch size, especially on language models.


                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               PTB                           WikiText-2                   101            SQuAD
                8                                 101

Training loss
                4                                 100                                     100

                2                        10 1                                             10 1
                 101 102 103 104 105 106      101           102       103     104   105          101    102   103     104   105
                                                                                          101
                8                         10 1
Training loss


                4                                 100                                     100

                2                                 10 1                                    10 1
                 101          Iteration     106       101         Iteration         105          101      Iteration         105
                    SGD(+m)      Adam(+m)     SGD( m)        Adam( m)                            Full    XL    L      M     S

Figure 4: Adam better takes advantage of the reduced noise with larger batch sizes. For each
problem, each optimizer is shown with five different batch sizes, interpolating between the small
batch setting of Figure 1 and the full batch setting of Figure 2. Larger batch sizes run for fewer
iterations and terminate earlier, indicated by the markers (▼), with smaller sizes for smaller batches.
SGD follow a similar trajectory across most batch sizes, indicating that increasing the batch size past
some threshold does not improve the performance; similar results would be expected from running
with the same batch size but terminating earlier. Adam, on the other hand, achieves similar error in
fewer iterations when the batch size is increased. Top/bottom: results without/with momentum.


3.1 L IMITATIONS AND ALTERNATIVE VISUALIZATIONS
The view provided by Figure 3 highlights the gap in performance per iteration between Adam and
SGD, but does not provide a full picture of their behavior with increasing batch-size. To stop each
method at a comparable number of iterations across batch sizes, we have to stop the smallest batch
sizes after one epoch. The results thus need not be representative of standard training, as neither SGD
nor Adam can achieve reasonable training error after only one epoch.
To verify that the observed behavior holds beyond the first epoch in small batches, we show the full
trajectory of the loss for each batch size in Figure 4, focusing on the transformer problems. For each
problem, each optimizer is shown running with fives batch sizes, giving a more detailed view of how
the gap between the two optimizers increases with batch size, and is greatest at full batch;
3.c The performance of plain SGD does not significantly improve improves with batch-size.
     The trajectory of the loss for SGD is similar across batch sizes, indicating that the reduction in
     noise from increasing the batch size does not improve its performance; we might expected similar
     results from running with the same batch size, but terminating earlier.
3.d Adam improves with batch size and achieves similar or lower error in fewer iterations.
We also observe that, for both optimizers, momentum improves the convergence speed more with
larger batch size. These results are consistent with previous studies on the batch size scaling of
momentum (Shallue et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2020) and Adam (G. Zhang et al., 2019).
Our experiments provide additional evidence on language tasks that SGD does not benefit from
a reduction in noise in the gradient estimate once beyond a certain batch-size. This suggests that
stochasticity is not the limiting factor in the performance of SGD for these problems. That the gap
between Adam and SGD grows with batch size is also inconsistent with the idea that the improvement
of Adam over SGD results from a more robust estimation of the gradient. Those observations do
not rule out the possibility that optimization dynamics for small batch sizes are better explained by
heavy-tailed rather than sub-Gaussian noise. However, results with large batch sizes suggest that the
benefits of Adam over SGD are deterministic in nature.

4               A LTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
As noise cannot explain the gap between (S)GD and Adam in the full batch setting, this raises the
question can the improved performance of Adam in full batch be attributed to a simpler algorithm?
Are the algorithmic differences between Adam and SGD, such as moving averages or bias-correction,
improving the performance in the stochastic setting, or are they necessary even in the deterministic


                                                                  5
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              MNIST               CIFAR-10          6
                                                                            PTB         101
                                                                                              WikiText-2               SQuAD

at comparable iter
                     10 1                  100
  Training loss                                                     4                                         100
                     10 3                 10 3                                          100
                                                                      2                                      10 1
                     10 5                  10 6                                          10 1
                         102 Batch size 105      102 Batch size 105     101 Batch size 105 101 Batch size104     101 Batch size 105
                                            Sign(+m)           Norm.(+m)          Sign( m)       Norm.( m)
    Figure 5: Sign descent and normalized GD improve with batch size. Performance after a similar
    number of iterations across batch sizes. Sign descent performs poorly in small batch sizes and
    is outperformed by normalized GD. In full batch, sign descent outperforms normalized GD and
    approaches the performance of Adam. We show the full runs for each batch size in Figure 6.


    setting? Our goal is to isolate small algorithmic changes from gradient descent that would exhibit a
    behavior similar to Adam, while being easier to interpret and analyse. Alternative hypotheses on the
    performance of Adam might provide insight on its performance, such as its similarity to sign descent
    or gradient clipping.

    4.1               S IGN DESCENT AND NORMALIZED UPDATES
    A common view of Adam is that it performs a form of smoothed sign descent (Balles and Hennig,
    2018; Bernstein et al., 2018). Indeed, the motivation for RMSprop (Tieleman and Hinton, 2012) was
    to make sign descent more stable in the stochastic setting. The update of RMSprop (with parameters
    x0 , second-moment buffer v0 = 0, and parameters α, β2 , ϵ),
                                                                                                        1
                                vt+1 = β2 vt + (1 − β2 )g̃t2                    xt+1 = xt − α √                g̃t ,
                                                                                                    vt+1 + ϵ
    reduces to sign descent when setting the hyperparameters β2 and ϵ to 0, as
                                                                                g̃t
                                  vt+1 = g̃t2 ,                  xt+1 = xt − α p = xt − α sign(g̃t ).
                                                                                  g̃t2
    The same applies to Adam when taking its momentum parameter β1 to 0 (ignoring bias-correction).
    Consistent with the sign descent interpretation, the success of Adam is often attributed to its normal-
    ization effect, that changes across coordinate are uniform despite large differences in their gradients
    (e.g., Liu et al., 2020, §3.2/Fig. 5). However, why sign descent should work in the deterministic
    setting and whether RMSprop succeeds in “stabilizing” sign descent have not been explored.
    An alternative approach to improve the performance of SGD on language models is to use gradient
    clipping (Pascanu et al., 2013), Clipping and normalized updates were discussed recently in the
    context of Adam (J. Zhang et al., 2020a) and sign-based methods (Crawshaw et al., 2022), as
    element-wise clipping is equivalent to the sign if all elements are larger than the clipping threshold.
    To gain insights on whether the success of Adam in the deterministic setting can be attributed to those
    simpler heuristics, we repeat the prior experiments with the following updates. We use the normalized
    gradient, which changes the magnitude of the step, and sign descent, which also change its direction.
    We implement the updates with heavy-ball momentum by accumulating the transformed gradient;
                            mt+1 = βmt + h(gt ),                where       h(g) = g/∥g∥2        for normalized GD,
                            xt+1 = xt − αmt+1 .                             h(g) = sign(g)       for sign descent.
    As before, we do not tune momentum and present results with (β = 0.9) and without (β = 0) it. We
    reproduce the visualizations of Figure 3–4 for the new updates in Figure 5–6 and observe that;
    4.a Sign descent performs poorly at small batch sizes but gets closer to Adam in full batch. At
        small batch sizes, sign descent can be worse than plain SGD. However, the improvement from
        increasing batch sizes is greater than for other optimizers, and sign descent goes from being the
        worst option with small batches to being competitive with Adam in full batch.
    4.b Normalized GD scales better but plateaus. While normalizaton improves performances and
        helps scale with batch size, the scaling plateaus earlier than for sign descent.


                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                PTB                            WikiText-2                   101            SQuAD
                8                                   101

Training loss
                4                                   100                                     100

                2                        10 1                                               10 1
                 101 102 103 104 105 106      101             102       103     104   105          101    102   103     104   105
                                                                                            101
                8                         10 1
Training loss


                4                                   100                                     100

                2                                   10 1                                    10 1
                 101           Iteration      106       101         Iteration         105          101      Iteration         105
                    Sign(+m)      Norm.(+m)     Sign( m)      Norm.( m)                            Full    XL    L      M     S

Figure 6: Sign descent improves with batch size. While normalized GD outperforms sign descent in
small batch sizes, the relationship switches in full batch and sign descent outperforms normalized GD.
Normalized gradient descent also scales better with batch size than plain gradient descent (compare
Figure 4), but the method that scales best with batch size is sign descent. Larger batch sizes run for
fewer iterations and terminate earlier, indicated by the markers (▼), with smaller sizes for smaller
batches. Top/bottom: results without/with momentum.


As with other optimizers, momentum helps both sign descent and normalized GD scale to larger
batch sizes. The improvement in performance with batch size observed for Adam is closer to that of
sign descent than normalized GD. In full batch, sign descent with momentum closes most of the gap
between SGD and Adam, and it can even outperform Adam on some problems.
To better illustrate that the performance of sign descent is poor in small batch, but that it closes most
of the gap between GD and Adam in full batch, we compare all optimizers with momentum in a
traditional loss per epoch format in Figure 7 (without momentum in Figure 10, Appendix B).
While a gap still exists between Adam and sign descent, the improvement in performance over
gradient descent supports the hypothesis that the performance gap between Adam and gradient
descent has its roots in a difference in the deterministic case. Parts of the benefit of the second-
moment estimation in Adam or RMSprop can be attributed to the difference between gradient descent
and sign descent. The good scaling properties of Adam to large batch sizes are also shared with sign
descent. This connection might provide a new avenue for analysis, by studying a simpler algorithm,
to understand the behavior of Adam and the impact of noise.

5               D ISCUSSION
We present experimental evidence that runs counter to the idea that Adam outperforms SGD on
transformers due to a more robust estimate of the descent direction. Rather, experimental results show
that Adam outperforms gradient descent in the full batch setting, where gradient descent already
performs poorly. Those results validate the intuitive motivations for RMSProp—and by extension,
Adam—that the sign of the gradient might be a more reliable direction than the gradient. In addition,
the results show that the improvement in performance with large batch sizes exhibited by Adam, also
observed by previous work (G. Zhang et al., 2019), is shared by sign descent. As Adam outperforms
sign descent in small batch sizes, this suggests that the benefits of the algorithmic differences between
sign descent and Adam indeed improves its behavior in small batch sizes.
Despite the reported similarities between sign descent and Adam, that sign descent outperforms
gradient descent by such a margin in full batch on transformers is surprising. The sign descent
perspective does not fit the common view of Adam as an “adaptive” algorithm, and there is limited
theory explaining the benefits of sign descent in deep learning. But that sign descent performs well
on deep learning tasks is corroborated by the recent work of Chen et al. (2023). Using evolutionary
search to discover optimization algorithms, they obtain a variant of sign descent with momentum
that outperforms Adam variants on a range of deep learning models and exhibits better relative
performance with large batch sizes. Understanding how to capture the benefits of sign descent on


                                                                    7
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           PTB                           WikiText-2             101         SQuAD
                8                             101
Medium batch
Training Loss
                                                                        SGD
                                      Sign                              Sign
                4                             100                       Norm.   100                     SGD
                                      SGD                                                               Norm.
                                      Norm.
                                      Adam                                                              Sign
                2                             10 1
                                                                        Adam
                                                                                10 1                    Adam
                    0     50        100              0     20         40               0    2      4        6
                                                                                101
                8                             101
Training Loss


                                                                        SGD
                                                                        Norm.
  Full batch


                4                     SGD                                       100                     SGD
                                              100                       Sign                            Norm.
                                      Norm.
                                      Sign                                                              Adam
                2                     Adam    10 1
                                                                        Adam
                                                                                10 1                    Sign
                    0   Epoch     3000               0   Epoch    300                  0   Epoch       60


   Figure 7: Sign descent can close most of the gap between GD and Adam in full batch. At small
   batch sizes, the performance of sign descent can be worse than SGD. However, the improvement
   when increasing the batch size is greater than for other optimizers, and sign descent goes from
   being the worst option to being competitive with Adam in full batch. All optimizers are shown with
   momentum. A similar trend holds when looking at all optimizers without momentum, shown in
   Figure 10. Top/Bottom: performance with a medium batch size/in full batch.


   those models might give us a better understanding of the loss landscape in deep learning. We end by
   discussing potential open questions, related work, and limitations of the results presented here.
   Improvement of sign descent with batch size. Larger improvements with batch size are often asso-
   ciated with methods that are faster than gradient descent, such as second-order methods, momentum
   or Nesterov acceleration. This improved performance typically comes at the cost of an increased
   sensitivity to noise, requiring larger batch sizes to achieve better performance. This has been shown
   empirically for momentum on deep learning models (Shallue et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2020), and can
   be established formally, e.g. on quadratics (Flammarion and Bach, 2015). Quadratic models have
   also been used to justify the improved performance of Adam with large batches (G. Zhang et al.,
   2019). This justification relies on the interpretation of Adam as an approximate second-order method,
   similar to the KFAC approximation to natural gradients (Martens and Grosse, 2015). However, this
   interpretation of Adam seems incompatible with its interpretation as a form of sign descent, and the
   quadratic model alone seems insufficient to explain the performance of sign descent.
   Limitations of typical assumptions. Typical analyses in optimization assume the objective function
   is smooth (has bounded Hessian, ∥∇2f ∥ ≤ L) to ensure the accuracy of its Taylor approximation. This
   assumption implies the following, sometimes called the descent lemma (Bertsekas, 1999, Prop. A.24)
                                       1            2    L                            2
                            f (y) ≤ f (x) −
                                          ∥∇f (x))∥ + ∥y − (x − (1/L)∇f (x))∥ .
                                      2L                 2
   Without further assumptions, this bound is the only guarantee of performance. As the bound is
   optimized at the gradient descent step y = x − (1/L)∇f (x), one would expect any corollary to not
   improve on GD. It is of course possible to provably improve on GD with further assumptions. e.g. with
   acceleration on convex functions (Nesterov, 1983), but this highlights the strong relationship between
   the typical smoothness assumption and GD. Moreover, recent works have called into question the
   adequacy of this assumption, showing that it does not hold even in “simple” deep learning problems
   (Cohen et al., 2021). We discuss next recent works that explore relaxations of smoothness to better
   characterize the loss landscape and capture the benefit of clipping and sign-based algorithms.
   Justifications for normalization approaches. J. Zhang et al. (2020a) provides empirical evidence
   that, on deep learning models, the Hessian and gradient norm can share a similar scale. This observa-
   tion motivates a relaxation of the uniform smoothness bound (∥∇2 f ∥ ≤ L) to allow the Hessian to
   grow with the gradient (∥∇2 f ∥ ≤ L0 + L1 ∥∇f ∥). This suggests f behaves like a smooth function
   when the gradient is small, and a gradient descent step can be expected to make progress. But if
   the gradient is large, the Hessian might be large. Dividing by the upper bound on the Hessian, the
   gradient norm, normalizes the step and leads to clipping. This view of clipping has been further
   explored by B. Zhang et al. (2020) and Qian et al. (2021). However, our experiments suggest that


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


normalization alone might be not be sufficient to bridge the gap between SGD and Adam, and that
element-wise clipping or sign-based methods exploit additional structure about the problem.
Justifications for sign- and element-wise clipping approaches. Bernstein et al. (2018) and Balles
et al. (2020) provide conditions under which sign-based approaches can outperform SGD in the
deterministic or stochastic setting, assuming element-wise smoothness or measuring smoothness in
the L∞ norm. As with the standard smoothness assumption, it is unclear whether they provide an
accurate description of the optimization dynamics in deep learning. Following the relaxed smoothness
assumption of J. Zhang et al. (2020a), Crawshaw et al. (2022) propose a coordinate-wise relaxation to
analyse a variant of sign-descent inspired by Adam, using exponential moving averages to estimate
the sign. While providing a justification for sign descent-like algorithms, it is not clear whether the
coordinate-wise relaxation is practical. Having 2d parameters, one for each of the d weights in the
network, checking this variant requires checking each weight and convergence results depend on
the 2d problem specific-constants. Identying a verifiable assumption that captures the advantage of
sign-based methods in the deterministic setting and understanding when it holds remains open.
What architecture choices lead to the increased gap between SGD and Adam? We do not observe
such a large gap between SGD and Adam on CNNs on image tasks compared to transformers on
language tasks. What properties of the problem or architecture leads to a much better performance
of Adam, sign descent or other normalization schemes, beyond the difference in the tails of the
stochastic gradients noted by J. Zhang et al. (2020b)? The prediction over a large vocabulary in
language tasks—much larger than the number of classes in image tasks—could suggest a similarity
with overparametrized logistic regression, which is known to exhibit faster convergence of normalized
gradient descent (Nacson et al., 2019). The architectures also differ in their choice of normalization
layers, skip connections and initializations, choices which were crucial for the training of deep
networks on image tasks (He et al., 2016) but might not yet be as mature for transformer models.
Reducing the complexity of such model to a minimal example that still exhibits a large gap between
SGD and Adam but without the computational hurdles of large deep learning models would be helpful
to serve as a mental model and benchmark to test hypotheses or optimizers.
Designing versions of sign descent that are robust to small batch sizes? The exponential moving
average used by RMSProp and Adam works well in practice, but capturing this benefit in theory is
challenging. Existing guarantees show a negative dependence on β2 (Défossez et al., 2022; Alacaoglu
et al., 2020; Crawshaw et al., 2022). In contrast, alternative mechanisms such as majority voting,
popular in the distributed setting due to the low communication cost of sign descent, have provable
guarantees (Bernstein et al., 2018; Safaryan and Richtárik, 2021). How to obtain similar guarantees
for exponential moving averages, which are known to work for deep learning, remains open.
5.1 L IMITATIONS
A major limitation whenever probing the full batch setting is computational costs. As we
measure progress per iteration, keeping the number of iterations constant across batch sizes would be
ideal, but it is computationally infeasible given our budget. We mitigate this limitation by introducing
intermediate batch sizes that interpolate between the small and full batch setting. However, due to
those limitations, our results might only probe the “beginning” of the training procedure compared to
state-of-the-art workloads. We also use a constant step-size, and some of the difficulties encountered
by SGD on transformers might be mitigated by a warm-up or decaying step-size schedule if the
initialization has a strikingly different landscape from the remainder of the optimization path.
Focus on training performance. We do not attempt to optimize hyperparameters for validation
error, and instead focus on understanding the optimization performance on the training loss. The
results might be of limited applicability in practical settings focused on generalization. However, the
validation metrics (available alongside our grid-search results in Appendix C) suggests that optimizers
which perform better on training error achieve a lower testing loss faster (before over-fitting).
Qualitative differences across architectures. The striking difference in performance between SGD
and Adam on transformers need not hold for other architectures. On the two image tasks included to
serve as comparison points, the distinction between SGD and Adam and the observed trends are less
clear. For example, on ResNet18/CIFAR10, SGD behaves differently than on the language tasks in
Figure 8 (Appendix B), and improves with batch size as much as Adam. We hypothesize this is due
to the network using Batch Normalization. We might need different assumptions, analysis tools and
possibly optimizers for different families of architectures that have qualitatively different behaviors.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Si Yi (Cathy) Meng, Aaron Mishkin, and Victor Sanches Portella for providing comments
on the manuscript and earlier versions of this work. This research was partially supported by the
Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) Discovery Grants RGPIN-2022-03669, and enabled in part by support provided by the
Digital Research Alliance of Canada (alliancecan.ca).
R EFERENCES
Ahmet Alacaoglu, Yura Malitsky, Panayotis Mertikopoulos, and Volkan Cevher (2020). “A new regret analysis
  for Adam-type algorithms”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Rohan Anil, Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer (2019). “Memory Efficient Adaptive Optimization”.
  In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton (2016). “Layer Normalization”. In: Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, Deep Learning Symposium.
Lukas Balles and Philipp Hennig (2018). “Dissecting Adam: The Sign, Magnitude and Variance of Stochastic
  Gradients”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Lukas Balles, Fabian Pedregosa, and Nicolas Le Roux (2020). The Geometry of Sign Gradient Descent.
  arXiv/2002.08056.
Jeremy Bernstein, Yu-Xiang Wang, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Animashree Anandkumar (2018). “SIGNSGD:
   Compressed Optimisation for Non-Convex Problems”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Dimitri P. Bertsekas (1999). Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientific.
Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong,
  Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le (2023). Symbolic Discovery of Optimization
  Algorithms. arXiv/2302.06675.
Jeremy M. Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J. Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar (2021). “Gradient Descent
   on Neural Networks Typically Occurs at the Edge of Stability”. In: International Conference on Learning
   Representations.
Michael Crawshaw, Mingrui Liu, Francesco Orabona, Wei Zhang, and Zhenxun Zhuang (2022). “Robustness to
  Unbounded Smoothness of Generalized SignSGD”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G. Carbonell, Quoc Viet Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (2019).
  “Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models beyond a Fixed-Length Context”. In: Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alexandre Défossez, Leon Bottou, Francis Bach, and Nicolas Usunier (2022). “A Simple Convergence Proof of
  Adam and Adagrad”. In: Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Nicolas Flammarion and Francis R. Bach (2015). “From Averaging to Acceleration, There is Only a Step-size”.
  In: Conference on Learning Theory.
Jonas Geiping, Micah Goldblum, Phil Pope, Michael Moeller, and Tom Goldstein (2022). “Stochastic Training
  is Not Necessary for Generalization”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, and Alexander V. Gasnikov (2020). “Stochastic Optimization with Heavy-
  Tailed Noise via Accelerated Gradient Clipping”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Elad Hazan (2022). Introduction to Online Convex Optimization. MIT Press.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun (2016). “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recogni-
  tion”. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy (2015). “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by
  Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba (2015). “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. In: International
  Conference on Learning Representations.
Alex Krizhevsky (2012). Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Tech. rep. University of
  Toronto.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner (1998). “Gradient-Based Learning Applied to
  Document Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE.



                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Liyuan Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen, and Jiawei Han (2020). “Understanding the Difficulty
  of Training Transformers”. In: Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz (1993). “Building a Large Annotated
  Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank”. In: Computational Linguistics 19.2, pp. 313–330.
James Martens and Roger B. Grosse (2015). “Optimizing Neural Networks with Kronecker-factored Approximate
  Curvature”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher (2017). “Pointer Sentinel Mixture
   Models”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations.
Mor Shpigel Nacson, Jason D. Lee, Suriya Gunasekar, Pedro Henrique Pamplona Savarese, Nathan Srebro, and
 Daniel Soudry (2019). “Convergence of Gradient Descent on Separable Data”. In: International Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Zachary Nado, Justin Gilmer, Christopher J. Shallue, Rohan Anil, and George E. Dahl (2021). A Large Batch
  Optimizer Reality Check: Traditional, Generic Optimizers Suffice Across Batch Sizes. arXiv/2102.06356.
Yurii E. Nesterov (1983). “A method of solving a convex programming problem with convergence rate O(k2 )”.
  In: Soviet Mathematics Doklady. English translation of Russian, in Doklady Adademii Nauk SSSR 269,
  543–547 (1983).
Yurii E. Nesterov (2018). Lectures on Convex Optimization. Springer.
Francesco Orabona (2020). Neural Networks (maybe) Evolved to Make Adam the Best Optimizer. Blog post.
  https://parameterfree.com/2020/12/06/neural-network-maybe-evolved-to-ma
  ke-adam-the-best-optimizer/.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomás Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio (2013). “On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary
  DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala (2019). “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library”. In:
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Jiang Qian, Yuren Wu, Bojin Zhuang, Shaojun Wang, and Jing Xiao (2021). “Understanding Gradient Clipping
   In Incremental Gradient Methods”. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang (2016). “SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for
   Machine Comprehension of Text”. In: Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Sashank J. Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar (2018). “On the Convergence of Adam and Beyond”. In:
  International Conference on Learning Representations.
Mher Safaryan and Peter Richtárik (2021). “Stochastic Sign Descent Methods: New Algorithms and Better
 Theory”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf (2019). “DistilBERT, a distilled version of
  BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, EMC2
  workshop.
Christopher J. Shallue, Jaehoon Lee, Joseph M. Antognini, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Roy Frostig, and George E.
  Dahl (2019). “Measuring the Effects of Data Parallelism on Neural Network Training”. In: Journal of Machine
  Learning Research 20, 112:1–112:49.
Samuel L. Smith, Erich Elsen, and Soham De (2020). “On the Generalization Benefit of Noise in Stochastic
  Gradient Descent”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Vishwak Srinivasan, Adarsh Prasad, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar (2021). Efficient
  Estimators for Heavy-Tailed Machine Learning. OpenReview:5K8ZG9twKY.
Tijmen Tieleman and Geoffrey Hinton (2012). RMSPROP: Divide the gradient by a running average of its
   recent magnitude. Lecture notes
   http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~tijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_slides_lec6.pdf.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin (2017). “Attention is All you Need”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems.


                                                    11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac,
  Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine
  Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and
  Alexander M. Rush (2020). “Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing”. In: Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Yang You, Jing Li, Sashank J. Reddi, Jonathan Hseu, Sanjiv Kumar, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Xiaodan Song,
  James Demmel, Kurt Keutzer, and Cho-Jui Hsieh (2020). “Large Batch Optimization for Deep Learning:
  Training BERT in 76 minutes”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations.
Bohang Zhang, Jikai Jin, Cong Fang, and Liwei Wang (2020). “Improved Analysis of Clipping Algorithms for
  Non-convex Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Guodong Zhang, Lala Li, Zachary Nado, James Martens, Sushant Sachdeva, George E. Dahl, Christopher J.
  Shallue, and Roger B. Grosse (2019). “Which Algorithmic Choices Matter at Which Batch Sizes? Insights
  From a Noisy Quadratic Model”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Jingzhao Zhang, Tianxing He, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie (2020a). “Why Gradient Clipping Accelerates Train-
   ing: A Theoretical Justification for Adaptivity”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations.
Jingzhao Zhang, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Andreas Veit, Seungyeon Kim, Sashank J. Reddi, Sanjiv Kumar,
   and Suvrit Sra (2020b). “Why are Adaptive Methods Good for Attention Models?” In: Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Supplementary material
Appendix A Experimental details
Appendix B Additional plots
Appendix C Grid-searches and performance of selected runs

A    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Appendix A.1 Datasets and models
Appendix A.2 Batch sizes and epoch counts
Appendix A.3 Algorithms pseudocode
Appendix A.4 Histograms in Figure 1
Appendix A.5 Grid search
The code to reproduce our experiments and data generated by each run is available at
https://github.com/fkunstner/noise-sgd-adam-sign
A.1 DATASETS AND MODELS
Problems in the main text are referred to by the dataset and corresponds to the following problems.
For all problems, we use the default train/test split and report the performance on the test split as
validation error.
MNIST, Modified LeNet5                                                          (LeCun et al., 1998)
    Image classification task using a modified LeNet5 architecture; a 3-convolution, 2-linear layer
    average pooling and tanh activations, using a linear rather than Gaussian output.
    Dataset   yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
CIFAR10, ResNet18                                               (Krizhevsky, 2012; He et al., 2016)
    PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) implementation of the 18-layer CNN with residual connections.
    Dataset   www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html
    Model     pytorch.org/vision/0.10/models.html#torchvision.models.resnet18
PTB, Transformer                                         (Marcus et al., 1993; Vaswani et al., 2017)
    Word-level language modeling with sequences of 35 tokens using a simple Transformer model
    used as a tutorial example in PyTorch. The architecture consists of an 200-dimensional embed-
    ding layer, 2 transformer layers (2-head self attention, layer normalization, linear(200x200)-
    ReLU-linear(200x200), layer normalization) followed by a linear layer. Data processing uses the
    implementation of Dai et al. (2019).
    Dataset       catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC99T42
    Processing    github.com/kimiyoung/Transformer-XL
    Model         pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/transformer_tutorial.html
WikiText-2, Transformer-XL                                     (Merity et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019)
    Word-level language modeling with sequences of length 128 with Transformer-XL, using the
    implementation of Dai et al. (2019) for the model and data preprocessing. Hyperparameters follow
    the ENWIK8 base experiment of Dai et al. (2019), except with the modifications of J. Zhang et al.
    (2020b), using 6 layers and a target length of 128.
    Dataset   blog.salesforceairesearch.com/the-wikitext-long-term-
              dependency-language-modeling-dataset/
    Model     github.com/kimiyoung/Transformer-XL
SQuAD v1.1, DistillBERT finetuning                        (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Sanh et al., 2019)
    Question-answering by fine-tuning a pretrained DistillBERT model using the HuggingFace (Wolf
    et al., 2020) implementation of the model and data processing.
    Dataset   rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/explore/1.1/dev/
    Model     huggingface.co/transformers/v4.9.2/model_doc/distilbert.html



                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Batch sizes used in experiments. The batch size corresponds to the number of input-output
samples. For image data, a sample corresponds to an image-label pair. For language models on
PTB/WikiText-2, a sample corresponds to pairs of sequences of 35/135 tokens. For DistillBERT on
SQuAD, a sample corresponds to a question/answer pair. The full batch runs that use ≥ 99.5% of the
entire dataset, drop 0.5% of the data and run in full batch on the remaining data at every epoch.

      Dataset/Model              Batch size      % data     Epochs     Iter./Epoch     Total Iter.
      MNIST               S             256       0.43%         100             234        23 400
      Modified LeNet5     M           1 024       1.71%         100              58         5 800
                          L           4 069       6.78%         200              14         2 800
                          XL         16 384      27.31%         400               3         1 200
                          Full       60 000     100.00%         800               1           800
      CIFAR-10            S              64       0.13%         100             781        78 100
      ResNet18            M             256       0.51%         100             195        19 500
                          L           1 024       2.05%         100              48         4 800
                          XL          4 096       8.19%         200              12         2 400
                          Full       50 000     100.00%         800               1           800
      PTB                 S              16       0.06%         100           1 659       165 900
      Transformer         M              64       0.24%         100             414        41 400
                          L             256       0.96%         200             103        20 600
                          XL          1 024       3.86%         400              25        10 000
                          Full       26 520      99.85%       3 200               1         3 200
      WikiText-2          S              20       0.12%          40             815        32 600
      Transformer-XL      M              80       0.49%          40             203         8 120
                          L             320       1.96%          40              50         2 000
                          XL          1 280       7.84%          80              12           960
                          Full       16 240      99.53%         320               1           320
      SQuAD               S              32       0.04%            5          2 741        13 705
      DistillBERT         M             128       0.15%            5            685         3 425
                          L             512       0.58%            5            171           855
                          XL          2 048       2.33%           10             42           420
                          Full       87 680      99.96%           60              1            60

A.2    BATCH SIZES AND EPOCH COUNTS
Our goal is to compare the optimization performance while controlling for the number of iterations.
But keeping the iteration count constant across batch sizes is computationally infeasible. For example,
running Transformer-XL on WikiText-2 with a batch size of 20 for 40 epoch (32600 iterations) takes
1–2 hours. Running 320 epochs in full batch (320 iterations) takes 8–10 hours. Running 100× more
iterations would take over a month, making hyperparameter tuning infeasible. As increasing the batch
size leads to better performance in fewer iterations, we run larger batch sizes for fewer iterations. We
control how the number of iterations changes from setting to setting to have comparable results. The
batch sizes indicated by S, M, L and XL correspond to a relative increase of 4× in batch size, and
tune the number of epochs for each setting so that the number of iterations from one batch size to the
next stays within a factor of ≈2–8. The settings used in our experiments are described in Table 1.

To highlight the improvement in performance per iteration and account for the confounding factor
that larger batch sizes run for fewer iterations (Appendices B.1 and B.2), we introduce intermediate
batch sizes and show the loss in each setting when stopped at a comparable number of iterations. The
stopping times for these experiments (given in Appendix A.2) were selected to make the number of
iterations similar. They could not be made equal as we did not record the loss on the entire dataset
at each iteration. For example, on WikiText-2, the full-batch run is stopped after 320 epochs (320
iterations), while the small batch-size run is stopped at one epoch (815 iterations). On the larger
language datasets (WikiText-2, SQuAD), the degradation in performance as the batch size increases
in Figure 3 is attributable to this decrease in number of iterations. However, we still observe that the
gap between SGD and Adam grows with batch size, despite this bias favoring small batch sizes.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Stopping times used in Figures 3 and 5 to obtain a comparable number of iterations across
batch sizes. The number of iterations can not always be made made equal as we did not record the
loss on the entire dataset at each iteration, and can only stop the small batch sizes at one epoch, but
the number of steps taken by the optimizer are much closer than in Table 1.

Batch size      Epoch      Iter.    Batch size       Epoch        Iter.     Batch size      Epoch       Iter.
           MNIST                                    PTB                                  SQuAD
S       256          4     936      S        16           2      3 320      S        32           1     2 741
M     1 024         14     812      M        64           8      3 320      M       128           2     1 370
L     4 096         58     812      L       256          32      3 296      L       512           3       513
XL 16 384          267     801      XL 1 024            128      3 200      XL 2 048              4       168
Full 60 000        800     800      Full 26 520       3 200      3 200      Full 87 680          60        60
          CIFAR-10                            WikiText-2
S        64          1     781      S        20             1      815
M       256          4     780      M        80             3      609
L     1 024         16     768      L       320            10      500
XL 4 096            64     768      XL 1 280               34      408
Full 50 000        768     768      Full 16 240           320      320


For settings where computing the gradient would not fit into memory, we use gradient accumulation
to reduce peak memory consumption (computing the gradients of smaller batches and averaging
them). We use accumulation for Full batch runs, WikiText-2 (≥ L) and SQuAD (≥ M). Due to the
batch normalization layers (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) in ResNet18, computing the full-batch gradient
would require to pass the entire dataset through the network at once (the normalization makes it
so that the average of the gradients of the minibatches is different from the full gradient). We use
the average over the minibatch gradients with a batch size of 10000. Transformer models use layer
normalization (Ba et al., 2016) and are unaffected.
The transformer models on PTB and WikiText-2 use dropout by default, meaning that the increase to
Full batch reduces noise to a floor but does not remove it entirely. In Appendix B.4, we verify that the
observation that sign descent bridges the gap between (S)GD and Adam in the deterministic setting
on those two datasets in full batch after removing dropout.
A.3 A LGORITHMS PSEUDOCODE
We use the PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) implementation of SGD and Adam, and implement the
normalized variants (sign descent, normalized GD) with heavy-ball momentum following the pseudo-
code in Algorithm 1. The pseudo-code of Adam is given in Algorithm 2.
For every algorithm, we tune the main step-size by grid search. The momentum parameters β in
gradient descent variants and β1 in Adam is set either to 0 or 0.9. This is indicated in the main text
and figure legends by the suffix (+m) (with momentum) or (−m) (without). We leave the remaining
hyperparameters of Adam to their default (β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 10−8 ).

Algorithm 1 Gradient Descent and variants                 Algorithm 2 Adam
Parameters: step-size α, momentum β.                      Parameters: step-size α, momentum β1 , β2 .
Initialization: momentum buffer m0 = 0.                   Initialization: moments buffers m0 , M0 = 0.
At iteration t: given a stochastic gradient g̃t ,         At iteration t: given a stochastic gradient g̃t ,
            mt = βmt−1 + dt                                       mt = β1 mt−1 + (1 − β1 )g̃t
          xt+1 = xt − αmt                                         Mt = β2 Mt−1 + (1 − β2 )g̃t2
                    g̃t for Gradient Descent
         
                                                                                    mt /(1 − β1t )
                                                                xt+1 = xt − α p
         
with dt = g̃t /∥g̃t ∥2 for Normalized GD                                           Mt /(1 − β2t ) + ϵ
         
           sign(g̃t ) for Sign Descent
                                                          Using the default ϵ = 10−8 .


                                                     15
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    A.4 H ISTOGRAMS IN F IGURE 1
    The histograms in Figure 1 show the distribution of the stochastic gradient errors at initialization to
    confirm the observation of J. Zhang et al. (2020b). J. Zhang et al. also show the pattern is preserved
    through training. We use the batch sizes
                                      MNIST       CIFAR-10        PTB    WikiText-2        SQuAD
                                        256            64         16          16             16
   As ResNet18 uses batch normalization, it does not have a well-defined “full” gradient (the average of
   minibatch gradients is not the gradient obtained by passing the entire dataset through the network).
   We use the average over the minibatch gradients. Other models are unaffected.
   A.5 G RID SEARCH
   We start with a sparse grid of integer powers of 10 (eg. [10−5 , 10−4 , . . . , 100 ]). After an ini-
   tial run to identify a reasonable region, we increase the density to include half-powers (eg.
   [10−3 , 10−2.5 , 10−2 , 10−1.5 , 10−1 ]). The density of the grid is the same for all problems. We run
   those step-sizes for 3 random seeds determining the data ordering and initialization (except for
   DistillBERT on SQuAD, which is pretrained).
    To select the step-size, we minimize the (maximum over seeds of the) training loss at the end
    of training. End-of-training is the epoch reported in Table 1 for most figures. The exceptions are
    Figures 3 and 5 which use the stopping times in Table 2.
    The final performance as a function of the step-size for the training loss and accuracy/PPL/F1-score
    (including on holdout data) are given in Appendix C

    B             A DDITIONAL PLOTS
    Appendix B.1 Gap vs. Batch size (Figure 4 including image tasks)
    Appendix B.2 Gap vs. Batch size (Version of Figure 6 including image tasks)
    Appendix B.3 Relative performance of sign descent in medium vs. full batch (Version of Figure 7
           without momentum)
    Appendix B.4 Verifying the results hold without Dropout
    B.1                G AP VS . BATCH SIZE (F IGURE 4 INCLUDING IMAGE TASKS )

                          MNIST       101
                                            CIFAR-10                   PTB               WikiText-2 101      SQuAD
                100                                           8                    101
Training loss


                10 3                 10 3                     4                    100                100

                10 6                  10 7                    2                 10 1                10 1
                    101 102 103 104 105 101 102 103 104 105    101102103104105106 101 102 103 104 105 1 101 102 103 104 105
                                       101                                                           10
                 100                                          8                  101
Training loss


                10 3                 10 3                     4                    100                100

                10 6                10 7                      2                10 1              10 1
                    101 Iteration 105 101 Iteration 105        101 Iteration 106 101 Iteration 105    101 Iteration 105
                    SGD(+m)       Adam(+m)     SGD( m)          Adam( m)                    Full   XL   L      M    S

    Figure 8: Adam better takes advantage of the reduced noise with larger batch sizes. For each
    problem, each optimizer is shown with five different batch sizes, interpolating between the small
    batch setting of Figure 1 and the full batch setting of Figure 2. Larger batch sizes run for fewer
    iterations and terminate earlier, indicated by the markers (▼), with smaller sizes for smaller batches.
    SGD follow a similar trajectory across most batch sizes, indicating that increasing the batch size past
    some threshold does not improve the performance; similar results would be expected from running
    with the same batch size but terminating earlier. Adam, on the other hand, achieves similar error in
    fewer iterations when the batch size is increased. However, the trends are not as clear on MNIST and
    CIFAR-10. SGD performs better on CIFAR-10 than on other problems, which might be attributable
    to the presence of Batch Normalization layers. Top/bottom: results without/with momentum.


                                                                  16
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    B.2                G AP VS . BATCH SIZE (V ERSION OF F IGURE 6 INCLUDING IMAGE TASKS )

                           MNIST      101
                                            CIFAR-10                     PTB                 WikiText-2 101      SQuAD
                100                                              8                   101
Training loss

                10 3                 10 3                        4                   100                  100

                10 6                  10 7                       2                 10 1                10 1
                    101 102 103 104 105 101 102 103 104 105       101102103104105106 101 102 103 104 105 1 101 102 103 104 105
                                       101                                                              10
                 100                                             8                  101
Training loss


                10 3                 10 3                        4                   100                  100

                10 6                 10 7                        2                10 1              10 1
                    101 Iteration 105 101 Iteration 105           101 Iteration 106 101 Iteration 105    101 Iteration 105
                    Sign(+m)      Norm.(+m)    Sign( m)           Norm.( m)                    Full   XL   L      M    S

    Figure 9: Sign descent improves with batch size. While normalized GD outperforms sign descent in
    small batch sizes, the relationship switches in full batch and sign descent outperforms normalized GD.
    Normalized gradient descent also scales better with batch size than plain gradient descent (compare
    Figure 4), but the method that scales best with batch size is sign descent. Larger batch sizes run for
    fewer iterations and terminate earlier, indicated by the markers (▼), with smaller sizes for smaller
    batches. Top/bottom: results without/with momentum.

    B.3                R ELATIVE PERFORMANCE OF SIGN DESCENT IN MEDIUM VS . FULL BATCH (V ERSION OF
                       F IGURE 7 WITHOUT MOMENTUM )

                                PTB                                  WikiText-2               101         SQuAD
                  8                                   101
Medium batch
Training Loss


                                                                                     SGD
                                              Sign                                   Sign
                  4                                   100                            Norm.    100                       SGD
                                              SGD                                                                       Norm.
                                              Norm.                                  Adam
                                              Adam                                                                      Sign
                  2                                   10 1                                    10 1                      Adam
                       0       50           100              0         20         40                 0    2       4         6
                                                                                     SGD      101
                  8                                   101
Training Loss


                                                                                     Norm.
  Full batch


                                                                                     Sign                               SGD
                                              SGD                                    Adam                               Norm.
                  4                           Norm.   100                                     100                       Sign
                                                                                                                        Adam
                                              Sign
                  2                           Adam
                                                      10 1                                    10 1
                       0     Epoch      3000                 0       Epoch     300                   0   Epoch        60


    Figure 10: Sign descent can close most of the gap between GD and Adam in full batch. At small
    batch sizes, the performance of sign descent can be worse than SGD. However, the improvement
    when increasing the batch size is greater than for other optimizers, and sign descent goes from being
    the worst option to being competitive with Adam in full batch. All optimizers are shown without
    momentum. Although all optimizers suffer from the lack of momentum, especially on WikiText-2,
    sign descent closes most of the gap between SGD and Adam. A similar trend holds when looking at
    all optimizers with momentum, shown in Figure 7. Top/Bottom: performance with a medium batch
    size/in full batch.


                                                                       17
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  B.4 V ERIFYING THE RESULTS HOLD WITHOUT D ROPOUT
  The increase of batch size to “Full batch” drives noise to a floor, but does not remove it entirely due to
  the use of Dropout in the transformer models. Figure 11 shows those models after disabling dropout
  to verify that the same trends holds, showing the performance of the optimizer in full batch, as in the
  bottom row of Figure 7 (momentum) and Figure 10 (without momentum). The settings use are the
  same as for the Full batch in those figures (See Full in Table 1 for batch size and epoch counts) and
  uses step-sizes tuned by grid-search, with the only modification of disabling dropout. We note that
  the models achieve lower training error, but the overall trend of Sign Descent closing most of the gap
  between SGD and Adam in full batch is preserved.

                101
                                         PTB                                                      WikiText-2
                                                                          101
Training loss


                100                                                       100


                10 1                                                      10 1
                       0   500   1000   1500    2000   2500   3000               0     50   100     150     200   250   300
                101
                                                                          101
Training loss


                100                                                       100


                10 1                                                      10 1
                       0   500   1000   1500    2000   2500   3000               0     50   100     150     200   250   300
                                        Epoch                                                       Epoch
                                        SGD(+m)         Adam(+m)                 SGD( m)      Adam( m)
                                        Sign(+m)        Norm.(+m)                Sign( m)     Norm.( m)

  Figure 11: Checking that sign descent still bridges the gap between GD and Adam when dropout
  is removed. The increase of batch size to “Full batch” drives noise to a floor, but does not remove it
  entirely due to the use of dropout in the transformer models. We rerun those models after disabling
  dropout to verify that the same trends observed in Figure 6-7 holds. We note that the models achieve
  lower training error, but the overall trend of Sign Descent closing most of the gap between SGD and
  Adam in full batch is preserved.


                                                                     18
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   C           G RID - SEARCHES AND PERFORMANCE OF SELECTED RUNS
   C.1 SGD AND A DAM
   C.1.1 MODIFIED L E N ET 5 ON MNIST



                                            SGD(+m)                 Adam(+m)               SGD( m)            Adam( m)

             102
                           S             102
                                                      M              102
                                                                                    L            102
                                                                                                             XL             102
                                                                                                                                      Full
             100                         100                         100                         100                        100
Train Loss


             10 2                        10 2                        10 2                        10 2                       10 2
             10 4                        10 4                        10 4                        10 4                       10 4
             10 6                        10 6                        10 6                        10 6                       10 6 6
                10 6    10 3       100      10 6   10 3       100       10 6    10 3       100      10 6   10 3       100      10    10 3         100
             100                         100                        100                          100                        100
Train Acc.


              50                          50                          50                          50                         50

               0                           0                          0                            0                          0
               10 6        10 2            10 6       10 2            10 6          10 2           10 6       10 2            10 6      10 2
             100                         100                        100                          100                        100
Valid Acc.


              50                          50                          50                          50                         50

               0                           0                           0                           0                          0
               10 6        10 2            10 6       10 2             10 6       10 2             10 6       10 2            10 6      10 2
                        Stepsize                   Stepsize                    Stepsize                    Stepsize                  Stepsize
                           S                          M                             L                        XL                       Full
             100                         100                         100                         100                        100
Train Loss


             10 2                        10 2                        10 2                        10 2                       10 2
             10 4                        10 4                        10 4                        10 4                       10 4
             10 6                      10 6                       10 6                         10 6                       10 6
                    0      50        100 0            50        100 0               100      200 0           200        400 0               500
             100                         100                        100                          100                        100
Train Acc.


              50                          50                          50                          50                         50

               0                         0                          0                            0                          0
                    0     50         100 0            50        100 0            100         200 0           200        400 0               500
             100                       100                        100                          100                        100
Valid Acc.


              50                          50                          50                          50                         50

               0                        0                          0                            0                          0
                    0     50         100 0           50         100 0            100         200 0           200        400 0            500
                         Epoch                      Epoch                       Epoch                       Epoch                     Epoch


   Figure 12: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size modified LeNet5 on MNIST. Top:
   Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey line
   corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training loss
   and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                               19
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   C.1.2                R ES N ET 18 ON C IFAR 10


                                         SGD(+m)           Adam(+m)                SGD( m)         Adam( m)

             102
                            S          102
                                                   M         102
                                                                           L           102
                                                                                                  XL          102
                                                                                                                       Full
Train Loss


             10 1                     10 1                  10 1                       10 1                 10 1

             10 4                     10 4                  10 4                       10 4                 10 4

             10 7 7                    10 7                  10 7                      10 7                  10 7
                10          10 3     101 10 7     10 3     101 10 7     10 3         101 10 7     10 3     101 10 7     10 3     101
             100                      100                   100                       100                   100
Train Acc.


              50                       50                    50                         50                    50

               0                        0                     0                         0                     0
               10 7           10 2      10 7        10 2      10 7          10 2        10 7        10 2      10 7        10 2
             100                      100                   100                       100                   100
Valid Acc.


              50                       50                    50                         50                    50

               0                         0                     0                         0                     0
               10 7           10 2       10 7       10 2       10 7       10 2           10 7       10 2       10 7       10 2
                          Stepsize              Stepsize              Stepsize                  Stepsize              Stepsize
             102
                            S          102
                                                   M         102
                                                                           L           102
                                                                                                  XL          102
                                                                                                                       Full
Train Loss


             10 1                     10 1                  10 1                       10 1                 10 1

             10 4                     10 4                  10 4                       10 4                 10 4

             10 7                      10 7                  10 7                      10 7                  10 7
                    0       50       100 0         50      100 0           50        100 0        100      200 0          500
             100                      100                   100                       100                   100
Train Acc.


              50                       50                    50                         50                    50

               0                         0                     0                         0                     0
                    0       50       100 0         50      100 0           50        100 0        100      200 0          500
             100                       100                   100                       100                   100
Valid Acc.


              50                       50                    50                         50                    50

               0                        0                     0                         0                     0
                    0       50       100 0        50       100 0        50           100 0        100      200 0          500
                           Epoch                 Epoch                 Epoch                     Epoch                 Epoch


   Figure 13: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size ResNet18 on Cifar10. Top: Loss and
   evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey line corresponds
   to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training loss and evaluation
   metrics during training.


                                                                      20
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 C.1.3                 S MALL T RANSFORMER ON PTB


                                           SGD(+m)                Adam(+m)              SGD( m)          Adam( m)
                           S                         M                            L                     XL                      Full
             101                         101                       101                        101                      101
Train Loss


             100 6                       100 6                     100 6                      100 6                    100 6
               10        10 3      100     10    10 3       100      10      10 3       100     10    10 3       100     10    10 3       100

             104                         104                       104                        104                      104
Train PPL


             102                         102                       102                        102                      102

             100 6                       100 6                     100 6                      100 6                    100 6
               10        10 3      100     10    10 3       100      10      10 3       100     10    10 3       100     10    10 3       100

             104                         104                       104                        104                      104
Valid PPL


             103                         103                       103                        103                      103
             102                         102                       102                        102                      102
             101 6                       101 6                     101 6                      101 6                    101 6
               10        10 3      100     10    10 3       100      10      10 3       100     10    10 3       100     10    10 3       100
                        Stepsize                 Stepsize                    Stepsize                 Stepsize                 Stepsize
                           S                         M                            L                     XL                      Full
             101                         101                       101                        101                      101
Train Loss


             100                        100                      100                         100                      100
                   0       50        100 0           50       100 0            100        200 0         200        400 0           2000

             104                         104                       104                        104                      104
Train PPL


             102                         102                       102                        102                      102

             100                        100                      100                         100                      100
                   0       50        100 0           50       100 0            100        200 0         200        400 0           2000

             104                         104                       104                        104                      104
Valid PPL


             103                         103                       103                        103                      103
             102                         102                       102                        102                      102
             101                        101                      101                         101                      101
                   0       50        100 0           50       100 0            100        200 0         200        400 0           2000
                         Epoch                    Epoch                       Epoch                    Epoch                    Epoch


 Figure 14: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size Small Transformer on PTB. Top:
 Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey line
 corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training loss
 and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                             21
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  C.1.4                 T RANSFORMER -XL ON W IKI T EXT-2


                                                 SGD(+m)                  Adam(+m)                  SGD( m)                 Adam( m)
                            S                              M                                  L                            XL                          Full
             101                               101                             101                             101                         101
Train Loss


             100                               100                             100                             100                         100

             10 1 6                        10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6
                10        10 3      100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3        100      10      10 3         100
              105                           105                             105                             105                             105
Train PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103

             101                               101                             101                             101                         101

             10 1 6                        10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6
                10        10 3      100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3        100      10      10 3         100
              105                           105                             105                             105                             105
 Valid PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103


             101 6                             101 6                           101 6                           101 6                       101 6
               10         10 3      100          10      10 3       100          10      10 3       100          10      10 3        100     10       10 3         100
                         Stepsize                        Stepsize                        Stepsize                        Stepsize                     Stepsize
                            S                              M                                  L                            XL                          Full
             101                               101                             101                             101                         101
Train Loss


             100                               100                             100                             100                         100

             10 1                           10 1                            10 1                            10 1                           10 1
                    0       20            40 0              20            40 0                20          40 0                  50                0          200
             105                             105                             105                             105                           105
Train PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103

             101                               101                             101                             101                         101

             10 1                           10 1                            10 1                            10 1                           10 1
                    0       20            40 0              20            40 0                20          40 0                  50                0          200
             105                             105                             105                             105                           105
 Valid PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103


             101                               101                             101                             101                         101
                    0       20            40         0      20            40         0        20          40         0          50                0          200
                          Epoch                           Epoch                           Epoch                           Epoch                        Epoch


  Figure 15: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size Transformer-XL on WikiText-2.
  Top: Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey
  line corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training
  loss and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                                         22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  C.1.5                 D ISTILL BERT FINETUNING ON SQ UAD


                                               SGD(+m)                   Adam(+m)                SGD( m)               Adam( m)

             101
                               S            101
                                                         M                101
                                                                                          L            101
                                                                                                                      XL             101
                                                                                                                                                 Full
Train Loss


             100                            100                           100                          100                           100

             10 1                           10 1                          10 1                         10 1                          10 1

                10 6      10 3        100      10 6    10 3        100       10 6    10 3        100        10 6    10 3       100      10 6    10 3        100
           100                              100                          100                           100                           100
Train F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

             0                                0                            0                             0                             0
             10 6              10 2           10 6          10 2           10 6           10 2           10 6          10 2            10 6          10 2
           100                              100                          100                           100                           100
Valid F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

               0                              0                             0                              0                           0
               10 6         10 2              10 6        10 2              10 6        10 2               10 6        10 2            10 6        10 2
                         Stepsize                      Stepsize                      Stepsize                       Stepsize                    Stepsize
             101
                               S            101
                                                         M                101
                                                                                          L            101
                                                                                                                      XL             101
                                                                                                                                                 Full
Train Loss


             100                            100                           100                          100                           100

             10 1                           10 1                          10 1                         10 1                          10 1

                    0      2          4            0    2          4             0    2          4              0          5                0   20     40         60
           100                              100                          100                           100                           100
Train F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

             0                                0                            0                             0                             0
              0.0          2.5            5.0 0.0        2.5           5.0 0.0            2.5        5.0 0                 5                0               50
           100                              100                          100                           100                           100
Valid F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

               0                              0                            0                               0                           0
                0.0        2.5            5.0 0.0        2.5           5.0 0.0         2.5           5.0        0        5                  0               50
                          Epoch                         Epoch                         Epoch                          Epoch                       Epoch


  Figure 16: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size DistillBERT finetuning on SQuAD.
  Top: Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey
  line corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training
  loss and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                                     23
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   C.2 S IGN D ESCENT AND N ORMALIZED GD
   C.2.1 MODIFIED L E N ET 5 ON MNIST


                                            Sign(+m)                Norm.(+m)               Sign( m)           Norm.( m)

             102
                           S             102
                                                       M              102
                                                                                     L            102
                                                                                                              XL             102
                                                                                                                                       Full
             100                         100                          100                         100                        100
Train Loss


             10 2                        10 2                        10 2                         10 2                       10 2
             10 4                        10 4                        10 4                         10 4                       10 4
             10 6                        10 6                        10 6                         10 6                       10 6 6
                10 6    10 3       100      10 6   10 3       100       10 6    10 3        100      10 6   10 3       100      10    10 3         100
             100                         100                         100                          100                        100
Train Acc.


              50                          50                          50                           50                         50

               0                           0                           0                            0                          0
               10 6        10 2            10 6        10 2            10 6          10 2           10 6       10 2            10 6      10 2
             100                         100                         100                          100                        100
Valid Acc.


              50                          50                          50                           50                         50

               0                           0                           0                            0                          0
               10 6        10 2            10 6       10 2             10 6        10 2             10 6       10 2            10 6      10 2
                        Stepsize                   Stepsize                     Stepsize                    Stepsize                  Stepsize
                           S                           M                             L                        XL                       Full
             100                         100                          100                         100                        100
Train Loss


             10 2                        10 2                        10 2                         10 2                       10 2
             10 4                        10 4                        10 4                         10 4                       10 4
             10 6                      10 6                       10 6                          10 6                       10 6
                    0      50        100 0             50       100 0             100         200 0           200        400 0               500
             100                         100                         100                          100                        100
Train Acc.


              50                          50                          50                           50                         50

               0                         0                          0                             0                          0
                    0     50         100 0             50       100 0             100         200 0           200        400 0               500
             100                       100                        100                           100                        100
Valid Acc.


              50                          50                          50                           50                         50

               0                        0                          0                             0                          0
                    0     50         100 0           50         100 0             100         200 0           200        400 0            500
                         Epoch                      Epoch                        Epoch                       Epoch                     Epoch


   Figure 17: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size modified LeNet5 on MNIST. Top:
   Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey line
   corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training loss
   and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                                24
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   C.2.2                R ES N ET 18 ON C IFAR 10


                                                  Sign(+m)               Norm.(+m)               Sign( m)              Norm.( m)

             102
                             S                 102
                                                             M               102
                                                                                           L               102
                                                                                                                      XL                 102
                                                                                                                                                   Full
Train Loss


             10 1                              10 1                          10 1                          10 1                          10 1

             10 4                              10 4                          10 4                          10 4                          10 4

             10 7 8                            10 7 8                        10 7 8                        10 7 8                        10 7 8
                10         10 4          100      10     10 4          100      10     10 4          100      10     10 4          100      10     10 4          100
             100                               100                           100                           100                           100
Train Acc.


              50                                50                            50                            50                            50

               0                                 0                             0                             0                             0
               10 8               10 2           10 8           10 2           10 8           10 2           10 8           10 2           10 8           10 2
             100                               100                           100                           100                           100
Valid Acc.


              50                                50                            50                            50                            50

               0                                 0                             0                             0                             0
               10 8           10 2               10 8       10 2               10 8       10 2               10 8       10 2               10 8       10 2
                          Stepsize                      Stepsize                      Stepsize                      Stepsize                      Stepsize
             102
                             S                 102
                                                             M               102
                                                                                           L               102
                                                                                                                      XL                 102
                                                                                                                                                   Full
Train Loss


             10 1                              10 1                          10 1                          10 1                          10 1

             10 4                              10 4                          10 4                          10 4                          10 4

             10 7                            10 7                          10 7                          10 7                          10 7
                    0        50            100 0             50          100 0             50          100 0          100            200 0            500
             100                               100                           100                           100                           100
Train Acc.


              50                                50                            50                            50                            50

               0                              0                             0                             0                             0
                    0       50            100 0              50         100 0              50         100 0           100           200 0             500
             100                            100                           100                           100                           100
Valid Acc.


              50                                50                            50                            50                            50

               0                             0                             0                             0                             0
                    0       50            100 0          50             100 0          50             100 0          100            200 0            500
                           Epoch                        Epoch                         Epoch                         Epoch                         Epoch


   Figure 18: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size ResNet18 on Cifar10. Top: Loss and
   evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey line corresponds
   to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training loss and evaluation
   metrics during training.


                                                                                      25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 C.2.3                 S MALL T RANSFORMER ON PTB


                                           Sign(+m)               Norm.(+m)              Sign( m)         Norm.( m)
                           S                          M                            L                     XL                      Full
             101                         101                        101                        101                      101
Train Loss


             100 6                       100 6                      100 6                      100 6                    100 6
               10        10 3      100     10    10 3       100       10      10 3       100     10    10 3       100     10    10 3       100

             104                         104                        104                        104                      104
Train PPL


             102                         102                        102                        102                      102

             100 6                       100 6                      100 6                      100 6                    100 6
               10        10 3      100     10    10 3       100       10      10 3       100     10    10 3       100     10    10 3       100

             104                         104                        104                        104                      104
Valid PPL


             103                         103                        103                        103                      103
             102                         102                        102                        102                      102
             101 6                       101 6                      101 6                      101 6                    101 6
               10        10 3      100     10    10 3       100       10      10 3       100     10    10 3       100     10    10 3       100
                        Stepsize                 Stepsize                     Stepsize                 Stepsize                 Stepsize
                           S                          M                            L                     XL                      Full
             101                         101                        101                        101                      101
Train Loss


             100                        100                      100                          100                      100
                   0       50        100 0            50      100 0             100        200 0         200        400 0           2000

             104                         104                        104                        104                      104
Train PPL


             102                         102                        102                        102                      102

             100                        100                      100                          100                      100
                   0       50        100 0            50      100 0             100        200 0         200        400 0           2000

             104                         104                        104                        104                      104
Valid PPL


             103                         103                        103                        103                      103
             102                         102                        102                        102                      102
             101                        101                      101                          101                      101
                   0       50        100 0            50      100 0             100        200 0         200        400 0           2000
                         Epoch                    Epoch                        Epoch                    Epoch                    Epoch


 Figure 19: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size Small Transformer on PTB. Top:
 Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey line
 corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training loss
 and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                              26
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  C.2.4                 T RANSFORMER -XL ON W IKI T EXT-2


                                                 Sign(+m)                 Norm.(+m)                 Sign( m)                Norm.( m)
                            S                               M                                 L                            XL                          Full
             101                               101                             101                             101                         101
Train Loss


             100                               100                             100                             100                         100

             10 1 6                        10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6
                10        10 3      100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3        100      10      10 3         100
              105                           105                             105                             105                             105
Train PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103

             101                               101                             101                             101                         101

             10 1 6                        10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6                          10 1 6
                10        10 3      100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3       100       10         10 3        100      10      10 3         100
              105                           105                             105                             105                             105
 Valid PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103


             101 6                             101 6                           101 6                           101 6                       101 6
               10         10 3      100          10      10 3       100          10      10 3       100          10      10 3        100     10       10 3         100
                         Stepsize                        Stepsize                        Stepsize                        Stepsize                     Stepsize
                            S                               M                                 L                            XL                          Full
             101                               101                             101                             101                         101
Train Loss


             100                               100                             100                             100                         100

             10 1                           10 1                            10 1                            10 1                           10 1
                    0       20            40 0              20            40 0                20          40 0                  50                0          200
             105                             105                             105                             105                           105
Train PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103

             101                               101                             101                             101                         101

             10 1                           10 1                            10 1                            10 1                           10 1
                    0       20            40 0              20            40 0                20          40 0                  50                0          200
             105                             105                             105                             105                           105
 Valid PPL


             103                               103                             103                             103                         103


             101                               101                             101                             101                         101
                    0       20            40         0      20            40         0        20          40         0          50                0          200
                          Epoch                           Epoch                           Epoch                           Epoch                        Epoch


  Figure 20: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size Transformer-XL on WikiText-2.
  Top: Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey
  line corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training
  loss and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                                         27
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  C.2.5                 D ISTILL BERT FINETUNING ON SQ UAD


                                               Sign(+m)                  Norm.(+m)               Sign( m)              Norm.( m)

             101
                               S            101
                                                          M                101
                                                                                          L            101
                                                                                                                      XL             101
                                                                                                                                                 Full
Train Loss


             100                            100                            100                         100                           100

             10 1                           10 1                          10 1                         10 1                          10 1

                10 6      10 3        100      10 6    10 3        100       10 6    10 3        100        10 6    10 3       100      10 6    10 3        100
           100                              100                           100                          100                           100
Train F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

             0                                0                             0                            0                             0
             10 6              10 2           10 6          10 2            10 6          10 2           10 6          10 2            10 6          10 2
           100                              100                           100                          100                           100
Valid F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

               0                              0                             0                              0                           0
               10 6         10 2              10 6        10 2              10 6        10 2               10 6        10 2            10 6        10 2
                         Stepsize                      Stepsize                      Stepsize                       Stepsize                    Stepsize
             101
                               S            101
                                                          M                101
                                                                                          L            101
                                                                                                                      XL             101
                                                                                                                                                 Full
Train Loss


             100                            100                            100                         100                           100

             10 1                           10 1                          10 1                         10 1                          10 1

                    0      2          4            0    2          4             0    2          4              0          5                0   20     40         60
           100                              100                           100                          100                           100
Train F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

             0                                0                            0                             0                             0
              0.0          2.5            5.0 0.0         2.5          5.0 0.0            2.5        5.0 0                 5                0               50
           100                              100                          100                           100                           100
Valid F1


              50                             50                            50                              50                         50

               0                              0                            0                               0                           0
                0.0        2.5            5.0 0.0        2.5           5.0 0.0         2.5           5.0        0        5                  0               50
                          Epoch                         Epoch                         Epoch                          Epoch                       Epoch


  Figure 21: Grid search and selected runs for each batch size DistillBERT finetuning on SQuAD.
  Top: Loss and evaluation metrics at the end of training (see Table 1) for step-sizes evaluated. Grey
  line corresponds to value at initialization. Bottom: Performance of the selected step-size on training
  loss and evaluation metrics during training.


                                                                                     28
