Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O FFLINE RL FOR NATURAL L ANGUAGE G ENERATION
WITH I MPLICIT L ANGUAGE Q L EARNING

    Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, Sergey Levine
    UC Berkeley; {csnell22,kostrikov,suyi,sherryy,svlevine}@berkeley.edu}



                                             A BSTRACT

           Large language models distill broad knowledge from text corpora. However, they
           can be inconsistent when it comes to completing user specified tasks. This issue
           can be addressed by finetuning such models via supervised learning on curated
           datasets, or via reinforcement learning. In this work, we propose a novel offline
           RL method, implicit language Q-learning (ILQL), designed for use on language
           models, that combines both the flexible utility maximization framework of RL
           algorithms with the ability of supervised learning to leverage previously collected
           data, as well as its simplicity and stability. Our method employs a combination
           of value conservatism alongside an implicit dataset support constraint in learning
           value functions, which are then used to guide language model generations towards
           maximizing user-specified utility functions. In addition to empirically validating
           ILQL, we present a detailed empirical analysis of situations where offline RL can
           be useful in natural language generation settings, demonstrating how it can be a
           more effective utility optimizer than prior approaches for end-to-end dialogue, and
           how it can effectively optimize high variance reward functions based on subjective
           judgement, such as whether to label a comment as toxic or not1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models can acquire a remark-
able amount of knowledge from large text cor-               supervised finetuning                  offline RL (this paper)
pora, and can be applied to a wide range of                                                                Suboptimal Dataset
                                                                                                             with Rewards
language-based tasks. However, such models                                                         Good bye.                                 0

are not designed to optimize any user-specified                    Task Specific
                                                                                                   Please don’t come back. Please
                                                                                                   don’t shop with us ever again.
                                                                                                                                             -1
                                                                 “Expert” Dataset
utility, instead requiring considerable trial and           Thank you for shopping with us
                                                                                                   Thank you for shopping with us
                                                                                                   have a nice day!
                                                                                                                                             +1
                                                            have a nice day!
error to design prompts that coerce the mod-                Thanks! Please return to shop
                                                            with us!
                                                                                                   Thanks! Please return to shop
                                                                                                   with us!
                                                                                                                                             +1


els into producing desirable outputs (Liu et al.,
                                                                                 Pretrained LM   Pretrained LM
2021; Brown et al., 2020; Min et al., 2021). In
essence, standard unsupervised language model                  Finetuning                                      Offline RL
training only solves part of the problem, being
                                                                                             …                                           …
effective at distilling down knowledge in large                  Have    a     nice   day                      0.0   0.1    0.3   0.9


corpora, but relatively clumsy when applying                      Task LM (𝛑)                                  Value Model

this knowledge to solve user-specified tasks.                     <a>   Have    a     nice   …                 <a>   Have   a     nice   …


Reinforcement learning (RL) in principle can Figure 1: Offline RL differs from supervised learning
provide an effective framework for steering lan- in that it learns to maximize user-specified rewards from
guage models toward user specified tasks as long suboptimal data with reward labels.
as the task can be represented by some utility
function (i.e., a reward function); however, as outlined in Figure 2 contemporary methods suffer from
high systems complexity and can require expensive human interaction. We need several conditions
to make RL practical: (1) Easy to use: the underlying learning algorithm and workflow should be
simple, stable, and scalable; (2) Able to optimize user specified rewards: the algorithm should be
able to steer a language model toward maximizing any user-defined reward signal, from high-level
task goals (e.g., book a flight) to low-level linguistic subtleties (e.g., avoiding rude or toxic speech);
(3) Practical for interactive applications: the system should be able to handle a variety of tasks,
    1
        Code at https://sea-snell.github.io/ILQL_site/


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


from generating text with desired properties to sequential turn-taking in settings such as dialogue
tasks; (4) Able to leverage existing data: such a system should be able to directly utilize the large
quantities of existing data, avoiding expensive and time-consuming online human interactions; (5)
Temporally compositional (Emmons et al., 2021; Rafols et al., 2005): the method should be able to
attain significant improvement over the average behavior in the data – not merely copying the best
behaviors in the dataset, but actually distilling out underlying patterns in the relationship between
rewards, task dynamics, and language to produce near optimal generations, even when the dataset
demonstrates only mediocre task performance.
Offline RL provides a learning paradigm (Fig-               Method /
                                                            Criteria
                                                                            Easy to Use   Able to
                                                                                          Optimize User
                                                                                                          Practical in
                                                                                                          Interactive
                                                                                                                         Able to
                                                                                                                         Leverage
                                                                                                                                         Temporally
                                                                                                                                         Compositional

ure 1) that combines both supervised learning’s             Supervised
                                                                                          Specified
                                                                                          Rewards
                                                                                                          Settings       Existing Data


ability to leverage existing data (criteria 4) with         Learning (BC)



RL’s ability to optimize arbitrary rewards and              Filtered Fine
                                                            Tuning (%BC)


leverage temporal compositionality (criteria 2,             Online RL



3, 5) (Levine et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021;         ILQL (ours)



Kumar et al., 2020; Janner et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., Figure 2: ILQL meets each of the five criteria for prac-
2020). However, prior offline RL approaches for tical NLP RL methods we outline in Section 1.
language tasks are either based on dynamic programming, which enjoy the temporal compositionality
(see Appendix A.2) but suffer from high systems complexity, hyper-parameter instability, and slow
training times (Verma et al., 2022; Jaques et al., 2020; 2017) (meets criteria 5, fails 1), or methods
based on conditional imitation or dataset value learning that are simple and stable to train, but do not
provide the temporal compositionality enjoyed by “full” RL methods (meets criteria 1, fails 5) (Chen
et al., 2021; Snell et al., 2022; Holtzman et al., 2018; Yang & Klein, 2021; Li et al., 2017; Krause
et al., 2021). Motivated by all these criteria, we design a novel offline RL method based on dynamic
programming with an implicit dataset support constraint (Kostrikov et al., 2021) that enjoys greater
stability, fewer training-time dependencies (such as relying on approximate likelihoods from an
external language model during training), and a more flexible decoding process than prior approaches
(see Sections 4 and 6.4). Our method, ILQL, fine-tunes a transformer language model to predict the
state-action Q function and the state value function V at each token. During training we perform
iterative policy improvement by fitting a value function to an upper-expectile of the Q function,
enabling us to learn policies that leverage temporal compositionality, significantly outperforming
the data, while avoiding the need to execute expensive training-time procedures, such as sampling
counterfactual utterances from the language model (Verma et al., 2022) (see Sections 5 and 6). Then
at inference time we can simply steer a standard language model towards utility maximizing behavior,
by perturbing the predicted likelihoods with our learned values functions (see Figure 3).
Our main contribution is twofold: (1) a novel offline RL algorithm, ILQL, for language models,
that employs a stable optimization process that can flexibly learn high-performing policies from
sub-optimal data in arbitrary sequential decision making settings, thus meeting each of the conditions
laid out above; and (2) a detailed empirical analysis, not only demonstrating ILQL’s ability to more
consistently and stably adapt to many different utility functions than prior approaches, but also ILQL’s
unique ability to optimize stochastic or subjective reward functions, and its ability to discover optimal
behaviors in the face of sub-optimal or unusual data distributions. In particular, in the controlled
generation setting of generating non-toxic text, we demonstrate that ILQL, trained on both toxic
and non-toxic comments, learns to produce fewer toxic outputs than the more standard approach of
performing standard supervised fine-tuning on only non-toxic comments.

2    R ELATED W ORK
A number of prior works have explored combining online RL methods with language models for
natural language tasks such as machine translation or summarization (Ranzato et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2016; Paulus et al., 2017; Wu & Hu, 2018). These works have demonstrated that RL can be an
effective tool for steering language models towards satisfying utility functions. However, when it
comes to settings that require multiple steps of human interaction, e.g., dialogue, these methods can
quickly become impractical (Verma et al., 2022; Ghasemipour et al., 2020).
Offline RL addresses this shortcoming by removing all need for environment interaction or user
simulators, instead operating purely on static datasets of prior human interaction. Several prior
works have applied offline RL to NLP and more broadly sequence generation problems (Jaques
et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2022; Jaques et al., 2017; Snell et al., 2022; Janner et al., 2021; Chen


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2021). The most closely related to our work are those methods based on approximate dynamic
programming (Jaques et al., 2020; 2017; Verma et al., 2022; Jang et al., 2022). While all these works
present promising offline RL methods for NLP tasks, none of them provide a method that achieves the
simplicity, stability, and ease-of-use aspect at the level of supervised learning. For example, Verma et
al. and Jang et al. (Verma et al., 2022; Jang et al., 2022) define their action space at the “per-utterance”
level (Verma et al., 2022), resulting in expensive decoding processes during training (Bender et al.,
2021); and while Jaques et al. (Jaques et al., 2020; 2017) remove this issue by defining actions at the
“per-token” level, the offline RL algorithm proposed requires querying likelihoods from a language
model at RL training time, which adds an additional compounding source of approximation error
and increases systems complexity at training time. Our proposed method instead operates both at the
“per-token“ level and trains in a fully self-contained way, without the need to simulate generation at
training time or query likelihoods from a separate language model. This is achieved by combining
an implicit dataset support constraint (Kostrikov et al., 2021) with a novel policy extraction method
that takes advantage of the discrete “per-token” action space. The result of these design choices is
a simple, stable, and effective method that is easy for NLP practitioners to pick up and apply to a
variety of language-based tasks. In Section 6.4 we demonstrate our method’s effectiveness in meeting
these criteria through a series of ablations and comparisons.
Much prior work on steering language models towards desired behavior has done so without an
explicit utility function, instead focusing on curating finetuning datasets (Zhang et al., 2018; Zellers
et al., 2019; Rajpurkar et al., 2018). A more closely related line of work uses classifiers to guide
LMs towards generating desired textual attributes (Yang & Klein, 2021; Ghazvininejad et al., 2017;
Holtzman et al., 2018; Li et al., 2017). These methods are closely related to the prior work on offline
RL. In RL parlance, such methods could be considered “policy extraction” methods with Monte
Carlo value estimates. This can be interpreted as taking a single step of policy improvement which,
though often effective (Brandfonbrener et al., 2021), is known to be suboptimal as compared to full
dynamic programming methods (i.e., full Q-learning or actor-critic) (Kostrikov et al., 2021). We will
demonstrate empirically in Section 5 that our offline RL method can lead to significant improvements
in final performance as compared to such “single step” approaches, particularly when the training
data is highly suboptimal for the desired task.

3    P RELIMINARIES : L ANGUAGE G ENERATION AS A R EINFORCEMENT
     L EARNING TASK
Token-level POMDP. In this work, we formalize language generation tasks as a partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP). We define the POMDP M at the token level with M =
(S, A, O, T , Z, µ0 , R, γ). We define the agent’s observation ht ∈ O as a history of tokens with
ht = {t0 , t1 , t2 , t3 , ...tt−1 }; the action space at = tt ∈ A is the set of possible next-tokens in our
vocabulary which includes the special end-of-turn token aend (see Figure 3).

Value-based offline RL. In offline RL, the goal is to learn the optimal policy π that achieves highest
discounted cumulative reward from a static dataset D that was produced by some potentially subopti-
mal behavior policy πβ . In this work, we build on the implicit Q-learning (IQL) algorithm (Kostrikov
et al., 2021), which approximates the Bellman optimality equation constrained to in-dataset actions
                          Q∗ (s, a) = R(s, a) + γ ′        max               Q∗ (s′ , a′ ).
                                                    a ,s.t. πβ (a′ |s′ )>0

Instead of directly implementing the support constraint, IQL approximates the maximization on the
right-hand side of the constrained Bellman operator with expectile regression:

                             LV (ψ) = E(s,a) ∼D [Lτ2 (Qθ̂ (s, a) − Vψ (s))]                             (1)

where Lτ2 (u) = |τ − 1(u < 0)|u2 . Increasing the hyperparameter τ , more closely approximates the
maximum. Then this approximation can be used to estimate TD-targets for the Q-networks:
                      LQ (θ) = E(s,a,s′ ) ∼D [(R(s, a) + γVψ (s′ ) − Qθ (s, a))2 ].                     (2)

IQL was designed for fully observable MDPs. However, in Section 4.1, we discuss how we adapt this
formulation to the POMDP setting described above using sequence models.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 IQL: Implicit Backup                           Hi      ,     How’s                                Ok     well      ,


               Qt fits to mean of rt + 𝛾Vt+1:                  Hello    .     </a>                                 Not     ok       .


                                                               What     !     What                                 I’m    doing   </a>

                                                                                                                                                    Target Values


                                                                              …


                                                                                                                   …

                                                                                                                          …
                                                               …

                                                                       …


                                                                                                                                  …
                                                               Q0      Q1     Q2                                   Q3     Q4      Q5
          Vt fits to upper expectile of Qt:
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ok                       Ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2. Perturb logprobs
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Not                      Not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               with value function   Ok

                                                               V0      V1      V2                                  V3     V4      V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Not
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I’m                      I’m
                                                                                                                                                                        1. Fetch LM logprobs
                                                               1.26    1.01   1.06                                 0.97   1.00    1.12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 𝜷     (                             0.97

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   …
                                                                                                                                                                                                         …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I’m

                            CQL Loss                                                                                                                                                                     ln P3                     Q3                V3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     …
                                                                              Transformer Value Function                                             Target Net
                                                                                                                                             Copy

                                                               <a>      Hi      !     </a>   How   are   you   ?   </s>   I’m     well   …           <a>   Hi   !   …

                     Key:                                                                                                                                                          𝛑β Transformer                    Transformer Value Function
    Q( Have      a   nice   , day ) → 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3. sample from
                                             Task Data
                                                                                                                                         …                              …   </a>   How   are   you   ?   </s>    …    </a>   How   are   you     ?     </s>          perturbed distribution
    V( Have      a   nice   ) → 0.7                             Hi      !     </a>                                 I’m    well    </a>

                                                         SL
    r ( Have     a   nice   , day ) → +1.0
                                                                                         𝛑β Transformer
    𝛑( Have      a   nice   ) → day

                                                               <a>      Hi      !     </a>   How   are   you   ?   </s>   I’m     well   …              Training            Deployment


Figure 3: A diagram of our Implicit Language Q Learning algorithm. Left: ILQL training involves three
transformers, each of which is finetuned from a standard pretrained model: (1) A πβ model, finetuned with
standard supervised learning. (2) A value function model, with Q and V on two separate heads; the value
functions are trained with Bellman backups using a combination of conservatism and and an implicit dataset
support constraint. (3) A target value network, which is a Polyak moving average of (2). Right: At inference time,
we use our learned value functions to perturb the log probabilities of πβ towards utility maximizing behavior.

Supervised learning baselines. To align with NLP terminology, we refer to %BC, or supervised
learning on curated or filtered data, as “filtered fine-tuning”, and we refer to BC, or finetuning on
unfiltered data as “fine-tuning”. See Appendix A.4 for filtering details.

4         I MPLICIT L ANGUAGE Q-L EARNING
Our main technical contribution implicit language Q-learning (ILQL), an offline RL algorithm for
NLP tasks. ILQL is specifically designed to enable simple and efficient training of language models
with user-specified reward functions, with a workflow that is similar to standard supervised learning.
ILQL builds on the IQL algorithm, extending it to the token-level POMDP that defines NLP tasks
via the following modifications: (i) it integrates with sequence models to handle partially observable
language generation tasks (Section 4.2); (ii) it utilizes a novel policy extraction method that directly
perturbs the behavior policy πβ with our learned value functions, rather than training a separate actor
π, significantly improving performance and stability on NLP tasks (Section 4.1) and (iii) it adds a
conservatism loss term (Kumar et al., 2020) to the Q-function, fixing a calibration issue in the policy
extraction step. Figure 3 provides an overview of our method.

4.1              A DAPTING I MPLICIT Q-L EARNING TO L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Implicit value function learning. Like IQL, our method learns both a value function and a Q-
function, which bootstrap off each other through Bellman backups with implicit maximization
through an expectile loss. This recursive process of fitting Q and V corresponds to iterative policy
improvement subject to an implicit dataset support constraint, specified by the expectile used to fit V.
Due to parameter sharing, we combine Eqn. 1 and 2 into a single loss function:
                      " T                                                                              #
                       X
                                                                      2   τ
   LQ,V (θ) = Eτ ∼D        (R(hi , ai ) + γVθ (hi+1 ) − Qθ (hi , ai )) + L2 (Qθ̂ (hi , ai ) − Vθ (hi ))
                                                              i=0

In contrast to IQL, we sample sequences of tokens instead of individual transitions to handle partial
observability, such that for each time step, the values are predicted based on a full history.

Policy extraction. IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2021) uses AWR policy extraction (Peng et al., 2019),
which distills the Q-function into a policy with a eβ(Q̂−V ) weighted log-likelihood loss. However, as
we discuss in Section 6, we found this somewhat unstable to train on language models, likely due
to the high-variance gradients induced by the advantage weights. Fortunately, the value learning
procedure in IQL is independent of policy extraction, so instead of attempting to train a model to
represent the optimal policy, we use the learned Q and V values to directly perturb samples from
a model finetuned via supervised learning to model πβ (see Figure 3). To this end, we compute a
modified likelihood for each token by adding its advantage Q(h, a) − V (h) to its logits under the πβ
model, with a multiplier β. We can then renormalize these pseudo-logits and sample them, resulting in


                                                                                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the implicit policy π(a|h) ∝ πβ (a|h)eβ(Q(h,a)−V (h)) = exp(log(πβ (a|h)) + β(Q(h, a) − V (h))).
This does not require training a separate actor, only a behavioral model πβ , which can be trained with
the standard and stable supervised finetuning objective.
However, naïvely performing policy extraction in this way can perform poorly due to over-smoothed
probabilities in πβ that may be nonzero for extremely unlikely tokens. In this case, samples from
πβ may be out of distribution for Q and V , and might have erroneous values. To fix this calibration
issue, we can either further decrease the probability of low probability actions in πβ by performing
top-p filtering or tuning a temperature parameter, or we can explicitly push down OOD Q-values
during training. We implement the latter by adding a small amount of NLL loss to the Q values,
which corresponds to the additional loss terms introduced by CQL (Kumar et al., 2020) with a
uniform KL regularizer. Since ILQL actions are discrete tokens, as opposed to the original CQL
method (Kostrikov et al., 2021), which operates on continuous action spaces, this CQL loss term is
no more expensive than, and in fact equivalent to, a standard cross-entropy loss at the token level. We
find that both of these approaches often work in practice, but prefer the latter, finding that it requires
less tuning for policy extraction at inference time. Our full loss function is therefore:
                                                                  eQθ (si ,ai )

                        c
                      LQ,V (θ) = LQ,V (θ) − αEτ ∼D log P                Qθ (si ,a′ )
                                                                 a′ ∈A e
In early experiments, we found that decoding using the CQL regularized value functions alone,
without πβ , required careful tuning of the CQL weight α. When the CQL regularized value function
is combined with πβ for policy extraction, it mitigates this issue with hyper parameter sensitivity, and
simply setting the CQL weight α to an arbitrary small value less than 1 typically works well.

4.2   A RCHITECTURES FOR I MPLICIT L ANGUAGE Q-L EARNING
We use GPT-2 small as the base model for all transformers in our experiments. Our value function
transformer has three MLP heads: two independently initialized and trained Q heads and one V head.
Each head has two layers, with a hidden dimension twice that of the embedding dimension. Our
target Q value is parameterized as the minimum prediction of both Polyak averaged target Q heads:
Q̂ = min(Q1 , Q2 ) (Fujimoto et al., 2018). As in standard language modeling, the transformer’s
causal masking enables us to perform Bellman updates over entire sequences in parallel.

5     P ROOF OF C ONCEPT: M ULTI -S TEP O FFLINE RL ON W ORDLE
The lack of configurable task settings and reliable evaluations has arguably slowed down progress
in applying sophisticated RL algorithms to language and dialogue tasks (Jiang et al., 2021; Deriu
et al., 2021; Curry et al., 2017). To address this, we present the Wordle game (Lokshtanov &
Subercaseaux, 2022) as an easy-to-use but challenging benchmark task to test the capabilities of
offline RL algorithms. In this section, we use this task to construct situations where we would expect
offline RL to lead to significant improvement over simpler methods based on supervised learning or
single-step improvement (e.g., single-step RL-style or filtered supervised learning methods).

Multi-step RL: a motivating example. General value-based RL methods based on solving the
Bellman equation described in Section 3 can be viewed as iteratively improving the policy: each
update sets the current value Q(ht , at ) to be the reward plus the maximum possible next time step
value according to the current value function. This is in contrast to “single-step” update methods,
which do not recursively update the value function, instead only learning to estimate the value of the
dataset and then greedily selecting the maximal-value action during inference. Classic examples of
such methods use Monte Carlo regression or single-step RL (Sutton et al., 1998) to train the value
function, and then greedily choose actions at test-time, though a number of different methods of
this sort have been proposed for guided language generation in the literature (Yang & Klein, 2021;
Ghazvininejad et al., 2017; Holtzman et al., 2018; Li et al., 2017). Such methods have been referred
to in the NLP literature as “reward models" (Young et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2016; Su et al., 2016) and
in the offline RL literature “one step RL" or SARSA (Brandfonbrener et al., 2021). Some works
also proposed behavioral cloning methods that filter the training data or use conditioning to clone
high-reward trajectories (Chen et al., 2021) – though these methods are based on different principles,
they also employ Monte Carlo estimates of the cumulative reward in place of value functions learned
with dynamic programming. While in principle such methods should not lead to optimal policies, in
practice they often constitute an appealing approximation due to their ease of use.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Abstract MDP Diagram                        Dataset Composition                            Goal: produce outputs that maximally activate a sentiment classifier
                                                        The movie wasn’t good. It was utterly
                                     10% of data        mind blowing, creative, and inspiring!    SARSA: Q(s, a)=+0.5
                      R = 0.5        +1.0 reward each                                             ILQL: Q(s, a)=+0.5                                                          reward:
                 S0             S1                      The movie wasn’t good. It was a
                                                                                                                           was                     a good time.
                                                                                                                                                                                +0.5
                                                        masterpiece, an experience, a lifetime!                                     SARSA
           R=0                                                                                                          SARSA
                                                        The movie wasn’t good. I wanted to        The movie
                                                        fall asleep by the end.
                                     45% of data                                                                        ILQL                                                  reward:
                 S2                                                                                                                                I disliked every minute.
                                                                                                                                                                                -1.0
                                     -1.0 reward each The movie wasn’t good. All the
                                                        characters were one dimensional, and
        R = -1        R=1                                                                         SARSA: Q(s, a)=-6.4      wasn’t good.     ILQL
                                                        it lacked creativity.
                                                                                                  ILQL: Q(s, a)=+1.0
                                                                                                                                                   It was fantastic! A true   reward:
                                                        The movie was good.
                                     45% of data                                                                                                   experience!                  +1.0
       Lava           Goal           0.5 reward each
                                                        The movie was solid. It entertained.


Figure 4: Left: an abstract depiction of an MDP where single-step RL fails to discover the optimal policy. Right:
A notional illustrative example where we might expect full “multi-step” RL methods (such as ILQL) to perform
significantly better than “single-step” methods. In this example, good utterances tend to start with “The movie
was...”, while bad utterances start with “The movie wasn’t...” However, the very best examples also start with
“The movie wasn’t...”, requiring multi-step planning or multiple steps of policy improvement to derive effective
strategies. Methods that implement just a single step of policy improvement will fail to produce maximally
positive sentiment outputs. While this example may appear somewhat contrived, we see in our experiments that
multi-step RL methods do lead to improvements in a number of more real settings.
Since ILQL performs multiple steps of policy improvement, it can significantly improve over Monte
Carlo estimators or single-step RL when the underlying data is sub-optimal. One example corresponds
to the notional task in Figure 4, in which the optimal sequence of actions requires traversing a state
that’s also frequented by sub-optimal examples. In this case, single-step RL will learn to take actions
that appear safer according to the dataset — such as the transition “The movie” → “was” in Figure 4
-– whereas full (“multi-step”) RL methods would recover the optimal policy. We demonstrate this
empirically on the Wordle game below.
Wordle dataset. Our Wordle task is designed to allow us to use data from real humans in a sequential
decision-making setting while still enabling objective simulated evaluation and the flexibility to
compose datasets with different properties, thus providing an effective benchmark for validating a
variety of approaches. Wordle is a word guessing game in which the agent gets 6 attempts to guess a
certain word, and at each turn receives feedback from the environment about which letters from the
guessed word are and are not in the true word (see Appendix A.5 for more details). While Wordle may
appear distinct from many natural language tasks, it shares a number of high-level properties, such
as non-deterministic dynamics and a sequential turn-based structure, with more complex language
domains like dialogue, making it well suited for a first evaluation of NLP-focused RL methods.
Synthetic Wordle task. We constructed a synthetic Wordle dataset to serve as a benchmark that
is specifically intended to evaluate how well a particular method can perform multiple steps of
policy improvement. This task intended to specifically bring out the failure mode of single step
methods in a setting suitable for testing offline RL methods with sequence models. The dataset
consists of data sampled from three behavior policies, each corresponding to one of the branches
in Figure 4: (1) πupper bound , a high-performing policy, corresponding to the path S0 → Goal. (2)
πadversarial , which behaves the same as πupper bound for the first two actions (S0 → S1 ) and then behaves
suboptimally (S0 → Lava). (3) πsuboptimal , a policy of moderate performance, corresponding to
S0 → S1 . Measuring the predicted Q values from our models trained on this distribution, in Figure 6
(right) we observe that ILQL assigns higher values to actions corresponding to the paths towards
“misleading states” (i.e. S2 ) than those to the “goal states” (i.e. S1 ), whereas single-step RL shows the
exact opposite preference, confirming both our hypothesis that this type of MDP would be amenable
to multiple steps of policy improvement, and that ILQL as an algorithm is able to perform such
policy improvement. Of course, the structure of real-world NLP tasks might not necessarily reflect
this setting – as we show in the next section, ILQL still often attains improvement over one-step
and BC-based methods, though it is more difficult to discern the particular structure that makes this
possible in more realistic tasks.
Validating on natural Wordle data. While the synthetic setting explored above was specifically
designed to demonstrate a dramatic difference between ILQL and single-step RL, the findings still
transfer to more realistic settings. In Table 6, we demonstrate ILQL outperforming single-step RL on
a natural dataset of Wordle games scraped from Twitter (see Appendix A.5 for details).

6    NATURAL L ANGUAGE E XPERIMENTS
Next, we evaluate ILQL on two realistic language tasks. We first identify scenarios in which one
might expect offline RL to be particularly beneficial: (1) tasks that demand repeated interactions,


                                                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   method        standard           y/n          cons. y/n
                                                                  train/eval     standard                       y/n                         cons. y/n
    ILQL       -5.21 ± 0.13     -5.57±0.13     -6.57 ± 0.18
                                                                   standard    -5.21 ± 0.13               -11.12 ± 0.30                  -14.97 ± 0.36
 1-step RL     -5.14 ± 0.13    -5.91 ± 0.14    -7.63 ± 0.20
                                                                      y/n      -5.41 ± 0.12                -5.57 ± 0.13                   -8.24 ± 0.22
 Filtered FT   -5.07 ± 0.13    -7.48 ± 0.21    -9.13 ± 0.22
                                                                  cons. y/n    -5.29 ± 0.13                -5.42 ± 0.13                   -6.57 ± 0.18
      FT       -5.25 ± 0.13   -10.85 ± 0.27   -15.16 ± 0.35

Table 1: Left: comparing ILQL to baselines on our Visual Dialogue rewards. “Cons. y/n” refers to the
“Conservative y/n” reward. ILQL successfully optimizes for many different rewards, even those for which the
data is sub-optimal (e.g. BC performance). Right: Evaluating each ILQL agent on other rewards. Agents
generally perform worse on rewards for which they were not trained.

like dialogue; (2) data that is highly sub-optimal under its utility function; (3) settings with highly
stochastic rewards based on subjective human judgement (e.g., avoiding toxic language). Taking
into account these three scenarios, we evaluate ILQL on (1) a goal-directed question asking task
based on Visual Dialogue (Das et al., 2016), where achieving high rewards on a diverse set of metrics
during repeated interactions is desirable, and (2) a Reddit comments generation task with highly
subjective and noisy reward functions (toxicity ratings or upvotes). For general experiment details
see Appendix A.4.

6.1    E VALUATING D IVERSE R EWARDS ON V ISUAL D IALOGUE

Visual Dialogue dataset. We use the Visual Dialogue
                                                                                                       Standard Reward Function:
dataset (Das et al., 2016) to evaluate our algorithm’s                          Image Caption: A man, with other people in the background, is sitting at a
ability to optimize many different reward functions in                          picnic table with a cell phone in front of him while he uses a fork and knife
                                                                                to cut a dessert on a plate.
complex dialogue settings. The task involves both a                             Questioner: is man young?
                                                                                Answerer: yes
question asking and question answering agent, the latter                        Questioner: is he wearing glasses?
                                                                                Answerer: no

of which is presented with an image and tasked with                             Questioner: is there food on table?
                                                                                Answerer: yes

answering the former’s questions about the image. In-                           Questioner: is there food on table?
                                                                                Answerer: yes

stead of using this task as a question answering task, we
                                                                                                              Yes/No Penalty:
follow Das et al. (Das et al., 2017) and train our agents                       Image Caption: A person flying a kite over a sand dune.
to ask questions, with rewards based on how well the                            Questioner: what color is kite?
                                                                                Answerer: it's black and white
ground-truth image can be predicted from the resulting                          Questioner: is person male or female?
                                                                                Answerer: can't tell
dialogue. For evaluation, we use the model from Das                             Questioner: what is person wearing?
                                                                                Answerer: i can't tell

et al. (Das et al., 2017) as our environment simulator.                         Questioner: what color is sand?
                                                                                Answerer: dark brown

To allow our agents to operate entirely in the space                            Questioner: is person flying kite flying in air?
                                                                                Answerer: yes

of natural language, we treat the image embedding as                            Questioner: what color is kite?
                                                                                Answerer: black

part of the reward function, using the supervised model
                                                                                                      Conservative Yes/No Penalty:
proposed by Das et al. (Das et al., 2017) to predict the                        Image Caption: Tour buses are lined up on the street waiting for people.
image embedding from the dialogue. See Figure 5 for                             Questioner: how many buses?
                                                                                Answerer: 2
example dialogues in this domain. We chose this envi-                           Questioner: what color are buses?
                                                                                Answerer: white and red

ronment specifically because (1) it has been previously                         Questioner: how many people?
                                                                                Answerer: 2

studied in the context of RL (Das et al., 2017); (2) as                         Questioner: what gender are people?
                                                                                Answerer: 1 is male and 1 is female

a dialogue game, automated evaluation is more reliable                          Questioner: what are they wearing?
                                                                                Answerer: 1 is wearing shorts and other is wearing shorts and shirt

than other tasks; and (3) the Q&A structure enables                             Questioner: what color is their hair?
                                                                                Answerer: dark brown

some temporal compositionality (i.e., the answer to one
question may prompt new more specific questions).         Figure 5: Dialogues from different agents on
                                                                         the Visual Dialogue task. We observe qualita-
Visual Dialogue task. The agent receives a reward of tive differences depending on the agent’s reward.
-1 for each turn in which the ground truth image can’t The “standard” agent asks many yes/no question,
be predicted accurately from the dialogue, otherwise whereas adding a string-match penalty for yes/no
the agent receives a reward of 0 and the environment questions prevents many of such questions from
                                                           being asked, and adding a more conservative
ends interaction. For details on the task setup, see yes/no penalty prevents all of such questions.
Appendix A.6. Since the Visual-Dialogue dataset was
largely designed for supervised learning agents, the data is already near optimal for the original task.
However, if we shift the reward function such that the data is no longer optimal, we can observe large
gains from offline RL. We therefore use this domain to demonstrate offline RL’s flexibility to adapt to
different reward functions. We consider three rewards: “standard”, “y/n”, and “conservative y/n”.
“Standard” is simply the reward described above and detailed in Appendix A.6. “y/n” adds to the
“standard” reward a penalty for asking questions that produce yes or no answers, by assigning a reward
of -2 each time the other speaker says “yes” or “no”. This is challenging, because while the data
contains many yes/no questions, the goal is not for the agent itself to avoid those words, but rather


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



               method         toxicity   upvotes real   upvotes model
                                                                          train/eval      toxicity   upvotes model
                ILQL          0.0±0.0    9.83±0.04        10.0±0.0
                                                                           toxicity       0.0±0.0     9.07±0.09
           single-step RL     0.0±0.0    6.23±0.15        10.0±0.0
                                                                         upvotes gold   -5.00±0.00    9.83±0.04
             Filtered FT    -0.74±0.07   7.06±0.14       7.86±0.13
                                                                        upvotes model   -5.00±0.00     10.0±0.0
                  FT        -3.51±0.13   4.87±0.16       4.87±0.16

Table 2: Left: A comparison of ILQL against baselines on our Reddit comment rewards. ILQL never generates
undesirable comments on 2 out of 3 rewards, whereas fine-tuning on filtered data occasionally does. Right:
Evaluating each Reddit ILQL agent on other rewards. Agents trained on one reward are less optimal on others.
avoid utterances that cause the other speaker to use them. Not all simple questions produce literal
“yes/no” answers, so our third reward further penalizes brief responses, such as “I can’t tell”, “no it
isn’t”, “yes it is”, “I don’t know”. This reward function assigns a -2 reward to a set of low-information
responses using a handful of conservative string matching heuristics, detailed in Appendix A.6.
Results on optimizing diverse rewards We demonstrate that ILQL learns a policy distinct from
the dataset behavior policy and can optimize many different rewards in Table 1 left, where we can see
that ILQL is able to outperform baselines on most of our Visual Dialogue reward functions. Agents
optimized for each reward learn different behaviors as well: in Table 1 right, we see that offline RL
agents trained on one reward function are generally suboptimal on others. Figure 5 demonstrates
this qualitatively: without the “yes/no” penalty, our policies ask many “yes/no” questions, but under
its presence policies tend to ask other questions instead. Even when the underlying data is highly
sub-optimal for a given reward function, ILQL is able to determine the desired behavior. In addition
to our reward-based evaluations, we also provide language quality evaluations for all baselines on
each reward function in Section A.11.
6.2 S UBJECTIVE R EWARDS ON R EDDIT C OMMENTS
Reddit comments dataset. To evaluate our agents on minimally curated and maximally diverse
open-domain text with highly stochastic reward functions based on subjective human judgement, we
train ILQL on a large dataset of 4 million Reddit comments from 2 ; our agents are given a parent
comment or post as context and then trained to produce replies that satisfy one of two rewards:
“toxicity” and “upvotes real”. Given that this is internet text, the data contains toxic language, so for
our “toxicity” reward, we train our agents to satisfy a toxicity filter, which gives rewards -10, -5, and
0 for toxic comments, moderately toxic, and non-toxic comments respectively. Our second reward
function incentivizes comments that would receive a positive number of upvotes, rewarding +10
for positive upvotes and 0 negative. We automatically evaluate our upvote agents with a finetuned
RoBERTa-base model, that predicts whether a comment will receive positive upvotes. We train this
model on a held-out split of the data (see Appendix A.7 for more details). We train agents on both the
ground truth upvotes (denoted “upvotes real”) and on this upvote model’s predicted reward (denoted
“upvotes model”).
Results on optimizing noisy rewards. In natural language tasks, we may need to optimize stochas-
tic, high-variance reward functions based on subjective judgement, such as whether a Reddit comment
should be flagged as toxic. Such stochastic settings should be expected when multiple users with
differing opinions provide reward labels. Offline RL, by design, is robust to environment stochasticity,
and therefore should be able to optimize such noisy environments. We use the Reddit toxicity and
upvote tasks to study how well ILQL can handle such settings. As we can see in Table 2 top, ILQL
is surprisingly able to get a perfect or near-perfect score on these more subjective settings, whereas
more standard approaches, such as filtered finetuning on only non-toxic or only positive upvote
comments, perform significantly worse (i.e. generates more comments flagged as toxic or predicted
to have negative upvotes). Additionally, we see in Table 2 bottom that agents trained on one reward
function are generally less optimal for others, confirming that ILQL is effectively specializing its
behavior for each utility function. We have additional complementary experiments studying this
effect in Appendix A.8. In addition to our reward-based evaluations, we also provide language quality
evaluations of our agents in Section A.11, and a preliminary user study in Appendix A.12.
6.3      C HOICE OF O FFLINE RL ALGORITHM
We compare ILQL to four other RL methods: a per-token version of CQL, an adaptation of the
ψ-learning as proposed by Jaques et al. (Jaques et al., 2020; 2017), decision transformer (DT) (Chen
et al., 2021), and single-step RL (Yang & Klein, 2021; Ghazvininejad et al., 2017; Holtzman et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2017). In Table 3, we see that ILQL significantly outperforms baselines, and also has
the second lowest hyper-parameter variance, just behind single-step RL, confirming our hypothesis
that ILQL can provide both high relative performance and training stability.
   2
       https://www.kaggle.com/code/danofer/reddit-comments-scores-nlp/notebook


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6.4   ILQL A BLATIONS
To understand which components of ILQL enable both good results and greater ease-of-use than prior
offline RL approaches for language tasks, we abalate ILQL’s main design decisions: the choice of a
per-token action space, our value learning method, and our policy extraction strategy.
We evaluate these comparisons on the Visual                   method          max score σ w.r.t hparams
                                                               ILQL          -5.57±0.13       0.46
Dialogue “yes/no” reward because (1) it is im-                 CQL           -7.32±0.17       1.98
portant to compare offline RL methods on a chal-                 ψ          -10.05±0.18       0.60
lenging and realistic sequential decision prob-           single-step RL     -5.91±0.14       0.35
                                                                DT           -6.70±0.17       1.15
lem like dialogue, and (2) since the Visual Dia-       Filtered Fine-tuning  -7.48±0.21       0.72
logue data is already “near-expert” for the “stan-          Fine-tuning     -10.85±0.27         -
dard” reward, the “yes/no” reward is better able
to differentiate between methods.                  Table 3: Comparison of ILQL and other offline RL
                                                    methods on the visual dialogue “y/n” task. ILQL per-
Ablations on per-token vs. per-utterance ac- forms better with lower hyperparameter sensitivity. Re-
tions. We hypothesize that, since a per-token sults show best hyperparameter settings for each method.
Q function enables an efficient search through
the utterance action space, performing offline RL at the token level, rather than the utterance level,
can yield cheaper inference and better performance.
We compare ILQL to: (1) ILQL (utterance): a per-utterance adaptation of ILQL that removes the
conservatism loss term and performs Bellman backups at the utterance level instead of the token level;
(2) single-step RL (utterance): a per-utterance version of single-step RL; and (3) CHAI (Verma et al.,
2022): an adaptation of CQL for use on language models at the per-utterance action level. For policy
extraction, each baseline uses EMAQ (Ghasemipour et al., 2020), where we sample N utterances
from a learned behavior policy and then re-rank with the Q function.
We see in Table 5 that ILQL outperforms per-utterance ILQL and single-step RL, while also running
inference ∼4x faster on a single T4 GPU. When tuned well, we see that CHAI perform similarly to
ILQL. However, CHAI is less stable with respect to hyperparameters and is >2x slower at inference
time.
                                                                 method      max score   σ w.r.t hparams
Ablations on policy extraction strategies. In adapt-              ILQL      -5.57±0.13     0.46
ing IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2021) to sequence models, we        ILQL (AWR)   -5.96±0.13     2.82
design a novel policy extraction strategy, as described in    ILQL (GOLD)   -7.58±0.21     0.61
Section 4. We compare our novel extraction procedure Table 4: Policy extraction techniques for ILQL.
to two baselines: (1) the standard AWR-based (Peng
et al., 2019) policy extraction method used in IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2021) and a number of other
offline RL algorithms (Nair et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), and (2) GOLD (Pang & He, 2020) an
off-policy gradient based method for natural language generation. We expect that our approach
should generally yield better performance, while also being easier to tune than these baselines. We
apply AWR and GOLD extraction to our best performing ILQL value function, denoting this as
“ILQL (AWR)” and “ILQL (GOLD)”. Table 4 demonstrates that ILQL is both more stable and better
at extracting good performance from a given value function than the well established AWR-style
extraction and GOLD. Additionally, the AWR and GOLD extraction methods require tuning addi-
tional hyper-parameters at training time rather than just at inference time, decreasing flexibility and
increasing the time and effort spent tuning parameters and re-training.

7     C ONCLUSION
We proposed ILQL, an offline RL method for steering language generation to fulfill a variety of
desirable conversational behaviors. Through experiments ranging from word games and goal-directed
question asking to optimizing upvotes and minimizing toxic language, ILQL shows that offline
RL can serve as a strong alternative to the method landscape of language generation dominated by
language model finetuning on manually filtered datasets and classifier guidance. We hope the positive
results from ILQL will inspire more work on offline RL for dialogue, and lead to more controllable
language models that directly optimize user-specified utility functions for a wide range of tasks in text
generation. Lastly, we acknowledge that our method is generally more computationally expensive
than more standard supervised learning approaches to language generation ( 2x more training time
in our experiments), since it requires 3 separate transformer networks during training and 2 during
inference. Future work should study alleviating this cost.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   E THICS S TATEMENT
We acknowledge that any utility optimization method can be used to aid or harm, we hope these
future works consider ethical uses of offline RL. Additionally, our method also has its limitations:
for example, ILQL may not be effective when datasets are highly suboptimal. Offline RL would
also not be ideal in settings which require distributional constraints, such as fairness. We hope that
practitioners will take these limitations into account when applying our method.

9   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To promote reproducibility, we present extensive results of all hyper-parameter settings we tried for
all baselines in the appendix. We also describe all experimental details. Lastly, we have also attached
in the supplemental source code for reproducing all the experiments in this submission.

R EFERENCES
Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
 dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021
 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’21, pp. 610–623, New
 York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450383097. doi:
 10.1145/3442188.3445922. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922.
David Brandfonbrener, William F. Whitney, Rajesh Ranganath, and Joan Bruna. Offline rl without
  off-policy evaluation, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08909.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.01345.
Amanda Cercas Curry, Helen Hastie, and Verena Rieser. A review of evaluation techniques for social
 dialogue systems. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI International Workshop on Investigating
 Social Interactions with Artificial Agents, pp. 25–26, 2017.
Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta, Avi Singh, Deshraj Yadav, José M. F. Moura, Devi
  Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Visual dialog, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.
  08669.
Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, José M. F. Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Learning cooperative
  visual dialog agents with deep reinforcement learning, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1703.06585.
Jan Deriu, Alvaro Rodrigo, Arantxa Otegi, Guillermo Echegoyen, Sophie Rosset, Eneko Agirre, and
  Mark Cieliebak. Survey on evaluation methods for dialogue systems. Artificial Intelligence Review,
  54(1):755–810, 2021.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1810.04805.
Scott Emmons, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Rvs: What is essential for
  offline rl via supervised learning?, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10751.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.07219.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09477.
Felix A. Gers, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Fred Cummins. Learning to Forget: Continual Prediction
  with LSTM. Neural Computation, 12(10):2451–2471, 10 2000. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/
  089976600300015015. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/089976600300015015.
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Dale Schuurmans, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Emaq: Expected-
  max q-learning operator for simple yet effective offline and online rl, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2007.11091.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Xing Shi, Jay Priyadarshi, and Kevin Knight. Hafez: an interactive po-
 etry generation system. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations, pp. 43–48,
 Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/P17-4008.
Jiatao Gu, Graham Neubig, Kyunghyun Cho, and Victor O. K. Li. Learning to translate in real-time
   with neural machine translation, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.00388.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1801.01290.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, Antoine Bosselut, David Golub, and Yejin Choi. Learning
  to write with cooperative discriminators, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.
  06087.
Youngsoo Jang, Jongmin Lee, and Kee-Eung Kim. GPT-critic: Offline reinforcement learning for end-
  to-end task-oriented dialogue systems. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qaxhBG1UUaS.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
N. Jaques, S. Gu, D. Bahdanau, J. M. Hernandez-Lobato, R. E. Turner, and D. Eck. Sequence tutor:
  Conservative fine-tuning of sequence generation models with kl-control. International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Natasha Jaques, Judy Hanwen Shen, Asma Ghandeharioun, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza,
  Noah Jones, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Rosalind Picard. Human-centric dialog training via offline
  reinforcement learning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.05848.
Haoming Jiang, Bo Dai, Mengjiao Yang, Tuo Zhao, and Wei Wei. Towards automatic evaluation of
  dialog systems: A model-free off-policy evaluation approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10242,
  2021.
Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel : Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05951.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit
   q-learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06169.
Ben Krause, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Shafiq Joty, Richard
  Socher, and Nazneen Fatema Rajani. GeDi: Generative discriminator guided sequence generation.
  In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 4929–4952,
  Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.424. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  findings-emnlp.424.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for
  offline reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc.
  ISBN 9781713829546.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.
  01643.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, and Dan Jurafsky. Learning to decode for future success, 2017. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06549.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig.
  Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language
  processing, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.13586.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
Daniel Lokshtanov and Bernardo Subercaseaux. Wordle is np-hard, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2203.16713.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Noisy channel language
  model prompting for few-shot text classification, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2108.04106.
Ashvin Nair, Abhishek Gupta, Murtaza Dalal, and Sergey Levine. Awac: Accelerating online
  reinforcement learning with offline datasets, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.
  09359.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang and He He. Text generation by learning from demonstrations, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.07839.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive
  summarization, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.04304.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1910.00177.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Eddie Rafols, Anna Koop, and Richard S Sutton. Temporal abstraction in temporal-difference
  networks. In Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, and J. Platt (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, volume 18. MIT Press, 2005. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2005/file/12311d05c9aa67765703984239511212-Paper.pdf.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
  for squad, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03822.
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. Sequence level training
 with recurrent neural networks, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06732.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
Charlie Snell, Sherry Yang, Justin Fu, Yi Su, and Sergey Levine. Context-aware language modeling
  for goal-oriented dialogue systems, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.10198.
Pei-Hao Su, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrksic, Lina Rojas-Barahona, Stefan Ultes, David Vandyke,
  Tsung-Hsien Wen, and Steve Young. On-line active reward learning for policy optimisation in
  spoken dialogue systems, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.07669.
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Introduction to reinforcement learning. 1998.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1706.03762.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Siddharth Verma, Justin Fu, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Chai: A chatbot ai for task-oriented
  dialogue with offline reinforcement learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.
  08426.

Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Konrad Zolna, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Scott Reed, Bobak
  Shahriari, Noah Siegel, Josh Merel, Caglar Gulcehre, Nicolas Heess, and Nando de Freitas. Critic
  regularized regression, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.15134.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin Johnson,
  Xiaobing Liu, Łukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith
  Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex
  Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s neural
  machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation, 2016. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144.

Yuxiang Wu and Baotian Hu. Learning to extract coherent summary via deep reinforcement learning,
  2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.07036.

Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.276. URL https://doi.org/10.18653%2Fv1%
  2F2021.naacl-main.276.

Tom Young, Devamanyu Hazarika, Soujanya Poria, and Erik Cambria. Recent trends in deep learning
  based natural language processing, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02709.

Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2005.13239.

Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a machine
  really finish your sentence?, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.07830.

Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston.
  Personalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too?, 2018. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1801.07243.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   J USTIFICATIONS FOR O FFLINE RL IN D IALOGUE

Dialogue tasks are one of the most rich and interactive settings in NLP, and as we will argue, these
properties make it an ideal target for applying offline RL. RL in general presents an elegant and
highly desirable utility optimization framework for sequential decision making settings, such as
dialogue. However, solving realistic interactive tasks with online RL requires either repeated real-
world interaction or building a realistic simulator of the environment. In the case of dialogue, such
online interaction means communicating with real humans, which may be impractically expensive
and time-consuming with contemporary sample-inefficient online RL methods (Schulman et al.,
2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018), and building a realistic simulator of human responses may be largely
intractable in sufficiently rich or complex dialogue settings. Offline RL, on the other hand, avoids
both of these heavy requirements, by, just as many recent breakthroughs in the field of NLP (Brown
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018), operating purely on previously collected data,
which is wildly available on the internet in general. Offline-RL therefore presents an ideal approach
for flexibly steering language models towards the successful completion of dialogue tasks in a way
that effectively leverages existing data, just as supervised learning does.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2    T EMPORAL C OMPOSITIONALITY

It has been well studied in the RL literature that value-function based RL methods are capabale of
a form of temporal compositionality (Emmons et al., 2021; Rafols et al., 2005) or “stitching” in
their utility optimization. Specifically this refers to an RL algorithm’s ability to stitch together the
locally optimal parts of suboptimal trajectories to find globally optimal behavior. The result of this
stiching is a learning algorithm which can distill the optimal behavior out of a dataset that contains
only suboptimal demonstrations.

A.3    F ULL T OKEN -L EVEL POMDP F ORMULATION

We expand on the POMDP definition presented in Section 3. In order to apply RL to interactive
language settings, we need to formalize dialogue generation and other NLP tasks as a partially
observable Markov decision processes (POMDP). We define the POMDP M at the token level with
M = (S, A, O, T , Z, µ0 , R, γ). We define the agent’s observation ht ∈ O to be a history of tokens
with ht = {t0 , t1 , t2 , t3 , ...tt−1 }; the action space at = tt ∈ A is defined to be the set of possible
next-tokens in our vocabulary, which includes the special end-of-turn token aend . The agent’s policy
then corresponds to a mapping π : O → P(A). Many tasks such as dialogue have an underlying state
st that goes beyond just the sequence history, which can encompass things like the speaker’s mental
state. The environment transitions T (·|st , at ) are defined as a function of this st . In particular, in
domains, such as dialogue, the dynamics are trivial within the agent’s utterance (the selected token is
deterministically appended to the history), but when the policy outputs a special “end of turn” token,
the other speaker gets a turn, which is subsequently appended to the history. In other tasks, where
the goal is to generate a single utterance, such as generating a summary or a single Reddit comment,
the episode ends when the policy produces the end token. The agent receives a reward, defined by
R(st , at ) → R, after each action taken. However, in all the settings we consider, the agent receives
non-zero reward rt only after producing an “end of turn” token, rather than densely at every token in
the agent’s utterances.
While some prior works (Verma et al., 2022; Jang et al., 2022) have considered actions at the
utterance level, defining decision processes at the token level can yield a more effective search
over the exponentially large utterance action space, simply by selecting tokens with high estimated
values. Typically, searching over a per-utterance action space requires a Monte Carlo process of
sampling multiple full utterances and then re-ranking with estimated values, which can generally
bring additional computational complexity at both training and inference time. In Section 6.4, we
demonstrated the effectiveness of learning at the token level through an ablation study that compares
with learning at the utterance level.

A.4    G ENERAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

Here we outline architecture and hyper-parameter details of all our models and baselines.

ILQL experiment details. We run all of our experiments on GPT-2 small transformer architectures,
with the supervised learning policy on one transformer and Q and V heads on a separate one. The
target Q network is also on a separate transformer. In all our experiments we initialize with GPT-2
pre-trained weights, except in the case of Wordle, where we initialize randomly. Additionally, Wordle
uses a different token set: the set of 26 characters, plus an additional token for each “color”. We train
all RL baselines with double-Q learning, using two separate heads on the same transformer model as
the two Q-functions. Our target Q networks are Polyak-averaged with decay factor 0.005 for both
the transformer and the Q function head. We use γ = 0.99 for all offline-RL experiments. All value
function heads are two layer MLPs with hidden dimension twice that of the transformer’s embedding
dimension. Our MLPs used ReLU non-linearities and no dropout. We used the AdamW optimizer
for all experiments, with a learning rate of 1e-4 on the Reddit and Visual Dialogue tasks and 1e-5 on
the Wordle task. We used no weight decay in the training any of our models, and we used a dropout
rate of 0.1 inside the transformer. We trained all Wordle models with a batch size of 1024, all Visual
Dialogue models with a batch size of 64, and all Reddit models with a batch size of 32. We always
truncate token sequences to length 1024, except on Reddit tasks, in which we truncate to length 512.
Except on the Reddit comment task, we train ILQL on each of τ = {0.7, 0.8, 0.9}, and we also
evaluate each on β = {4, 8, 16, ∞}. Where β = ∞ refers to acting greedily according to only


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the Q function. On the Reddit comment tasks, we only train with τ = 0.6 and evaluate on β =
{1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32}. On all tasks, we report the setting with the greatest performance.
For the NLL (CQL) loss term applied to ILQL, we used a weight α of 1.0 on all VisualDialogue
experiments, 0.25 on all Reddit Comment experiments, and 0.0001 on Wordle. These values were
tuned by hand. Generally, we find this loss parameter to not be too critical to performance; we tune it
a little at first for each task and then don’t worry about it.
All ILQL models and all baselines were trained on a single GPU until convergence. Training never
exceeded three days (or 72 V100 hours).

Evaluation details. During evaluation, we use greedy decoding to generate utterances on all tasks
and baselines, except the Reddit Comments tasks, where we sample instead. All experiments are
evaluated on 1024 task-instances from an unseen evaluation set. We use our BC baseline model as
πβ for guiding ILQL’s perturbation-based policy extraction.

Fine-tuning (BC) baselines. We train our fine-tuning baselines with the same optimization param-
eters (i.e., weight decay, dropout, learning rate, batch size) and initialization as ILQL. We use early
stopping: when the validation loss exceeds the training loss, we stop training. Unlike our ILQL value
function models, we use a linear head on top of the transformer to parameterize our BC policy, as is
standard for language model finetuning. The only difference between our fine-tuning and standard
language model training is that instead of finetuning the model to predict the whole sequence of states
and actions, we only finetune the model to predict the agent’s own actions or utterances.

Filtered Fine-tuning (%BC) baselines. For our filtered fine-tuning baselines, we train models on
datasets filtered for the top reward trajectories. Specifically we filter for the top {10%, 30%, 50%}
for Wordle, {10%, 20%, 30%} for Visual Dialogue, and for Reddit, since our rewards are discrete,
we define filtered fine-tuning to mean just training on the data-points with the maximum reward label.
For each task, we train models on each of these percentages and report the performance of the best
setting found. We use the same hyper-parameters as our Fine-tuning (BC) baselines for training these
models.

Decision transformer baseline. Our decision transformer baseline follows from Chen et al. (Chen
et al., 2021), except we initialize with pretrained GPT2 weights. All hyperparameters are iden-
tical to those used to train our BC baselines. To evaluate decision transformer on our Vi-
sual Dialogue “y/n” reward, we swept over a broad range of conditional reward-to-go values:
{−11, −10, −9, −8, −7, −6, −5, −4, −3, −2, −1, 0}. We report the setting with the best perfor-
mance.

single-step RL baselines. single-step RL baselines are implemented as ILQL with τ = 0.5 and
all other hyper-parameters are identical to those used with ILQL as described above. Except on
the Reddit comment tasks, we evaluate all single-step RL models on β = {4, 8, 16}, and report the
setting with the greatest performance. On the Reddit comment tasks, we show the best performance
from β = {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32}.

Per-utterance ILQL. For “ILQL (utterance)”, we train models with τ = {0.7, 0.8, 0.9}. We also
evaluate each model with number of EMAQ-style (Ghasemipour et al., 2020) samples chosen from
N={4, 8, 16}. We report the setting with the best task performance. “single-step RL (utterance)” is
a special case of “ILQL (utterance)” with τ = 0.5, which we evaluate on each of N={4, 8, 16} and
report the setting with the best performance. The architecture for “ILQL (utterance)” and “single-step
RL (utterance)” is largely identical to that of per-token ILQL, with the main difference being that
Bellman backups are performed at the utterance level instead of the token-level. As a result of this
difference, Q-heads map to a scalar at the end of an utterance instead of a vector at every token with
length equal to the size of the vocabulary. We include comparisons to Per-utterance ILQL in Table 5.

CHAI baseline. Our CHAI baseline is adopted from Verma et al. (Verma et al., 2022). The tasks we
consider only require utterance actions; no axuiliary actions, like the price proposal action required by
that of Verma et al. (Verma et al., 2022)’s bargaining task. We therefore only adopt the components
from CHAI relevant to utterance level actions. In order to compute CHAI’s CQL loss at the utterance


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         method               max score    σ w.r.t hparams   inference time per-dialogue (sec)
                         ILQL                -5.57±0.13          0.46                    5.10±0.12
                   ILQL (utterance)          -5.89±0.14          0.51                    22.1±0.47
               single-step RL (utterance)   -7.35 ± 0.17         0.21                   20.38±0.41
                         CHAI                -5.57±0.13          1.11                  12.13 ± 0.25

Table 5: On the VisualDialogue “y/n” reward, we compare per-token ILQL to per-utterance ILQL, per-utterance
single-step RL, and CHAI (Verma et al., 2022). We observe that per-token ILQL is generally much faster at
inference time than per-utterance methods, while also outperforming or performing equivalently to all per-
utterance baselines. All evaluations were performed on a single T4 GPU. All baseline implementations build on
the same core code for sampling utterances, with a handful of method specific runtime optimizations in each
case.


level, we need to sample counterfactual utterances for each action in the training data, which can
be highly expensive and can greatly slow training. Following Verma et al. (Verma et al., 2022), we
amortize this cost at the risk of inducing some bias by caching 5 counterfactual samples for each
action in the training data as a preprocessing step. In our case, this preprocessing step took over
30 hours to execute on a V-100 GPU for the full the Visual Dialogue training set. As in all our
other experiments, we train two Q networks (Fujimoto et al., 2018), where our target Q value is
parameterized as the minimum of both Polyak averaged target Q heads. We train our CHAI models
with a batch size of 16 and otherwise all other hyperparameters are identical to those used with ILQL.
We train models with CQL α = {0.1, 1.0, 10.0}, and we evaluate each model with the number of
EMAQ-style (Ghasemipour et al., 2020) samples chosen from N={4, 8, 16}. We report the setting
with the best performance. We include comparisons to CHAI in Table 5.

Per-token dynamic programming baselines. For our per-token CQL and ψ-learning baselines in
Table 4, we tuned the CQL loss weight with α = {0.1, 1.0, 10.0}, and the ψ-learning reward scale
with c = {0.1, 1.0, 10.0}. For each baseline agent, we evaluated using ILQL’s policy extraction with
β = {4, 8, 16} and also evaluated by greedily selecting tokens with the Q function by itself. We
report the setting with the best performance for each baseline.
Our implementation of per-token CQL is identical to ILQL with the only exception being that for
per-token CQL the loss function is defined as:
                            " T                                                            #
                             X
          LQ,V (θ) = Eτ ∼D       (R(hi , ai ) + γ max Qθ̂ (hi+1 , at+1 ) − Qθ (hi , ai ))2
                                                            at+1 ∈A
                                     i=0


Our implementation of ψ-learning is adapted from Jaques et al. (Jaques et al., 2020; 2017) for use
on transformer language models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019) instead of RNNs (Gers
et al., 2000). The architecture is identical to that of ILQL, the main difference is in the loss function:
                                                                                                                     
                       T
                      X        R(h   ,
                                    i ia )                               X
LQ,V (θ) = Eτ ∼D         Lδ (             + log(πβ (hi , ai )) + γ log(      exp Qθ̂ (hi+1 , at+1 )) − Qθ (hi , ai ))
                                    c
                      i=0                                                         at+1 ∈A


Where πβ is our BC baseline model: a transformer language model trained with supervised learning.
And Lγ defines the Huber loss; we use γ = 1 in our experiments.
In both baselines, we also fit a value function head to the mean of the Q functions, as in ILQL
with τ = 0.5. Additionally, for both baselines, aside from the parameters mentioned, all other
parameters are identical to those used with ILQL, as described above. The only exception being that
for ψ-learning, we used a learning rate of 1e-5 instead of 1e-4 due to training instability with the
higher learning rate.
We generally found ψ-learning to be highly unstable to train in our experiments, often producing
incomprehensible outputs. It is possible that the baseline could work better with even more careful
tuning.

AWR extraction abalation details. For our “ILQL (AWR)” ablation, we extracted a policy
with AWR extraction using the best performing ILQL value function out of those trained with
τ = {0.7, 0.8, 0.9}. We performed AWR extraction from this value function using 3 different settings


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                We synthesize a dataset with trajectories from                                              We see a dramatic difference between
                        3 different Wordle policies.                                                         ILQL and SARSA on this dataset.

                                                                                                             Fraction of Q Values Where [ S0 => S2 ] > [ S0 => S1 ]

       represents S0=>Goal              represents S0=>Lava                          represents S0=>S1
       average reward: -2.647            average reward: -6.0                      average reward: -4.262
            ~9% of data                    ~45.5% of data                              ~45.5% of data
                                *repeats the first two words from optimal policy


Figure 6: We empirically validate the setting depicted in Figure 4 on a Wordle task. Left: a visualization
of the synthetic dataset distribution we constructed to evaluate the benefits of ILQL’s multiple steps of policy
improvement over “single step” methods, such as single-step RL. Right: a plot showing that ILQL’s Q function
learns to more often assign higher Q values to optimal actions than single-step RL.


for beta: β = {4, 8, 16}. Using the same value function, we performed ILQL extraction with
τ = {4, 8, 16}. For each, we reported the setting with the best performance.

GOLD baseline. Our GOLD baseline is adopted from Pang et al. (Pang & He, 2020), with some
small modifications. In particular, we use our best performing ILQL Q function as the Q function
for GOLD policy learning, and instead of using a manually tuned constant baseline, we use our
ILQL value-function, V, as the baseline. We updated our target policy every 1.5k steps, as was done
on several tasks in the original gold paper. We trained 4 models one with the target-policy weight
lower-bound hyperparameter u set to each of {0.00, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20}. We reported the setting with
the best performance.

A.5    W ORDLE TASK D ETAILS
Evaluating ILQL on the synthetic Wordle task.

Wordle Background. In the game of Wordle, the agent gets 6 turns to guess a 5 letter word
randomly selected from a vocabulary, and the environment responds with one of three “colors” for
each letter in the guessed word: “black” meaning the guessed letter is not in the environment’s word,
“yellow” meaning the guessed letter is in the word but not in the right location, and “green” meaning
the guessed letter is in the right location. We give a reward of -1 for each incorrect guess and a reward
of 0 for a correct guess, at which point environment interaction ends; the agent’s goal is therefore to
guess the correct word in as few turns as possible, a task for which computing optimal behavior has
previously been proven to be an intractable NP-Hard problem (Lokshtanov & Subercaseaux, 2022).

Environment details. Our agents observe the game-state as a history of alternating sequences
of 5 letter tokens followed by 5 color tokens. Unlike the actual Wordle game, we do not prevent
the agent from generating words that aren’t in the vocabulary (i.e., the agent is free to produce any
sequence of 5 letters). For our synthetic experiments, we chose to use the full word list given at
https://gist.github.com/cfreshman/a03ef2cba789d8cf00c08f767e0fad7bdue to its relatively large size
and its use in the actual Wordle game. However, the environment can be configured with any provided
list of 5 letter words.

Wordle Twitter dataset details. We outline the details of our natural Wordle dataset scraped from
Twitter, introduced in Section 5. Due to Wordle’s popularity, we have access to a large amount of
natural human data for Wordle (specifically 214,930 games), scraped from tweets 3 . Existing offline
RL benchmarks are composed of purely synthetic data (Fu et al., 2020), and as a result, it may be
unclear how well offline RL algorithms work on more natural data distributions. We therefore present
this human Wordle dataset as a more naturalistic offline RL task. While the scraped Tweets don’t
display the actual words used by human players, only the sequence of transition colors given by the
   3
     we use the wordle tweet dataset provided here: https://www.kaggle.com/code/benhamner/wordle-1-
6/notebook


                                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              method          Wordle Score
                                               ILQL           -2.13 ± 0.03
                                          single-step RL      -2.23 ± 0.03
                                       Filtered Fine-tuning   -2.38 ± 0.03
                                            Fine-tuning       -2.61 ± 0.03
                                             πupper bound     -1.75 ± 0.02

Table 6: Comparing ILQL to baselines on Wordle human data. Even on realistic human data, ILQL outperforms
“single step” single-step RL.

environment, we can retrofit valid words onto these tweets to produce a dataset of full trajectories.
Note that the words we retrofit may not necessarily be the natural words human players would have
used, but the dataset still represents the average performance of human players, since the number
of turns remains unchanged in this retrofitting process. Additionally, this retrofitting allows us to
further multiply the size of the dataset, since typically several different sequences of words can be
valid for a given tweet. We can also partially control the difficulty level of the task and dataset by
specifying the size and composition of the vocabulary used to retrofit words onto Tweets. In our
Wordle human experiments in Table 6, we use a random subset of 200 words from the word list given
at https://gist.github.com/cfreshman/a03ef2cba789d8cf00c08f767e0fad7b.

Synthetic Wordle Evaluation. For our synthetic Wordle task, we constructed a training distribution
in which demonstrate ILQL’s multiple steps of policy improvement significantly outperforms methods
which only perform a single-step of improvement, such as single-step RL. As described in Secrion 5
our training distribution consists of a mixture of 3 policies, each of which represents one of the paths
through the MDP in Figure 4: (1). πupper bound , a high-performing policy which myopically selects
the word with the highest information gain, representing the path from S0 → Goal. (2). πadversarial ,
which behaves the same as πupper bound for the first two actions (S0 → S1 ) and then subsequently
repeats these first two words (S0 → Lava). (3). πsuboptimal , which selects a random word 50%
of the time, and the other 50% randomly selects a word that meets all known letter constraints,
representing the path from S0 → S1 . The relative performance of these policies is ordered according
to πupper bound > πsuboptimal > πadversarial . We construct our dataset with 9% of the data coming from
πupper bound , 45.5% from πsuboptimal , and 45.5% from πadversarial . In Figure 6 (right), we show that when
trained on this distribution, ILQL assigns higher Q values to actions corresponding to the paths to
”misleading states“ (i.e. S2 ) than those to the “goal states” (i.e. S1 ), whereas single-step RL shows
the exact opposite preference, just as our hypothesis predicted.

Human Wordle Evaluation. In Figure 6, we compare ILQL against baselines on our dataset of
Wordle games scraped from Twitter. We see that even on realistic data, ILQL’s multiple steps of
policy improvement outperforms methods which employ just a single-step of improvement.

A.6      V ISUAL D IALOGUE TASK D ETAILS
Here we detail the task setup and reward functions used in our Visual Dialogue experiments in
Section 6.1. We use Das et al.’s code 4 to produce generations and to predict image embeddings
from the provided supervised learning answer and question bots, respectively. We integrate these
components of Das et al.’s codebase into ours by wrapping the relevant functionality of Das et al.’s
codebase in a flask webserver interface that is then queried by our system.
As described in Section 6.1, our “standard” reward function gives a reward of -1 for each turn in
which the true image is sufficiently difficult to predict from the dialogue, otherwise the agent receives
a reward of 0 and the environment interaction ends. We firstly formalize this notion of “sufficiently
difficult to predict”.
The standard reward is based on the relative percentile ranking of the ground truth image’s distance
from the predicted embedding among a set of images taken from the evaluation set. We give a -1
reward to our agent for every turn in which (1 − pt ) < (1 − p0 ) ∗ 0.5, where pt is the ground truth
image’s percentile rank at dialogue turn t and p0 is the ground truth image’s percentile rank at the
beginning of the dialogue, when only the image caption is observed. Otherwise, the agent gets a
reward of 0 and the episode ends. This condition effectively rewards the agent once the ground truth
image is preferred over 50% of the images that were preferred over it at initialization. The agent
should learn to ask as many good questions as possible to get the episode to successfully end as early
   4
       https://github.com/batra-mlp-lab/visdial-rl


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     method            toxicity   noised toxicity   upvotes real   upvotes model
                      ILQL             0.0±0.0       0.0±0.0         9.83±0.04        10.0±0.0
                 single-step RL        0.0±0.0       0.0±0.0         6.23±0.15        10.0±0.0
              Filtered Fine-tuning   -0.74±0.07    -1.61±0.11        7.06±0.14       7.86±0.13
                   Fine-tuning       -3.51±0.13    -3.48±0.15        4.87±0.16       4.87±0.16

Table 7: A comparison of ILQL against baselines on the various Reddit comments reward functions. ILQL
manages to never generate undesirable comments on 3 out of 4 reward functions, whereas fine-tuning on filtered
data occasionally does.


as possible. In initial experiments, we found it took a very long time to train good value functions for
rewards based on the absolute Euclidean distance alone, as used by Das et al. (Das et al., 2017), so to
make it faster to iterate, we used the relative distance formulation described above.
Our “y/n” reward adds, on top of the “standard” reward, a reward of -2 for every question that results
in a response that exactly matches the strings “yes” or “no”.
Our “conservative y/n” reward instead aims to provide a more conservative, higher-recall lower-
precision penalty to any question which might be a yes/no question. This accounts for the fact
that people often answer yes/no questions with longer phrases (e.g., “It appears so”). This reward
function provides a reward of -2 if any of the following words are sub-strings of the response to the
agent’s question: “not”, “don’t”, “can’t”, “cannot”, “fairly”, “could”, “think so”, “okay”, “maybe”,
“yes”, “no”, “looks”, “appears”, “tell”, “mostly just”. All of these were determined by hand to be
words/phrases that occur often in answers to questions that are effectively yes/no questions.

A.7      R EDDIT R EWARD M ODEL D ETAILS
We outline the details of our reward functions for the Reddit tasks presented in Section 6.2.

Toxicity Reward. Our toxicity filter reward uses OpenAI’s API 5 , which provides a free toxicity
filter, meant for developers building applications off the GPT3 API to use to block toxic inputs or
generations. We assign a reward of -10 for comments labeled as toxic (scored as 2), -5 for comments
labeled as moderately toxic (scored as 1), and 0 for comments labeled as non-toxic (scored as 0).

Upvote Model Reward. Our upvote reward function is finetuned from RoBERTa-base (Liu et al.,
2019) with a learning rate of 1e-5 and a batch size of 64. Since our reward functions are binary,
we train with binary cross entropy loss. Like our value function heads in ILQL, we predict the
reward as a scalar from a 2-layer MLP on top of the RoBERTa transformer, with hidden dimension
twice that of the transformer, ReLU non-linearity, and no dropout. We truncate token sequences to
maximum length 256. At inference time, we predict a reward of +10 if the model’s reward logit is
≥ 0 and a reward of 0 otherwise. We used binary (positive or negative) rewards for upvotes instead of
the more natural cardinal numeric representation, because different sub-reddits can have drastically
different upvote counts depending on the sub-reddit’s population, and our binarization (positive or
negative upvotes) is invariant to these differences in scale. However, this binarization is not the only
normalization that we could have used to overcome this issue.

A.8      N OISY R EWARDS
In figure 7, we present a more detailed visual explanation for why offline RL outperforms filtered
finetuning on our Reddit tasks in section 6.2. As our results in Table 2 show, offline RL consistently
outperforms finetuning on filtered data on this task. We hypothesize that this is due to offline RL’s
ability to effectively reason about the inherently stochastic and subjective rewards functions present in
these tasks. In these high-variance reward settings, simply filtering or curating datasets for exclusively
high-reward examples can fail to produce desirable outputs, since such filtered finetuning approaches
do not make the model aware of the reward uncertainty. Put another way, training on curated datasets
that exclude low-reward examples doesn’t teach the model about what not to generate, whereas
models that are aware of the reward, such as Q-learning, directly learn to relate actions to their
expected reward values, averaging out uncertainty and stochasticity. This can enable models to avoid
   5
       https://openai.com/api/


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               Stochastic Reward
                                                                            Key:
      = expected reward decision boundary         = comment labeled as non-toxic           = comment labeled as toxic            = policy probability density

                                                   Filtered Finetuning Policy                                                               Offline-RL Policy


                                                         Non-stochastic Reward
                                                                            Key:
         = reward decision boundary             = non-toxic comment                  = toxic comment                         = policy probability density


                                                   Filtered Finetuning Policy                                                               Offline-RL Policy


Figure 7: A visual explanation of offline RL’s ability to optimize high variance reward functions
based on subjective judgement, such as whether to label a comment as an example of toxic speech or
not. Finetuning on filtered data accidentally generalizes into producing undesirable outputs, whereas
offline RL is able to find the “safe” outputs. Top: In the case of stochastic rewards, offline RL learns
to avoid the highly stochastic regions of the action space, whereas filtered finetuning will explicitly
learn to imitate undesirable outputs that were stochastically given a positive reward in the training
data, thus leading to suboptimal behavior. Right: In the case of non-stochastic but sharp-boundary
reward functions, ILQL is still able to integrate into its Q values uncertainty about actions near the
sharper parts of the reward function’s decision boundary, thus avoiding these regions. Finetuning on
filtered data expresses no such preference and thus risks generalizing into occasionally producing
undesirable outputs.


             ILQL per-token advantages for toxic comments generated by filtered finetuning model


               advantage:       0.1      -0.1           -0.9         -0.5           0.1         0.2      0.0          -0.9       -0.3      -1.1

                 token:         And      they          censor       your        comments       on       this     horrible        site       .


          advantage:      0.1     -1.6          -0.6      -0.6        0.5          -2.0      -0.6     -1.0     -1.2      -1.0       -1.0          -2.1

            token:        He    ripped      your         skull       out        thinking     he       was       a       dead       man             .


Figure 8: Two toxic comments incidentally generated by the filtered fine-tuning model. ILQL assigns negative
advantages to many tokens, demonstrating how ILQL is more effectively able to avoid such generations.


                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      comment: yes         comment: http://i.imgur.com/e2O.gif
                      comment: lol         comment: I and all of you know me...
                      comment: edit        comment: Yep. The Oatmeal on the right is
                                           trying to deny [this](http://imgur.com/Ojc4M)


                                                                             comment: it's not the main menu, it's the
                                                                             fridge
                                                                             comment: I did what Idra did. Deep down
                                                                             they told me, I said "I'm not cool" and all I
                                                                             could do was leave.
                                                                             comment: All I see in its place is a
                                                                             frame-by-frame summary of its most relevant
                                                                             comments. So having no thought
                                                                             whatsoever of this, I'm happy.


Figure 9: By varying β at inference time, we can interpolate the trade-off between offline RL
"optimization" and output diversity.


outputs that have low but non-trivial probability of undesirable outcomes (e.g., toxicity). Offline RL
in this sense is able to find the safest outputs, whereas fine-tuning on filtered data does not explicitly
express such a preference.
To further test this hypothesis, we artificially add further noise to the toxicity reward function. The
standard toxicity reward assigns all comments one of three reward values: 0, indicating the comment
is non-toxic; -5, indicating the comment is moderately toxic; -10, indicating the comment is highly
toxic. We now relabel the reward for all comments originally given a -5 reward, randomly to either 0
or 10 with equal probability.
Since some of the moderately toxic comments get relabeled with reward=0, they would be included in
the %BC training set, whereas offline RL should learn to represent uncertainty about such comments
and thus push away from the stochastic “middle ground” of this reward function. In Table A.8 in
the “noised toxicity” column, we see that our offline RL agents learn to never generate toxic outputs
despite the additional noise, and in Figure 8 we can see qualitatively that offline RL assigns low
advantages to potentially negative or toxic words/phrases that were incidentally generated by the
%BC model. All of this goes to support our hypothesis that the advantage of offline RL over filtered
supervised learning in these settings lies in its improved ability to handle reward uncertainty.

A.9    T RADING O FF O UTPUT D IVERSITY FOR O PTIMIZATION

An advantage of our novel policy extraction mechanism is that we can flexibly tune the parameter β
at inference time, directly trading off between random generation and optimality. As discussed in
Section 9, this parameter controls a constraint on our policy’s deviation from the data distribution. As
we increase β, the resulting policy will be more strongly influenced by the Q-function, and as we
decrease β, it should approach the data distribution. Beyond the risk in diverging too far from the
data, another potential downside to increasing β is that the resulting policy distribution will become
more deterministic. In some settings, such as chit-chat dialogue, we may desire policies capable of
producing diverse and interesting outputs, so such a deterministic, highly-optimized agent would be
undesirable.
We demonstrate in Figure 9, using the Reddit Toxicity task, how varying β can modulate the diversity
of the generations produced by our policy, as measured by its entropy, at the cost of a small decrease
in performance. We show that as we increase β, while the policy’s performance generally increases,
the entropy decreases and subsequently so does the interestingness and diversity of the language


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             model                reward          rougeL     rouge1                   BERT score
                                                                         precision       recall        F1
            Fine-tuning          standard         27±0.82    26±0.82   0.90±0.0011   0.89±0.0012   0.90±0.0011
       Filtered Fine-tuning      standard         22±0.73    21±0.72   0.89±0.0010   0.89±0.0010   0.89±0.0009
          single-step RL         standard         26±0.82    26±0.80   0.90±0.0011   0.89±0.0011   0.89±0.0011
               ILQL              standard        24±0.0.73   23±0.72   0.89±0.0011   0.89±0.0011   0.89±0.0011
            Fine-tuning             y/n           27±0.82    26±0.82   0.90±0.0012   0.89±0.0012   0.90±0.0011
       Filtered Fine-tuning         y/n           20±0.83    20±0.69   0.88±0.0010   0.88±0.0010   0.88±0.0009
          single-step RL            y/n           25±0.83    24±0.81   0.89±0.0012   0.89±0.0012   0.89±0.0011
               ILQL                 y/n           25±0.82    24±0.81   0.88±0.0012   0.89±0.0012   0.89±0.0011
            Fine-tuning       conservative y/n    27±0.82    26±0.82   0.90±0.0012   0.89±0.0012   0.90±0.0011
       Filtered Fine-tuning   conservative y/n    22±0.74    21±0.73   0.88±0.0010   0.88±0.0010   0.88±0.0010
          single-step RL      conservative y/n    23±0.82    23±0.80   0.88±0.0012   0.88±0.0012   0.88±0.0011
               ILQL           conservative y/n    24±0.81    23±0.79   0.88±0.0011   0.89±0.0012   0.88±0.0011

Table 8: Automatic language quality evaluations comparisons between ILQL and baselines on each Visual
Dialogue reward. We see that ILQL still nearly matches standard fine-tuning on these reference-based metrics of
language quality and also generally matches or exceeds filtered fine-tuning.


model’s outputs. At inference time, we can tune this parameter to trade-off optimization for output
diversity as we desire.

A.10    V ISUAL D IALOGUE E XAMPLE D IALOGUES AND H ISTOGRAM
In Figures 10, 11,and 12 we present a set of selected representative example dialogues produced by
our best performing ILQL agent on each reward. In Figure 13 we present a histogram showing often
different agents generate yes/no questions as judged by their respective “y/n” or “y/n conservative”
reward functions.

A.11    AUTOMATIC L ANGUAGE Q UALITY E VALUATIONS
In Tables 8 and 9 we present automatic reference-based language quality scores for our main baselines
on each Visual Dialogue and Reddit comment reward.

A.12    R EDDIT C OMMENTS P RELIMINARY U SER S TUDY
To validate the automatic evaluations from our Reddit comments task, we ran a preliminary human
study, where we got 41 people to answer 48 questions each about generations from our Reddit
comment agents. We asked subjects two types of questions: 1) to classify the toxicity of comments
generated by agents trained on our “toxic” reward function; and 2) to compare the diversity of outputs
produced by our ILQL agent with β = 4 and β = 32, verifying the claims about output diversity in
Appendix A.9. In each case, generations were randomly selected and shuffled for each user from a
bank of 128 sampled generations for each agent.
We present the results for the toxicity questions in Table 10. We see that the human ratings align
very well with those from our automatic evaluations, with ILQL and single-step RL never generating
toxic comments, and BC and %BC producing more toxic comments. This further emphasizes the
effectiveness of ILQL in optimizing high variance rewards based on subjective human judgement.
In the case of our diversity questions, our human raters were given sets of 5 random comments from
ILQL with beta=4, and 5 random comments from ILQL with beta=32. They were then asked to select
which set of comments was more “diverse”. Our subjects were asked to do this task 7 times with the
order of the two sets randomly swapped. Raters determined that ILQL with beta=4 generated more
diverse comments in 282 out of 289 such cases. This confirms our claim in Appendix A.9 that by
changing beta, the inference time hyperparameter, we can effectively control the tradeoff between
output diversity and objective optimization.
In initial investigations, we found that human raters could not provide reliable evaluations for the
upvotes reward (regardless of which method produced the comments). This is likely because judging
whether a comment will receive an upvote without access to either the comment’s conversation
context or its broader context in the specific Reddit community is very difficult for human raters
(e.g., many of the comments are short phrases like “Yes" or “Thank you"), and the human raters
do not necessarily have the right mental model of typical reddit upvote dynamics to make accurate
predictions. We therefore consider our automated evaluations to be the closest thing we have to the
“ground truth reward” in this case.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              model               reward        rougeL         rouge1                   BERT score
                                                                           precision       recall          F1
             Fine-tuning        upvotes real     7±0.29       6±0.26     0.81±0.0029   0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0025
        Filtered Fine-tuning    upvotes real     9±0.32       7±0.29     0.83±0.0028   0.82±0.0025   0.83±0.0025
       single-step RL β = 1     upvotes real     5±0.29       5±0.27     0.85±0.0026   0.81±0.0025   0.83±0.0025
       single-step RL β = 2     upvotes real     1±0.15       1±0.14     0.84±0.0025   0.79±0.0025   0.81±0.0024
       single-step RL β = 4     upvotes real   0.76±0.11     0.76±0.11   0.83±0.0025   0.79±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
       single-step RL β = 8     upvotes real   0.75±0.11     0.75±0.11   0.83±0.0025   0.79±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
      single-step RL β = 16     upvotes real   0.75±0.11     0.75±0.11   0.83±0.0025   0.79±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
      single-step RL β = 32     upvotes real   0.75±0.11     0.75±0.11   0.83±0.0025   0.79±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
            ILQL β = 1          upvotes real     5±0.28       5±0.26     0.85±0.0026   0.82±0.0025   0.83±0.0025
            ILQL β = 2          upvotes real     3±0.26       3±0.25     0.87±0.0028   0.81±0.0025   0.84±0.0025
            ILQL β = 4          upvotes real     2±0.22       2±0.22     0.87±0.0029    0.8±0.0025   0.83±0.0026
            ILQL β = 8          upvotes real     1±0.12       1±0.12     0.85±0.0027   0.79±0.0025   0.82±0.0025
           ILQL β = 16          upvotes real   0.34±0.08     0.34±0.08   0.84±0.0025   0.79±0.0025   0.81±0.0024
           ILQL β = 32          upvotes real   0.15±0.05     0.15±0.05   0.84±0.0025   0.79±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
             Fine-tuning       upvotes model     7±0.29       6±0.26     0.81±0.0029   0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0025
        Filtered Fine-tuning   upvotes model    10±0.34       8±0.31     0.84±0.0027   0.83±0.0025   0.83±0.0025
       single-step RL β = 1    upvotes model     2±0.24       2±0.23     0.88±0.0029   0.81±0.0025   0.84±0.0026
       single-step RL β = 2    upvotes model   0.33±0.14     0.33±0.14   0.84±0.0025   0.79±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
       single-step RL β = 4    upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.83±0.0025   0.78±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
       single-step RL β = 8    upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.83±0.0025   0.78±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
      single-step RL β = 16    upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.83±0.0025   0.78±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
      single-step RL β = 32    upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.83±0.0025   0.78±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
            ILQL β = 1         upvotes model     3±0.24       2±0.23     0.88±0.0027   0.81±0.0025   0.85±0.0025
            ILQL β = 2         upvotes model   0.42±0.15     0.42±0.15   0.87±0.0028    0.8±0.0025   0.83±0.0026
            ILQL β = 4         upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.83±0.0025   0.78±0.0024   0.81±0.0024
            ILQL β = 8         upvotes model   0.33±0.14     0.33±0.14   0.83±0.0025   0.78±0.0024    0.8±0.0024
           ILQL β = 16         upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.82±0.0024   0.78±0.0024    0.8±0.0024
           ILQL β = 32         upvotes model   0.31±0.14     0.31±0.14   0.82±0.0024   0.78±0.0024    0.8±0.0024
             Fine-tuning          toxicity       7±0.29       6±0.26     0.81±0.0029   0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0025
        Filtered Fine-tuning      toxicity       8±0.32       7±0.29     0.82±0.0026   0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0025
       single-step RL β = 1       toxicity       7±0.31       6±0.28     0.81±0.003    0.82±0.0025   0.81±0.0026
       single-step RL β = 2       toxicity       8±0.31       7±0.28     0.82±0.003    0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0026
       single-step RL β = 4       toxicity       7±0.29       6±0.26     0.82±0.0031   0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0026
       single-step RL β = 8       toxicity       3±0.24       3±0.23     0.84±0.0051   0.79±0.0047   0.81±0.0048
      single-step RL β = 16       toxicity     0.02±0.01     0.02±0.01   0.14±0.0099   0.13±0.0092   0.14±0.0095
      single-step RL β = 32       toxicity      0.0±0.0       0.0±0.0       0.0±0.0       0.0±0.0       0.0±0.0
            ILQL β = 1            toxicity       7±0.31       6±0.28     0.81±0.003    0.82±0.0025   0.81±0.0026
            ILQL β = 2            toxicity       7±0.32       6±0.29     0.81±0.0031   0.82±0.0025   0.81±0.0026
            ILQL β = 4            toxicity       8±0.3        7±0.27     0.81±0.0031   0.82±0.0025   0.81±0.0027
            ILQL β = 8            toxicity       7±0.31       6±0.29     0.83±0.003    0.82±0.0025   0.82±0.0026
           ILQL β = 16            toxicity     0.81±0.18     0.8±0.18    0.85±0.0032   0.79±0.0028   0.82±0.0029
           ILQL β = 32            toxicity     0.35±0.14     0.35±0.14   0.79±0.0062   0.74±0.0058    0.77±0.006

Table 9: Automatic language quality evaluations comparisons between ILQL and baselines on the Reddit
comment tasks. As we increase β, our policy diverges further from the dataset distribution, and correspondingly
the reference-based scores decreases. In general, however, we see that ILQL maintains greater language quality
than single-step RL for similar values of β.


                                     method              # toxicity ratings / # ratings
                                 ILQL β = 32                        0 / 164
                                  ILQL β = 4                        4 / 164
                                       BC                          43 / 159
                                      %BC                          12 / 158
                                 single-step RL                     0 / 159

Table 10: Human ratings of output toxicity on our Reddit comments task. We see that ILQL and
single-step RL never generate toxic comments, whereas BC and %BC occasionally do. These results
align very closely with our automatic evaluations, further emphasizing the effectiveness of ILQL for
optimizing these kinds of high variance reward functions based on subjective human judgement.


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.13    C OMPREHENSIVE R ESULT TABLES
In Tables 11, 12, 13,and 14 we present comprehensive results for all hyper-parameter settings for all
baselines on all tasks.
                                model              standard        y/n      conservative y/n
                       ILQL τ = 0.7, β = 4       -5.23±0.13    -6.65±0.18     -7.64±0.21
                       ILQL τ = 0.7, β = 8       -5.22±0.13    -5.92±0.15     -7.05±0.19
                      ILQL τ = 0.7, β = 16       -5.28±0.13    -5.69±0.13     -6.77±0.18
                      ILQL τ = 0.7, β = ∞        -5.21±0.13    -5.57±0.13     -6.64±0.18
                       ILQL τ = 0.8, β = 4       -5.30±0.12    -6.88±0.18     -7.97±0.21
                       ILQL τ = 0.8, β = 8       -5.40±0.13    -6.28±0.16     -6.85±0.18
                      ILQL τ = 0.8, β = 16       -5.38±0.13    -5.99±0.15     -6.65±0.18
                      ILQL τ = 0.8, β = ∞        -5.41±0.13    -5.64±0.14     -6.71±0.18
                       ILQL τ = 0.9, β = 4       -5.35±0.13    -7.01±0.19     -7.41±0.20
                       ILQL τ = 0.9, β = 8       -5.40±0.13    -6.35±0.16     -6.72±0.18
                      ILQL τ = 0.9, β = 16       -5.45±0.13    -6.17±0.15     -6.57±0.18
                      ILQL τ = 0.9, β = ∞        -5.41±0.13    -5.89±0.15     -6.69±0.18
                        single-step RL β = 4     -5.20±0.13    -6.87±0.18     -9.12±0.24
                        single-step RL β = 8     -5.14±0.13    -6.39±0.16     -8.09±0.21
                       single-step RL β = 16     -5.18±0.13    -6.19±0.15     -7.77±0.20
                       single-step RL β = ∞      -5.30±0.13    -5.91±0.14     -7.63±0.20
                      10% Filtered Fine-tuning   -5.24±0.12    -7.48±0.21     -9.67±0.26
                      20% Filtered Fine-tuning   -5.07±0.13    -8.91±0.24     -9.13±0.22
                      30% Filtered Fine-tuning   -5.16±0.12    -9.10±0.22    -10.52±0.25
                             Fine-tuning         -5.25±0.13   -10.85±0.27    -15.16±0.35

Table 11: All hyper-parameter settings evaluated across all Visual Dialogue tasks for our main
baselines. The best performing setting for each baseline of abalation is bolded. β = ∞ refers to
greedily selecting actions with just the Q function. ILQL is generally better performing and more
stable than all baseline approaches.


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              model                       y/n
                                      CQL α = 0.1, β = 4             -10.08±0.21
                                      CQL α = 0.1, β = 8             -10.97±0.21
                                      CQL α = 0.1, β = 16            -12.92±0.23
                                      CQL α = 0.1, β = ∞             -10.74±0.17
                                      CQL α = 1.0, β = 4              -7.84±0.20
                                      CQL α = 1.0, β = 8              -7.53±0.19
                                      CQL α = 1.0, β = 16             -7.45±0.18
                                      CQL α = 1.0, β = ∞              -7.32±0.17
                                      CQL α = 10.0, β = 4            -11.76±0.29
                                      CQL α = 10.0, β = 8            -11.81±0.30
                                     CQL α = 10.0, β = 16            -11.84±0.30
                                     CQL α = 10.0, β = ∞             -11.81±0.30
                                        ψ c = 0.1, β = 4             -11.59±0.18
                                        ψ c = 0.1, β = 8             -11.26±0.17
                                       ψ c = 0.1, β = 16             -11.42±0.17
                                       ψ c = 0.1, β = ∞              -11.51±0.16
                                        ψ c = 1.0, β = 4             -10.05±0.18
                                        ψ c = 1.0, β = 8             -10.05±0.18
                                       ψ c = 1.0, β = 16             -10.05±0.18
                                       ψ c = 1.0, β = ∞              -10.05±0.18
                                       ψ c = 10.0, β = 4             -11.35±0.18
                                       ψ c = 10.0, β = 8             -10.99±0.17
                                       ψ c = 10.0, β = 16            -10.95±0.17
                                       ψ c = 10.0, β = ∞             -10.78±0.17
                                           DT R = −11               -10.57 ± 0.24
                                           DT R = −10               -10.58 ± 0.24
                                            DT R = −9               -10.53 ± 0.24
                                            DT R = −8               -10.49 ± 0.24
                                            DT R = −7               -10.40 ± 0.23
                                            DT R = −6               -10.42 ± 0.23
                                            DT R = −5               -10.30 ± 0.23
                                            DT R = −4               -10.30 ± 0.23
                                            DT R = −3                -9.83 ± 0.22
                                            DT R = −2                -9.54 ± 0.21
                                            DT R = −1                -8.15 ± 0.19
                                             DT R = 0                -6.70 ± 0.17
                                  ILQL (AWR) τ = 0.7, β = 4           -5.96±0.13
                                  ILQL (AWR) τ = 0.7, β = 8          -11.75±0.23
                                 ILQL (AWR) τ = 0.7, β = 16          -12.11±0.22
                                ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.7, N = 4       -7.08±0.17
                                ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.7, N = 8       -6.04±0.15
                               ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.7, N = 16       -5.89±0.14
                                ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.8, N = 4       -7.12±0.17
                                ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.8, N = 8       -6.15±0.15
                               ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.8, N = 16       -5.91±0.14
                                ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.9, N = 4       -7.01±0.17
                                ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.9, N = 8       -6.12±0.15
                               ILQL (utterance) τ = 0.9, N = 16       -5.93±0.14
                                 single-step RL (utterance) N = 4     -7.82±0.18
                                 single-step RL (utterance) N = 8     -7.39±0.17
                                single-step RL (utterance) N = 16     -7.35±0.17
                                      CHAI α = 0.1, N = 4             -7.18±0.18
                                      CHAI α = 0.1, N = 8             -6.18±0.15
                                     CHAI α = 0.1, N = 16             -5.62±0.13
                                      CHAI α = 1.0, N = 4             -7.03±0.17
                                      CHAI α = 1.0, N = 8             -5.87±0.14
                                     CHAI α = 1.0, N = 16             -5.57±0.13
                                     CHAI α = 10.0, N = 4             -8.43±0.18
                                     CHAI α = 10.0, N = 8             -8.24±0.16
                                    CHAI α = 10.0, N = 16             -8.28±0.15
                                         GOLD u = 0.00                -8.33±0.21
                                         GOLD u = 0.10                -7.58±0.21
                                         GOLD u = 0.15                -8.97±0.25
                                         GOLD u = 0.20                -9.12±0.25

Table 12: All hyper-parameter settings evaluated across all abalations, and baselines on the Visual-
Dialogue “y/n” reward. The best performing setting for each baseline of abalation is bolded. β = ∞
refers to greedily selecting actions with just the Q function. ILQL is generally better performing and
more stable than all baseline approaches.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            example standard reward Visual Dialogues
                   Image Caption: A man, with other people in the background, is sitting at a
                   picnic table with a cell phone in front of him while he uses a fork and knife
                   to cut a dessert on a plate.
                   Questioner: is man young?
                   Answerer: yes
                   Questioner: is he wearing glasses?
                   Answerer: no
                   Questioner: is there food on table?
                   Answerer: yes
                   Questioner: is there food on table?
                   Answerer: yes

                   Image Caption: A man with a wide eyed look with an apron on in a
                   kitchen.
                   Questioner: is man young?
                   Answerer: i would say he is
                   Questioner: what color is man's hair?
                   Answerer: brown
                   Questioner: is he wearing glasses?
                   Answerer: no
                   Questioner: is he wearing apron?
                   Answerer: i can't tell
                   Questioner: is he wearing apron?
                   Answerer: i can't tell
                   Questioner: is there anything on his head?
                   Answerer: yes, it's UNK and UNK
                   Questioner: is he looking at something?
                   Answerer: he is looking at camera
                   Questioner: is there anything else on counter?
                   Answerer: yes, there are some papers and papers
                   Questioner: is there anything on counter?
                   Answerer: yes, there are some papers and papers

                   Image Caption: Young adults with surfboards standing on pathway near
                   beach.
                   Questioner: how many people are there?
                   Answerer: 2
                   Questioner: are they male or female?
                   Answerer: 1 male and 1 female
                   Questioner: are they wearing wetsuits?
                   Answerer: yes
                   Questioner: what color are they?
                   Answerer: 1 is black and other is white
                   Questioner: are they wearing swimsuits?
                   Answerer: yes they are
                   Questioner: are they wearing wetsuits?
                   Answerer: yes they are
                   Questioner: are they wearing sunglasses?
                   Answerer: no they are not
                   Questioner: are there any other people around?
                   Answerer: no there are not
                   Questioner: are there any animals?
                   Answerer: no animals
                   Questioner: is it sunny?
                   Answerer: yes it is

                   Image Caption: Colorful vehicles in roadway near large building in city.
                   Questioner: how many cars are there?
                   Answerer: i see 3
                   Questioner: are there any people?
                   Answerer: yes, there are people
                   Questioner: are there any cars parked?
                   Answerer: yes, there are cars


Figure 10: Example dialogues produced by the best performing ILQL agent on the Visual Dialogue
“standard” reward.

                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  example y/n reward Visual Dialogues
                     Image Caption: Yellow and blue passenger train rounding a curve.
                     Questioner: how many cars on train?
                     Answerer: i can only see 1
                     Questioner: is it day or night?
                     Answerer: day
                     Questioner: is it sunny or cloudy?
                     Answerer: sunny
                     Questioner: is there anything else on tracks?
                     Answerer: no, just birds
                     Questioner: how many birds are there?
                     Answerer: 2
                     Questioner: what color are birds?
                     Answerer: black
                     Questioner: what color is sky?
                     Answerer: blue
                     Questioner: what time of day is it?
                     Answerer: it is daytime
                     Questioner: what time of year is it?
                     Answerer: i can't tell
                     Questioner: what else can you see?
                     Answerer: trees, sky, sky, sky

                     Image Caption: A person flying a kite over a sand dune.
                     Questioner: what color is kite?
                     Answerer: it's black and white
                     Questioner: is person male or female?
                     Answerer: can't tell
                     Questioner: what is person wearing?
                     Answerer: i can't tell
                     Questioner: what color is sand?
                     Answerer: dark brown
                     Questioner: is person flying kite flying in air?
                     Answerer: yes
                     Questioner: what color is kite?
                     Answerer: black

                     Image Caption: Little girl reaching through fence to pet a giraffe.
                     Questioner: how old is girl?
                     Answerer: maybe 3
                     Questioner: what color is her hair?
                     Answerer: dark brown
                     Questioner: what is she wearing?
                     Answerer: i can only see her from waist up
                     Questioner: what color is her hair?
                     Answerer: dark brown
                     Questioner: what is her eye color?
                     Answerer: i can't tell, it's covered with white and black and red
                     Questioner: what is fence made of?
                     Answerer: wood
                     Questioner: what color is fence?
                     Answerer: it's metal fence with black metal fence
                     Questioner: is giraffe full grown?
                     Answerer: yes

                     Image Caption: a number of people in a field with a kite in the air
                     Questioner: how many people are there?
                     Answerer: i see 4
                     Questioner: what color is kite?
                     Answerer: it's hard to tell, but it looks black
                     Questioner: are they male or female?
                     Answerer: both are male
                     Questioner: what are they wearing?
                     Answerer: they are wearing shorts and t shirts
                     Questioner: what color are shorts?
                     Answerer: black



Figure 11: Example dialogues produced by the best performing ILQL agent on the Visual Dialogue
“y/n” reward.



                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        example conservative y/n reward Visual Dialogues
                     Image Caption: Tour buses are lined up on the street waiting for people.
                     Questioner: how many buses?
                     Answerer: 2
                     Questioner: what color are buses?
                     Answerer: white and red
                     Questioner: how many people?
                     Answerer: 2
                     Questioner: what gender are people?
                     Answerer: 1 is male and 1 is female
                     Questioner: what are they wearing?
                     Answerer: 1 is wearing shorts and other is wearing shorts and shirt
                     Questioner: what color is their hair?
                     Answerer: dark brown
                     Questioner: what color is their shirt?
                     Answerer: black
                     Questioner: what color is their pants?
                     Answerer: black
                     Questioner: what color is their shirt?
                     Answerer: black
                     Questioner: what color is their pants?
                     Answerer: black

                     Image Caption: a living room with a table couch guitar and some pictures
                     Questioner: what color is couch?
                     Answerer: brown
                     Questioner: what kind of pictures are on couch?
                     Answerer: 1 is UNK other is not sure
                     Questioner: what color is guitar?
                     Answerer: black
                     Questioner: what color is table?
                     Answerer: brown
                     Questioner: what color is table?
                     Answerer: brown
                     Questioner: what color is guitar?
                     Answerer: black
                     Questioner: what color are walls?
                     Answerer: white


                     Image Caption: Little girl reaching through fence to pet a giraffe.
                     Questioner: what is little girl wearing?
                     Answerer: she is wearing long sleeved shirt and jeans
                     Questioner: what color is fence?
                     Answerer: it's metal fence with black metal fence
                     Questioner: what is giraffe doing?
                     Answerer: it is just standing there

                     Image Caption: Pictures of living room, dining room, kitchen and bedroom.
                     Questioner: how many people are there?
                     Answerer: 2
                     Questioner: what are they doing?
                     Answerer: 1 is on top of other 1 is on other side of fridge
                     Questioner: what color is fridge?
                     Answerer: silver


Figure 12: Example dialogues produced by the best performing ILQL agent on the Visual Dialogue
“conservative y/n” reward.


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Top: Histogram of the fraction of yes/no questions asked per dialogue by Visual Dialogue
agents trained on the “y/n” reward. Here yes/no questions are determined by the same exact match
heuristic used by the “y/n” reward. ILQL agents ask fewer questions triggered as being yes/no than
baselines. The best performing agent is used for all methods. Bottom: Histogram of the fraction
of yes/no questions asked per dialogue by Visual Dialogue agents trained on the “conservative
y/n” reward. Here yes/no questions are determined by the same exact match heuristic used by the
“conservative y/n” reward. ILQL agents ask fewer questions triggered as being yes/no than baselines.
The best performing agent is used for all methods.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   method                      toxicity                  noised toxicity
           ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 1       -2.15±0.10 / 289.97±10.92    -1.89±0.12 / 260.34±10.35
           ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 2        -1.16±0.08 / 222.18±9.68     -0.99±0.09 / 202.09±8.99
           ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 4        -0.47±0.05 / 151.46±7.86     -0.53±0.07 / 156.85±7.80
           ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 8         -0.12±0.02 / 79.20±5.38      -0.23±0.05 / 73.12±4.88
          ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 16         -0.01±0.01 / 15.46±1.76      -0.03±0.02 / 22.05±1.51
          ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 32          0.00±0.00 / 2.00±0.35        0.00±0.00 / 9.24±0.16
           single-step RL β = 1     -1.60±0.09 / 240.21 ± 10.10    -1.72±0.12 / 233.17±9.89
           single-step RL β = 2       -0.96±0.07 / 199.04±9.24     -1.06±0.10 / 187.36±8.82
           single-step RL β = 4       -0.34±0.04 / 111.13±6.76     -0.41±0.06 / 108.76±6.53
           single-step RL β = 8       -0.07±0.019 / 37.59±3.47      -0.13±0.03 / 41.61±3.52
          single-step RL β = 16         0.00±0.00 / 4.38±0.54         0.00±0.0 / 1.09±0.38
          single-step RL β = 32         0.00±0.00 / 0.03±0.01        0.00±0.00 / 0.00±0.00
            Filtered Fine-tuning       -0.74±0.07 / 80.84±3.19      -1.61±0.11 / 90.75±3.29
                 Fine-tuning          -3.51±0.13 / 137.70±5.82     -3.48±0.15 / 126.54±5.26
                      method                  upvotes real              upvotes model
              ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 1       6.29±0.15 / 39.11±1.99    8.38±0.12 / 25.15±1.43
              ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 2       7.01±0.14 / 21.47±1.56     9.53±0.07 / 7.82±0.88
              ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 4        7.47±0.14 / 7.91±0.63     9.99±0.01 / 1.38±0.09
              ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 8        9.05±0.09 / 1.55±0.07    10.00±0.00 / 0.78±0.02
             ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 16        9.73±0.05 / 0.55±0.14    10.00±0.00 / 0.54±0.02
             ILQL τ = 0.6, β = 32        9.83±0.04 / 0.18±0.02    10.00±0.00 / 0.22±0.02
              single-step RL β = 1      6.23±0.15 / 33.75±1.64    7.82±0.13 / 28.80±1.87
              single-step RL β = 2      4.66±0.16 / 15.81±0.82     8.96±0.10 / 9.34±0.64
              single-step RL β = 4       0.81±0.09 / 2.38±0.28     9.93±0.03 / 0.43±0.09
              single-step RL β = 8       0.09±0.03 / 0.00±0.00    10.00±0.00 / 0.01±0.01
             single-step RL β = 16       0.09±0.03 / 0.00±0.00    10.00±0.00 / 0.00±0.00
             single-step RL β = 32       0.09±0.03 / 0.00±0.00    10.00±0.00 / 0.00±0.00
               Filtered Fine-tuning     7.06±0.14 / 100.77±4.15   7.86±0.13 / 97.51±3.90
                    Fine-tuning         4.87±0.16 / 127.65±5.48   4.87±0.16 / 127.65±5.48

Table 13: All hyper-parameter settings evaluated across all Reddit Comment tasks, abalations, and
baselines. The best performing setting for each baseline of abalation is bolded. The left result in
each cell the the agent’s average reward and the right result is the estimated entropy of the agent’s
policy, measured in nats. As β is turned up, performance increases, but the entropy (or diversity) of
the policy’s outputs decreases. ILQL generally learns better performing and more diverse policies
than baselines.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        method               score
                                 ILQL τ = 0.7, β = 4      -2.23±0.03
                                 ILQL τ = 0.7, β = 8      -2.18±0.03
                                ILQL τ = 0.7, β = 16      -2.18±0.03
                                ILQL τ = 0.7, β = ∞       -6.00±0.00
                                 ILQL τ = 0.8, β = 4      -2.13±0.02
                                 ILQL τ = 0.8, β = 8      -2.13±0.03
                                ILQL τ = 0.8, β = 16      -2.31±0.03
                                ILQL τ = 0.8, β = ∞       -6.00±0.00
                                 ILQL τ = 0.9, β = 4      -2.30±0.03
                                 ILQL τ = 0.9, β = 8      -2.26±0.03
                                ILQL τ = 0.9, β = 16      -2.36±0.03
                                ILQL τ = 0.9, β = ∞       -6.00±0.00
                                 single-step RL β = 4     -2.24±0.03
                                 single-step RL β = 8     -2.26±0.03
                                single-step RL β = 16     -2.23±0.03
                                single-step RL β = ∞      -6.00±0.00
                               10% Filtered Fine-tuning   -2.93±0.06
                               30% Filtered Fine-tuning   -3.01±0.06
                               50% Filtered Fine-tuning   -2.38±0.03
                                      Fine-tuning         -2.61±0.03

Table 14: All hyper-parameter settings and baselines evaluated on the human Wordle dataset scraped
from Tweets (see Section A.5). The best performing setting for each baseline of abalation is bolded.
β = ∞ refers to greedily selecting actions with just the Q function. ILQL is generally better
performing than baselines.


                                                31
