Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S YNAPTIC DYNAMICS R EALIZE F IRST- ORDER A DAP -
TIVE L EARNING AND W EIGHT S YMMETRY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Gradient-based first-order adaptive optimization methods such as the Adam opti-
         mizer are prevalent in training artificial networks, achieving the state-of-the-art re-
         sults. This work attempts to answer the question whether it is viable for biological
         neural systems to adopt such optimization methods. To this end, we demonstrate
         a realization of the Adam optimizer using biologically-plausible mechanisms in
         synapses. The proposed learning rule has clear biological correspondence, runs
         continuously in time, and achieves performance to comparable Adam’s. In ad-
         dition, we present a new approach, inspired by the predisposition property of
         synapses observed in neuroscience, to circumvent the biological implausibility of
         the weight transport problem in backpropagation (BP). With only local informa-
         tion and no separate training phases, this method establishes and maintains weight
         symmetry in the forward and backward signaling paths, and is applicable to the
         proposed biologically plausible Adam learning rule. The aforementioned mecha-
         nisms may shed light on the way in which biological synaptic dynamics facilitate
         learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Gradient-based adaptive optimization is a widely used in many science and engineering applica-
tions including training of artificial neural networks (ANNs) (Rumelhart et al., 1986). In particular,
first-order methods are preferred over higher-order methods since their memory overhead is signifi-
cantly lower, considering ANNs are often characterized by high dimension feature spaces and large
numbers of parameters. Among the most well-known ANN training methods are stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with momentum (Rumelhart et al., 1986), root mean square propagation (RMSProp)
(Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), and adaptive moment estimation (Adam) (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Dif-
ferent from gradient descent, which optimizes an loss function over the complete dataset, SGD runs
on a mini-batch. The momentum term accelerates the adjustment of SGD along the direction to a
minima, and RMSProp impedes the search in the direction of oscillation. The Adam optimizer can
be considered as the combination of the above two ideas; and it is computationally efficient, has
fast convergence, works well with noisy/sparse gradient, and achieves the state-of-the-art results on
many AI applications (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022).
Given the success of gradient-based adaptive optimization techniques, particularly Adam, in training
ANNs, it is natural to ask the question whether it is viable for biological neural systems to adopt such
optimization strategies. We attempt to answer this question by demonstrating an implementation of
the Adam optimizer based on biologically plausible synaptic dynamics and a new solution to the
well-known weight transport problem. We call our implementation Bio-Adam.
Nevertheless, it is not immediately clear how to realize the Adam optimizer biologically realistically
given its intricacies. Comparing to the classical SGD method, Adam has two major new ingredients:
use of√momentum m to smooth the gradient g of multiple batches, and division by a smooth estima-
tion v of the root mean  √ square of the gradient to constrain the step size, which is also known as
the RMSProp term 1/( v t + ϵ), in which ϵ is a small number to prevent division by zero. Although
signal smoothing is commonly done in biological modeling such as by using the leaky-integrate and
fire (LIF) model
             √ of spiking neurons (Gerstner et al., 2014), we identify that the root mean square
calculation v and the existence of the division operator in Adam are biologically problematic.
With respect to these difficulties, we define a new variable ρ to mimic the dynamics of RMSProp.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Biologically, this newly defined ρ variable may be thought as the concentration of certain synaptic
substance consumed during the learning process. Essentially, ρ is designed based on the following
biologically motivated ideas. A large weight updating signal accelerates the consumption of the sub-
stance, dropping the concentration of the substance, which in turn slows down the pace of weight
update. On the other hand, under a small weight updating signal, the synapse gradually replenishes
the substance
         √ and restores the fast weight update pace. This kind of behavior mimics the RMSProp
term 1/( v t + ϵ) in Adam. The overall weight update speed of our biological Adam is proportional
to the product of m and ρ.
Another roadblock to a biologically plausible realization of Adam is the weight transport problem,
which is in fact an issue common to the wider family of all BP methods. BP is generally believed
to be biologically implausible in the brain for several reasons (Stork, 1989; Illing et al., 2019).
One key issue is that BP requires symmetrical weights between the forward and backward paths to
propagate correct error information. This is also known as the weight transport problem (Grossberg,
1987; Ororbia II et al., 2017), which we address by a new approach, inspired by the predisposition
property of synapses observed in neuroscience. According to predisposition (Chistiakova et al.,
2014), weak synapses that have been depressed are more prone to potentiation, whereas strong
ones are more prone to depression. When the forward and backward synapses share local updating
signals, a potentiation signal potentiates the stronger synapses less than the weaker ones. Conversely,
a depression signal depresses the weaker synapses less than the stronger ones. By leveraging the
biological predisposition property, the proposed mechanism eventually aligns the forward weights
with the backward weights. There are other methods also mentioned to share gradients, like the
weight-mirror and the modified KP algorithm presented in (Akrout et al., 2019). Yet we believe our
method is more bio-plausible for it is based on the well-observed synaptic property. Our solution to
the weight transport problem is immediately applicable to the proposed Adam learning rule.
To conclude, the presented Bio-Adam learning rule is based on biologically plausible synaptic dy-
namics with an underlying biological mechanism addressing the weight transport problem. More-
over, our biological Adam optimizer delivers a performance level that is on a par with its original
implementation (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Our findings may shed light on the way in which biological
neural systems facilitate powerful learning processes.

2     B IO - PLAUSIBLE F IRST- ORDER A DAPTIVE O PTIMIZERS

2.1    P RELIMINARIES

The classical stochastic gradient descent (SGD) follows:
                                           θt ← θt−1 − γgt ,                                         (1)
where θ is the weights, γ is the learning rate, and g is the gradient. SGD with momentum (Rumelhart
et al., 1986) further introduced a momentum term m to smooth the gradient g of multiple batches
according to the following dynamics:
                                    mt ← β1 mt−1 + (1 − β1 )gt ,                                     (2)
where β1 is a hyperparameter in the range of [0, 1) and is usually close to 1.0. The final updating
rule is obtained by changing g to m in (1), yielding: θt ← θt−1 − γmt .
                                                                                                  √
RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) computes a smooth estimate of the root mean square v of
the gradient and uses it in the denominator to constrain the step size in the oscillation direction. The
dynamic of v follows:
                                     vt ← β2 vt−1 + (1 − β2 )gt2 ,                                    (3)
                                                  β2 ∈ [0, 1) typically has a value near 1.0. The
where β2 is a hyperparamter. Similar to β1 in (2),√
updating rule of RMSProp is: θt ← θt−1 − γgt /( v t + ϵ), where ϵ is a small number to prevent
division by zero.
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) can be viewed as a combination of momentum and RMSProp by
omitting minor adjustments such as the bias correction and use of the infinity norm. Adam’s main
updating rule is:                                     √
                                 θt ← θt−1 − γmt /( v t + ϵ).                                (4)


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2     B IO - PLAUSIBLE REALIZATION

2.2.1    OVERALL D ESIGN OF THE B IO - PLAUSIBLE S YNAPTIC DYNAMICS FOR B IO -A DAM
Molecular studies have connected synaptic plasticity to dozens of chemical and biological events,
and the direction of adjustment, long-term-potentiation (LTP) or long-term depression (LTD), is a
crucial determinant of whether and how chemicals are involved (Bliss & Cooke, 2011; Miranda
et al., 2019; Wiera & Mozrzymas, 2021).
It is importantly to know that, when an optimizer like Adam is used, the instant adjusting signal
corresponding to the negative gradient −g, may not be completely proportional to the actual weight
update ∆w. Therefore, we call the direction of the instant adjusting signal potentiation or depres-
sion, to distinguish from the LTP/LTD that actually applied on the synapse.
Our synaptic model in the proposed Bio-Adam receives two types of inputs that come from the
interactions with other neurons: the potentiation signal and the depression signal, which correspond
to the conditions {g(t)|g(t) < 0} and {g(t)|g(t) > 0}, respectively. We assume that these two
signals are readily available on each synapse, and refer interested readers to previous works for
more discussions (Ponulak & Kasiński, 2010; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Sacramento et al., 2018; Payeur
et al., 2021).
As shown in Figure 1 (A), our design utilizes two types of substances only: m and ρ. Despite
the fact that biological synapses contain various additional types of substance dynamics, the two
types of substances we choose here provide enough flexibility to design dynamics akin to those of
first-order adaptive optimizers.
The first type contains a group of substances that are modulated complementarily by the poten-
tiation and depression stimuli. As detailed in Figure 1 (A), we name this type of substances as
m. Further, it can be divided into m+ and m− depending on whether its plasticity effect is LTP
or LTD. The potentiation signal transforms m− to m+ , and the depression signal reversely trans-
forms m+ to m− . Therefore, the total quantity of m+ and m− does not change while the quantity
of each changes in a complimentary way. Such complementarity is very common in biological
synapses. For example, the phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation processes, controlled by poten-
tiation and depression stimuli respectively, follow such complementary rule and apply on multiple
targets such as calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII), cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB) and cofilin (Knobloch & Mansuy, 2008). Based on these biological bases, the final
dynamics of m in our setting exactly replicates the updating rule of the momentum term, which is
the leaky-integration (exponentially smoothing) of both potentiation and depression stimuli, or the
gradient per se. The dynamics of m is illustrated in Figure 1 (B).
The second type of substances ρ is co-consumed by both potentiation and depression signals. As
reflected in Figure 1 (A), ρ has a simple biological dynamics, which is balanced by two forces:
consumption and supplementation. We assume that the consumption speed is linearly proportional
to the current concentration of substances: the more abundant the substances, the faster they are
consumed. In addition, we assume that the supplementation speed is linearly proportional to the
difference between the saturation value ρrest and the current value ρ: when ρ is low, supplementation
would be fast. While when ρ reaches saturation, supplementation would slow down and finally stop.
This type of dynamics refers to non-instantaneous chemical/biological processes such as translation
and transcription. For example, the Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) is consumed by
both LTP and LTD, and supplemented through the transcription in the nucleus (Miranda et al., 2019).
                                             √ bio-plausible properties, ρ exhibits a dynamics that
Interestingly, as we will show, with these chosen
is nearly identical to the RMSProp term 1/( v + ϵ) as depicted in the last subplot of Figure 1 (B).
In conclusion, our synaptic model has three inputs: the potentiation signal, the depression signal, and
the supplementation signal. It operates on two types of substances: the complementarily modulated
type m and the co-consumed type ρ. The first two input signals correspond to the negative and
positive parts of the gradient g, which are assumed to be readily available. The last input comes from
the intraneuron dynamics. Our proposed system adopts the basic bio-plausible leaky-integrate model
on both m and ρ, and linear models are adopted to describe the consumption and supplementation
speed of ρ. The overall weight update of the proposed Bio-Adam is proportional to the product of
the density of the two types of substances m and ρ:
                                         θt ← θt−1 − γmt ρt .                                        (5)


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Receptors
   +                                         −
                               𝑚     LTD              𝑔
        LTP     𝑚"
                             𝑚!
                                                                                    𝑚!
                                                 𝑚! & 𝑚"
                       𝜌                                                            𝑚"
   Activate/                       Consume
   Supplement                                         𝑚



                                             RMSProp & 𝜌                       𝜌
        Potentiation         Depression                                             RMSProp

              Supplementation
                                                                                   Time/ 𝑚𝑠
    (A) Dynamics of synaptic substances                        (B) dynamics of 𝑚 and 𝜌 given an example gradient 𝑔

Figure 1: First-order optimizers based on synaptic substance dynamics. (A) m+ and m− are the
densities of two groups of substances that modulates LTP and LTD respectively, and they are com-
plementarily controlled by potentiation and depression stimuli. The combination of them forms the
momentum term m = (m− − m+ )/2. ρ represents the density of the second types of substances
that co-consumed by both potentiation and depression stimuli. The product of m and ρ affects the
overall adjustment’s strength and direction. (B) An example of different variables’ dynamics along
time is provided. Please reference the exact dynamics in Section 2.2.2 and 2.2.3. In this example,
our assumed gradient is divided into five slices along the 100s total simulation time, and the values
are [0, 0.3, 0, -0.7, 0] in each slide respectively. During the simulation, we set τm = τρ = 1000ms,
ρrest = 1/ϵ = 1. Meanwhile, we set the resting densities of m+ and m− as one. As one may
observe from the bottom subplot, The proposed dynamics of ρ converges to the same value as RM-
SProp’s, and only diverges slightly in the adjusting period


Moreover, all variables in the system have their clear biological correspondences. Therefore, the
system yields good bio-plausibility.
Next, we present the detailed design of the proposed biological Adam rule and analyze its dynamical
behavior.

2.2.2    B IOLOGICALLY PLAUSIBLE REALIZATION OF M OMENTUM
The concentration of a substance is always positive. To deal with this, we implement the momentum
term m using two separate concentrations m+ and m− , which produce LTP and LTD, respectively.
Additionally, we name the potentiation and depression signals as x+ and x− , corresponding to the
absolute value of negative gradient and positive gradient:
                           x+ (t) = |g(t)| · (g(t) < 0), x− (t) = |g(t)| · (g(t) > 0)                           (6)
                                                           +         −
Using a leaky-integration dynamics to model m and m , we have our complementary rule as:
                           τm (dm+ (t)/dt) = −(m+ (t) − mrest ) + x+ (t) − x− (t),
                                                                                                                (7)
                           τm (dm− (t)/dt) = −(m− (t) − mrest ) + x− (t) − x+ (t),
in which τm is the time constant, and mrest is the concentration of m+ and m− at rest, i.e., when
no stimulus is received. Noting that m in (2) is the smoothed gradient, which corresponds to the
opposite of the updating direction. We define m by m = (m− − m+ )/2, as the overall impact of
m+ and m− . Combining the biologically plausible dynamics of (6) and (7) gives the continuous-
time dynamics of m, which has a form identical to the original momentum implementation of (2)
(Rumelhart et al., 1986):
                                       dm(t)
                                    τm        = −m(t) + g(t).                                   (8)
                                        dt
The above dynamics can be discretized in time, e.g., by using the first-order forward Euler method:
                                                        1          1
                                          mt ← (1 −       )mt−1 +    gt .                                       (9)
                                                       τm         τm
                                             1
β1 in (2) corresponds to (1 − 1/τm ): τm = 1−β 1
                                                 . For example, β1 = 0.9 correspond to τm = 10.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Bio-Adam, our proposed biologically plausible version of the Adam optimizer. See
Section 2 for details. Good default settings for the tested machine learning problems are γ = 0.0001,
τm = 10, τρ = 1000 and ρrest = 108
Require: γ: Stepsize
Require: τm , τr ho: Time constant of m and ρ
Require: f (θ): Stochastic object function with parameters θ
Require: θ0 : Initial parameter vector
  m0 ← 0 (Initialize the vector of the complementarily modulated substances’ density)
  ρ0 ← 1 (Initialize the vector of the co-consumed substances’ density)
  t ← 0 (Initialize timestep)
  while θt not converged do
      t←t+1
      gt ← ∇θ ft (θt−1 ) (Get gradients w.r.t. stochastic objective at timestep t)
      mt ← (1 − 1/τm ) · mt−1 + gt /τm (Update the complementarily modulated substances’
  density)
             ρ    ·(τρ −1)+ρrest
      ρt ← t−1  τρ +ρrest ·|gt | (Update the co-consumed substances’ density)
      θt ← θt−1 − γmt ρt (Update parameters/synaptic strengths)
  end while
  return θt (Resulting Parameters)


2.2.3   B IOLOGICALLY PLAUSIBLE REALIZATION OF RMSP ROP
The second type of substances ρ that is co-consumed by potentiation and depression stimuli is bal-
anced by two factors: the intraneuron supplementation speed s+ , and the consumption speed s− .
First, we set the supplementation speed s+ to be proportional to the difference between ρ(t) and its
resting value ρrest :
                                     s+ (t) = k + [ρrest − ρ(t)],                              (10)
in which k + is a constant. Second, since ρ is co-consumed during both potentiation and depression,
we consider the rate of consumption for ρ to be dependent on the absolute value |g(t)| of the gradient.
In addition, we make the consumption rate proportional to the current concentration. Consequently,
the product of |g(t)| and ρ(t) sets the consumption rate:
                                     s− (t) = k − · ρ(t) · |g(t)|,                                (11)
where k − is also a constant. The overall dynamics of ρ is controlled by s+ and s− :
                                dρ(t)
                              τρ        = s+ (t) − s− (t)
                                  dt                                                              (12)
                               = k + [ρrest − ρ(t)] − k − · ρ(t) · |g(t)|.

[Properties of Our Biological RMSProp] Surprisingly,     √ we show that at the equilibrium the dy-
namics in (12) converges to the desired quantity of 1/( vt + ϵ) as what is used for weight update
in the original RMSProp implementation (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) based on (3). To see this, first
          at a constant gradient g at equilibrium, the exponentially smoothed mean square root of
note that √
gradient vt converges to the absolute value of gradient |g|. So the RMSProp term converges to
1/(|g| + ϵ). Furthermore, setting dρ(t)/dt = 0 and g(t) = g in (12) gives the equilibrium value of
ρ as:
                              0 = k + [ρrest − ρ(∞)] − k − · ρ(∞) · |g|
                                                     k + ρrest                                (13)
                                       ⇒ ρ(∞) = −              +
                                                                 ,
                                                   k |g| + k
which has a form very similar to that of the equilibrium value of the original RMSProp, 1/(|g| + ϵ).
We can force the equilibrium value ρ(∞) of the proposed dynamics to be 1/(|g| + ϵ) by properly
choosing constant values k + , k − , and ρrest of our model:
                                                         (
                               k + ρrest          1         1/ρrest = ϵ
                                            =          ⇒                                       (14)
                               −
                            k |g| + k    +     |g| + ϵ      k − = ρrest k +

                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bring these two constrains into (12), we have:
                   dρ(t)
                τρ        = [ρrest − ρ(t)] − ρrest · ρ(t) · |g(t)|, where ρrest = 1/ϵ              (15)
                     dt
In the above, the constant k + is absorbed into the time constant τρ , and the hyperparameter τρ
sets the duration of the time window for the exponential moving average of ρ. Based on the same
                                                                   1
reasoning used to determine the value of τm , we set τρ = 1−β        2
                                                                       . For example, we set τρ = 1000
when β2 = 0.999 is chosen in the Adam optimizer.
The proposed dynamics can be again discretized in time using the first-order forward Euler method:
                                 1           1
                     ρt ← (1 − )ρt−1 +          · (ρrest − ρrest · ρt · |gt |),               (16)
                                 τρ          τρ
which simplifies to the following final rule for updating ρ:
                                           ρt−1 · (τρ − 1) + ρrest
                                    ρt ←                           .                              (17)
                                              τρ + ρrest · |gt |

We conclude our proposed bio-plausible Adam optimizer (Bio-Adam) in Algorithm 1.

3     R EALIZE W EIGHT S YMMETRY VIA P REDISPOSITION
3.1     P RELIMINARIES : THE WEIGHT TRANSPORT PROBLEM

It is generally believed that learning by backpropagation (BP) is not necessarily biological plausible
in the brain for many reasons Stork (1989); Illing et al. (2019). One of the primary reasons is that it
requires symmetrical weights between the forward and backward paths in order to propagate correct
error information. This issue is also known as the weight transport problem Grossberg (1987);
Ororbia II et al. (2017).
Using x(l+1) and y (l+1) to denote the input and output vectors of layer (l + 1) in an ANN, we have
y (l+1) = σ(x(l+1) ), where σ is a non-linear activation function (Rumelhart et al., 1986). The input
vector is given by:
                                   x(l+1) = W(l+1) y (l) + b(l+1) ,                              (18)
where W(l+1) , b(l+1) are the forward weights and bias in layer (l + 1), respectively. For a given
loss function L, define error signals as δ (l+1) = ∂L/∂x(l+1) . BP propagates δ (l+1) to y (l) by:
                               e(l) = ∂L/∂y (l) = (W(l+1) )T δ (l+1)                              (19)
                          (l+1) T
The backward weight (W         ) is the transpose of the forward weights, which necessitates that the
synaptic strength of the forward and backward routes be identical. This is considered biologically
implausible for biological synapses that transmit signals in a single direction.

3.2     P ROPOSED B IO - PLAUSIBLE W EIGHT S YMMETRY

3.2.1    B IOLOGICAL M ODELLING
Our bio-plausible setting is shown in Figure 2 (A). Following Lillicrap et al. (2016), we use a pair
of synapses wij and wji between neuron i and neuron j to carry forward and backward signals,
respectively. In addition, we employ the multi-compartments neuron model, which hypothesizes
that neurons’ basal and apical dendrites separately store two independent variables (Guerguiev et al.,
2017). The basal dendrites receive the summed forward input signal x. In ideal situations, the apical
dendrites receive the sum of top-down error signal e = ∂L/∂y, which is the partial derivative of a
given loss function L with respect to the neuron’s output y. Given the fact that the backward weight
may not necessarily be equal to the forward weight, the top-down error signal may not be precisely
equal to ∂L/∂y, but rather provides only an estimation of it. The neuron processes the two stored
variables x and e through its internal dynamics to generate the forward output y = σ(x) to its next
layer; and the backward error with respect to the input δ = ∂L/∂x = eσ ′ (x) and propagates it to
neurons in its previous layer. We refer interested readers to (Sacramento et al., 2018; Payeur et al.,
2021) for more discussion of interneuron dynamics.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         𝑒!   𝑤!"               𝑒"                          LTP (+)       LTD (−)
Apical
                                                                                    T=1          𝑤"!


                                           Predisposition
                        Backward                                                    T=2                 −𝑔~𝒩 (0,1)
 Soma


                                              Function
                                      𝑦"                                            T=5
  𝛿!     𝜎(·) 𝑦!          𝛿"   𝜎(·)                                                 T=10
              Forward
         𝑥!                                                           𝑤                           𝑤!"   Iterations
Basal                      𝑤"! 𝑥"
         (A) Neuron model settings         (B) Predisposition function 𝑝(𝑤, ±)             (C) A convergence example

Figure 2: The model and the step function we use to realize weight symmetry. (A) The solid red
lines represent axons and synapses that convey information in a single direction; the solid black
lines represent dendrites that can transmit information bidirectionally through electrical spikes or
molecular diffusion; and the dash red line represent our required variables sharing that helps build
symmetrical weights. (B) An example series of stepsize function with different temperature param-
eter T . The solid line works for LTP while the dash line works for LTD. (C) Initialize two weights
as ±1 respectively, and run gradient descent with stepsize = 0.1*p(w,±) and hyperparameter T=1.


3.2.2    P ROPOSED B IO - PLAUSIBLE W EIGHT S YMMETRY L EARNING RULE

Under the above bio-plausible setting, there are two synaptic weights to be updated in learning. One
is the weight wij of the forward path synapse that connects to a basal dendrite of neuron i, and the
other is the weight wji of the backward path synapse that connects to an apical dendrite of neuron
j. To facilitate successful learning, the adjusting goals of them are different: the forward weight
wij is updated by the top-down error signal directly to minimize a given loss function, while the
backward weight wji is updated to be symmetric with respect to its corresponding forward weight
wij to convey accurate error information.
Here, we discuss the proposed mechanisms that make the backward weight to be symmetric to
the forward weight. The attainment of weight symmetry is accomplished in two stages. The first
stage achieves the establishment of symmetry, i.e., aligning two initially different weights at the
start of the learning process. The second stage deals with the maintenance of symmetry, which
ensures that the values of forward and backward weights remain identical throughout the subsequent
learning process. In the following, we first describe the maintenance of symmetry in the second stage
assuming that the forward and reverse weights have already been aligned in the preceding first stage.
Then, we elaborate on how we establish weight symmetry at the beginning of learning in the first
stage.
[Maintenance of Weight Symmetry by Gradient Transport] Under the setting of biologically
plausible multi-compartment based neural modeling, we may assume that the forward and backward
synapses have access to the signals yj and δi locally. Note the product of these two signals is the
gradient of the forward synaptic weight wij . Therefore, although the backward synapse with weight
wji cannot access wij , it may obtain the gradient of wij based on the locally available signals yj and
δi . In other words, we employ gradient transport between the two synapses, which is considered
biologically plausible (Akrout et al., 2019). Gradient transport allows the same gradient to be used
in the weight updates of both the forward and backward synapses:
                                       gij (t) = gji (t) = yj (t)δi (t).                                         (20)
With gradient transport, one can immediately see that for a BP method such as SGD, the amounts
of weight change for the pair of forward and backward weights wij and wji are always identical. To
see the same under the proposed Bio-Adam, we note that the momentum m and the concentration
ρ of the co-consumed substances are integrated from the same gradient g, making them identical
across the two synapses. Hence, the amounts of forward and backward weight changes mediated by
Bio-Adam are also identical. As a result, both BP and Bio-Adam maintain the initially established
weight symmetry between wij and wji since the amounts of update applied to the two weights are
always identical.
[Establishment of Weight Symmetry by Predisposition] Building upon gradient transport, we
achieve establishment of weight symmetry by further introducing a biologically plausible process


                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


called predisposition. In this work, we specifically propose predisposition functions p(w, ±) that
depend on two factors: synaptic strength w, and the direction of weight change (LTP or LTD).
Injecting p(w, ±) into the weight update rule of Bio-Adam in (5) results in a more comprehensive
model of our bio-plausible synaptic dynamics:
                            wt ← wt−1 − p(wt−1 , sign(−mt )) · γ · mt · ρt .                     (21)
Here, the negative momentum term −m determines the updating type: −m > 0 corresponds to LTP,
and −m < 0 correspond to LTD.
Now let us consider applying this rule to a pair of forward and backward weights wij and wji .
When an LTP update is applied to both wij and wji , by predisposition we would like to potentiate
the the weaker synapse of the two more than the other stronger one. As illustrated by the solid
lines in Figure 2 (B), we achieve this predisposition effect by defining the predisposition function
p(w, +) in the form of the sigmoid function (Han & Moraga, 1995) with a hyperparameter T , which
is usually considered as temperature :
                               p(w, +) = 2/(1 + exp(w/T )), (LTP),                               (22)
Similarly, for a LTD update applied to wij and wji , the desired predisposition effect would depress
the larger weight more than the smaller one. As shown in the dashed lines in Figure 2 (B)), we
achieve this by defining the predisposition function p(w, −) according to:
                              p(w, −) = 2/(1 + exp(−w/T )), (LTD).                               (23)
Under practical settings like small learning rate, we can see that the two predisposition effects de-
signed above diminish the initial difference between wij and wji over time and eventually establish
weight symmetry.

4        E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

4.1           B IO -A DAM

Figure 3 compares the train/test loss curves of ANNs based on the widely adopted ResNet18 archi-
tectures (He et al., 2016) trained by four different optimizers on the well-known CIFAR10 dataset
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009). Except for RMSProp, the performance of the remaining three optimizers
on the test set is comparable. SGD+momentum performs the best on the train set, and our proposed
Bio-Adam performs marginally better than Adam. RMSProp performs the worst.
In addition, we evaluated the wall-clock times of all four optimizers to determine the computing
overhead Bio-Adam imposes. Running 200 training epochs on 4 NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPUs in par-
allel, Bio-Adam takes 55m52s, which is slightly slower than Adam’s 54m07s; RMSProp’s 53m15s;
and SGD+Momentum’s 52m56s.


                               1      RMSProp                              1      RMSProp
                               2      Adam                                 2      Adam
                               3      Bio-Adam                             3      Bio-Adam
      Loss/test


                               4      SGD+Momentum                         4      SGD+Momentum
                                                      Loss/train


                                                                                           1
                                                                                           2
                                                1                                          3
                                                234                                        4
                             Epochs                                      Epochs



Figure 3: Cifar10 experiment. Network architecture: ResNet18 (He et al., 2016); All strengths of
weight decay are set to zero; Learning rate γ=0.01 for RMSProp and SGD+momentum, γ=0.0001
for Adam and Bio-Adam; Detail setting for each optimizer: RMSProp: β2 =0.99, ϵ=10− 8; Adam:
(β1 , β2 )=(0.9, 0.999), ϵ=10− 8; Bio-Adam: (τ1 , τ2 )=(10, 1000), ρrest =108 ; SGD+momentum:
β1 =0.9.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (A) Weight Alignment with T=10                   (B) Weight norm ratio with T=10


        (C) Weight Alignment with T=5                    (D) Weight norm ratio with T=5

Figure 4: Cifar10 experiment. Network architecture: ResNet20 (He et al., 2016); Weight decay are
set to zero; Learning rate γ=0.0001 for Bio-Adam with predisposition turned on. For (A) and (B),
temperature T=10. For (C) and (D), temperature T=5


4.2   W EIGHT S YMMETRY

Throughout the training process, predisposition can establish and maintain the alignment between
forward and backward paths. As demonstrated in Figure 4, we exhibit the alignment behavior of each
layers individually in two forms: Sub-figures (A) and (C) evaluate the angle between the forward
weight matrix W and the backward weight matrix B as:
                      ∠(B, W) = (180◦ /π)cos−1 (B · W/(||B||2 ||W||2 ))
and Sub-figures (B) and (D) evaluate the weight norm ratio (||B||2 ||/W||2 ).
Comparing different temperatures T, we can see that the lower temperatures establish symmetry
more quickly. However, a temperature that is too low may hinder training performance. When com-
paring the (train/test) accuracy after the 100 epochs training, Adam reaches (99.17%/91.54%); Bio-
Adam reaches (99.24%/91.53%); Bio-Adam + Predisposition (T=10) reaches (97.88%/91.55%),
which is still comparable to Adam’s. However, Bio-Adam + Predisposition (T=5) only reaches
(95.31%/90.33%).

5     C ONCLUSION
Based on synaptic dynamics, we present two ideas that, respectively, implement the bio-plausible
Adam optimizer (Bio-Adam) and overcome the weight transport problem in BP. Bio-Adam elimi-
nates the biologically problematic RMSProp term in favor of a synaptic substances dynamic ρ that
converges to the same equilibrium as RMSProp’s. Meanwhile, Bio-Adam provides a clear biolog-
ical explanation for the momentum term m . In addition, inspired by the predisposition property
of synapses observed in neuroscience, we describe a novel method to build and maintain the sym-
metry between forward and backward paths using only local signals and without a separate training
phase. The results of this investigation may impact future neuroscience research on the dynamics of
synapses and on how they contribute to learning.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Mohamed Akrout, Collin Wilson, Peter Humphreys, Timothy Lillicrap, and Douglas B Tweed. Deep
 learning without weight transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:976–
 984, 2019.
Timothy VP Bliss and Sam F Cooke. Long-term potentiation and long-term depression: a clinical
  perspective. Clinics, 66:3–17, 2011.
Marina Chistiakova, Nicholas M Bannon, Maxim Bazhenov, and Maxim Volgushev. Heterosynaptic
 plasticity: multiple mechanisms and multiple roles. The Neuroscientist, 20(5):483–498, 2014.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Wulfram Gerstner, Werner M Kistler, Richard Naud, and Liam Paninski. Neuronal dynamics: From
 single neurons to networks and models of cognition. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Stephen Grossberg. Competitive learning: From interactive activation to adaptive resonance. Cog-
  nitive science, 11(1):23–63, 1987.
Jordan Guerguiev, Timothy P Lillicrap, and Blake A Richards. Towards deep learning with segre-
  gated dendrites. Elife, 6:e22901, 2017.
Jun Han and Claudio Moraga. The influence of the sigmoid function parameters on the speed of
  backpropagation learning. In International workshop on artificial neural networks, pp. 195–201.
  Springer, 1995.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Bernd Illing, Wulfram Gerstner, and Johanni Brea. Biologically plausible deep learning—but how
  far can we go with shallow networks? Neural Networks, 118:90–101, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Marlen Knobloch and Isabelle M Mansuy. Dendritic spine loss and synaptic alterations in
 alzheimer’s disease. Molecular neurobiology, 37(1):73–82, 2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Master’s thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Daniel Cownden, Douglas B Tweed, and Colin J Akerman. Random synaptic
  feedback weights support error backpropagation for deep learning. Nature communications, 7(1):
  1–10, 2016.
Magdalena Miranda, Juan Facundo Morici, Marı́a Belén Zanoni, and Pedro Bekinschtein. Brain-
 derived neurotrophic factor: a key molecule for memory in the healthy and the pathological brain.
 Frontiers in cellular neuroscience, pp. 363, 2019.
Alexander G Ororbia II, Patrick Haffner, David Reitter, and C Lee Giles. Learning to adapt by
  minimizing discrepancy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11542, 2017.
Alexandre Payeur, Jordan Guerguiev, Friedemann Zenke, Blake A Richards, and Richard Naud.
  Burst-dependent synaptic plasticity can coordinate learning in hierarchical circuits. Nature neu-
  roscience, 24(7):1010–1019, 2021.
Filip Ponulak and Andrzej Kasiński. Supervised learning in spiking neural networks with resume:
   sequence learning, classification, and spike shifting. Neural computation, 22(2):467–510, 2010.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
João Sacramento, Rui Ponte Costa, Yoshua Bengio, and Walter Senn. Dendritic cortical microcir-
   cuits approximate the backpropagation algorithm. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 31:8721–8732, 2018.
Sumit Bam Shrestha and Garrick Orchard. SLAYER: spike layer error reassignment in time. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1419–1428, 2018.
David G Stork. Is backpropagation biologically plausible. In International Joint Conference on
  Neural Networks, volume 2, pp. 241–246. IEEE Washington, DC, 1989.
Tijmen Tieleman and Geoffrey Hinton. Lecture 6.5-rmsprop, coursera: Neural networks for machine
   learning. University of Toronto, Technical Report, 6, 2012.
Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal,
 Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, et al. Image as a foreign language:
 Beit pretraining for all vision and vision-language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10442, 2022.
Grzegorz Wiera and Jerzy W Mozrzymas. Extracellular metalloproteinases in the plasticity of exci-
  tatory and inhibitory synapses. Cells, 10(8):2055, 2021.
Yukun Yang, Wenrui Zhang, and Peng Li. Backpropagated neighborhood aggregation for accu-
  rate training of spiking neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  11852–11862. PMLR, 2021.
Friedemann Zenke and Surya Ganguli. Superspike: Supervised learning in multilayer spiking neural
  networks. Neural computation, 30(6):1514–1541, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT

A.1     T RAINING SPIKING NEURAL NETWORKS

A.1.1    CIFAR10

Here, we train spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Yang et al., 2021) on the CIFAR10 dataset
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009). SNNs are known for their noisy and sparse gradients due to spiking
neuron’s natural discontinuous 0/1 firing activity (Zenke & Ganguli, 2018; Shrestha & Orchard,
2018).
The experiment uses the recently proposed neighborhood aggregation (NA) direct training al-
gorithm (Yang et al., 2021) to compute and propagate gradients. We use their open-source
code (https://github.com/superrrpotato/Backpropagated-Neighborhood-Aggregation-for-Accurate-
Training-of-Spiking-Neural-Networks) and only modify the optimizers to make a comparison be-
tween these four different optimizers: SGD+momenrtum, RMSProp, Adam and Bio-Adam.

  Acc/%                                     3          Acc/%                                    2
                                            12                                                  1
                                                                                                 3
                                           4
                        1     RMSProp                                                           4
                                                           20 epochs
                        2     Adam
                        3     Bio-Adam
                        4     SGD+Momentum
                                                                  60 epochs
                                       Epochs                                              Epochs

              (A) Test Accuracy                                    (B) Train Accuracy
 𝑙! Loss                                              𝑙! Loss


                                                                                               4
                                          4
                                           1                                                   1
                                             2                                                  3
                                    Epochs 3                                            Epochs 2

                 (C) Test loss                                         (D) Train loss

Figure 5: Cifar10 experiment on a spiking neural network trained by neighborhood aggregation
(Yang et al., 2021). Network architecture: AlexNet 96C3-256C3-P2-384C3-P2-384C3-256C3-
1024-1024 (iCj:convolution with depth i, kernel size j; Px:average pooling with kernel size x; 1024:
fully connect layer with neurons number 1024); All strengths of weight decay are set to zero; Learn-
ing rate γ=0.05 for SGD+momentum, γ=0.0005 for Adam, Bio-Adam and RMSProp; Detail setting
for each optimizer: RMSProp: β2 =0.99, ϵ=10− 8; Adam: (β1 , β2 )=(0.9, 0.999), ϵ=10−8 ; Bio-Adam:
(τ1 , τ2 )=(10, 1000), ρrest =106 ; SGD+momentum: β1 =0.9.

As shown in Figure 5, Bio-Adam, Adam and RMSProp reach comparable performance, where
Bio-Adam has the marginally better testing accuracy and lower testing loss. Meanwhile,
SGD+Momentum performs relatively poor, which confirms our conjecture about the advantages
of different optimizers: Adam-liked optimizers has faster convergence when work with noisy/sparse
gradient.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.1.2   ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION ON MNIST
In Figure 6, we empirically evaluate the robustness of the hyperparameters of our proposed Bio-
Adam optimizer on the MNIST dataset (in solid lines). As a comparison, we also evaluate the
performance of the vanilla Adam optimizer (in dashed lines).
As in the previous section, an SNN is trained using the NA algorithm (Yang et al., 2021). The
x-axis represents the learning rate, and the y-axis represents the training loss in Figure 6 (A) (B)
and represents the testing accuracy in Figure 6 (C) (D). All results are recorded after 10 epochs of
training.

                                    Bio-Adam           vanilla Adam
                                     𝜏# = 100           𝛽$ = 0.99
                                     𝜏# = 1000          𝛽$ = 0.999
                                     𝜏# = 10000         𝛽$ = 0.9999
           Training Loss


                                                                     Training Loss
                                     Learning rate 𝛾                                            Learning rate 𝛾

                                  (A)Training Loss with                                     (B) Training Loss with
                                    𝜏! = 1 (𝛽" = 0)                                          𝜏! = 10 (𝛽" = 0.9)
          Testing Accuracy/%


                                                                    Testing Accuracy/%


                                     Learning rate 𝛾                                            Learning rate 𝛾

                               (C) Testing Accuracy with                                 (D) Testing Accuracy with
                                    𝜏! = 1 (𝛽" = 0)                                         𝜏! = 10 (𝛽" = 0.9)

Figure 6: Network architecture:15C5-P2-40C5-P2-300 (iCj:convolution with depth i, kernel size
j; Px:average pooling with kernel size x; 300: fully connect layer with neurons number 300); All
strengths of weight decay are set to zero; ρrest = 108 ; The red circled data point is our default
setting: τm = 10, τρ = 1000, and γ = 0.0001. It is reported that the bias correction term in Adam
boosts its robustness at the start of training (Kingma & Ba, 2014). However, biology learning is a
lifelong process. Moreover, the bias correction terms appear to lack a clear biological correspon-
dence. Due to these two considerations, we omitted them from this experiment in order to make a
fair comparison.

In Figure 6, Different combinations of τm and τρ can achieve equivalent performance with a suitable
choice of the learning rate γ, demonstrating the robustness of the hyperparameters. In the meantime,
the default configuration (red circled) derived from Adam’s default setting achieves the lowest train-
ing loss and the highest testing accuracy among all Bio-Adam’s results ((β1 , β2 ) = (0.9, 0.999) in
Adam corresponds to τm = 10, and τρ = 1000 in Bio-Adam; and adopt the same default learning
rate γ = 0.0001). When compared to vanilla Adam, Bio-Adam gains comparable performance in
both accuracy and robustness.


                                                               13
