Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EVEALING D OMINANT E IGENDIRECTIONS VIA S PEC -
TRAL N ON -ROBUSTNESS A NALYSIS IN THE D EEP R E -
INFORCEMENT L EARNING P OLICY M ANIFOLD

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Deep neural policies have recently been installed in a diverse set of settings, from
         biotechnology to automated financial systems. However, the utilization of deep
         neural networks to approximate the state-action value function commences con-
         cerns on the decision boundary stability, in particular, with regard to the sensitivity
         of policy decision making to indiscernible, non-robust features due to highly non-
         convex and complex deep neural manifolds. These concerns constitute an obstruc-
         tion to understanding the reasoning made by deep neural policies, and their foun-
         dational limitations. Thus, it is crucial to develop techniques that aim to under-
         stand the sensitivities in the learnt representations of neural network policies. To
         achieve this we introduce a method that identifies the dominant eigen-directions
         via spectral analysis of non-robust directions in the deep neural policy decision
         boundary across both time and space. Through experiments in the Arcade Learn-
         ing Environment (ALE), we demonstrate the effectiveness of our spectral analysis
         algorithm for identifying correlated non-robust directions, and for measuring how
         sample shifts remold the set of sensitive directions in the neural policy landscape.
         Most importantly, we show that state-of-the-art adversarial training techniques
         yield learning of sparser high-sensitivity directions, with dramatically larger os-
         cillations over time, when compared to standard training. We believe our results
         reveal the fundamental properties of the decision process made by the deep rein-
         forcement learning policies, and can help in constructing safe, reliable and value-
         aligned deep neural policies.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning algorithms leveraging the power of deep neural networks have obtained
state-of-the-art results initially in game-playing tasks Mnih et al. (2015) and subsequently in contin-
uous control Lillicrap et al. (2015). Since this initial success, there has been a continuous stream of
developments both of new algorithms Mnih et al. (2016), Hasselt et al. (2016), Wang et al. (2016),
and striking new performance records in highly complex tasks Silver et al. (2017). While the field of
deep reinforcement learning has developed rapidly, the understanding of the representations learned
by deep neural network policies has lagged behind.
The lack of understanding of deep neural policies is of critical importance in the context of the
sensitivities of policy decisions to imperceptible, non-robust features. Beginning with the work of
Szegedy et al. (2014), Goodfellow et al. (2015), deep neural networks have been shown to be vul-
nerable to adversarial perturbations below the level of human perception. In response, a line of work
has focused on proposing training techniques to increase robustness by applying these perturbations
to the input of deep neural networks during training time (i.e. adversarial training) Goodfellow
et al. (2015) Madry et al. (2017). However, there are also concerns about adversarial training in-
cluding decreased accuracy on clean data Bhagoji et al. (2019), prohibiting generalization (e.g. a
performance gap between adversarial and standard training that increases as the size of the dataset
grows Chen et al. (2020)), and incorrect invariance to semantically meaningful changes Tramèr et al.
(2020).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In our paper we focus on understanding the learned representations and policy vulnerabilities and
ask the following questions: (i) How do non-robust directions on the deep neural policy manifold
interact with each other temporally and spatially? (ii) Do the non-robust features learnt by the deep
reinforcement learning algorithms transform under adversarial attacks? (iii) How do these learnt
correlated non-robust features change with distributional shift? (iv) Does adversarial training solve
the problem of learning correlated non-robust features? To be able to answer these questions in
our paper we focus on understanding the representations learned by deep reinforcement learning
policies and make the following contributions:

       • We propose a novel tracing algorithm to analyze the spatially and temporally correlated
         vulnerabilities of deep reinforcement learning policies.
       • We conduct several experiments in the Arcade Learning Environment with policies trained
         in high-dimensional state representations.
       • We go over several benchmarked adversarial attack techniques and show how these attacks
         affect the vulnerable learned representations.
       • We inspect the effects of distributional shift on the correlated non-robust feature patterns
         learned by deep reinforcement learning policies.
       • Finally, we investigate the presence of non-robust features in adversarially trained deep
         neural policies, and show that the state-of-the-art adversarial training method leads to learn-
         ing sparser and spikier vulnerable representations.


2     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES

2.1   P RELIMINARIES

A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is defined by a tuple (S, A, P, R) where S is a set of states, A
is a set of actions, P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is a Markov transition kernel, R : S × A × S → R is a
reward function, and γ is a discount factor. A reinforcement learning agent interacts with an MDP
by observing the current state s ∈ S and taking an action a ∈ A. The agent then transitions to state
s0 with probability P(s, a, s0 ) and receives reward R(s, a, s0 ). A policy π : S × A → [0, 1] selects
action a in state s with probability π(s, a). The main objective in reinforcement learning is to learn
a policy π which maximizes the expected cumulative discounted rewards
                                                   X
                                 R = Eat ∼π(st ,·)   γ t R(st , at , st+1 ).
                                                  t

This maximization is achieved by iterative Bellman update
                                                    X
                      Q(st , at ) = R(st , at ) + γ   P(st+1 |st , at )V (st+1 )                    (1)
                                                       st

Hence, the optimal policy π ∗ (s, a) can be achieved by executing the action a∗ (s)                  =
arg maxa Q(s, a) i.e. the action maximizing the state-action value function in state s.

2.2   A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATION T ECHNIQUES AND F ORMULATIONS

Following the initial study conducted by Szegedy et al. (2014), Goodfellow et al. (2015) proposed a
fast and efficient way to produce  -bounded adversarial perturbations in image classification based
on linearization of J(x, y), the cost function used to train the network, at data point x with label
y. Consequently, Kurakin et al. (2016) proposed the iterative form of this algorithm named iterative
fast gradient sign method (I-FGSM).

                            xN +1          N                 N
                             adv = clip  (xadv + αsign(∇x J(xadv , y))).                            (2)
This algorithm further has been improved by the proposal of the utilization of the momentum term
by Dong et al. (2018). Following this Ezgi (2020) proposed a Nesterov momentum technique to
compute  -bounded adversarial perturbations for deep reinforcement learning policies by computing


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the gradient at the point stadv + µ · vt ,
                                                ∇sadv J(stadv + µ · vt , a)
                               vt+1 = µ · vt +                                                    (3)
                                             k∇sadv J(stadv + µ · vt , a)k1
                                                            vt+1
                                     st+1     t
                                       adv = sadv + α ·                                           (4)
                                                         kvt+1 k2
Another class of algorithms for computing adversarial perturbations focuses on different methods
for computing the smallest possible perturbation which successfully changes the output of the target
function. The DeepFool method of Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2016) works by repeatedly computing
projections to the closest separating hyperplane of a linearization of the deep neural network at the
current point. Carlini & Wagner (2017) proposed targeted adversarial formulations in image classi-
fication based on distance minimization between the original sample and the adversarial sample
                                                                     
                                    min c · J(xadv ) + kxadv − xk                                (5)
                                     xadv ∈X
Another variant of this algorithm was proposed by Chen et al. (2018) based on `1 -regularization of
the `2 -norm bounded Carlini & Wagner (2017) adversarial formulation.
                                                                          
                        min c · J(xadv ) + σ kxadv − xk + σ kxadv − xk                      (6)
                         xadv ∈X


2.3   D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING P OLICIES AND A DVERSARIAL E FFECTS

Beginning with the work of Huang et al. (2017) and Kos & Song (2017), which introduced ad-
versarial examples based on FGSM to deep reinforcement learning, there has been a long line of
research on both adversarial attacks and robustness for deep neural policies. On the attack side, the
work of Lin et al. (2017) utilized the Carlini&Wagner method to compute perturbations in only a
subset of states, strategically chosen to maximize impact. Ezgi (2020) showed Nesterov momentum
produced adversarial perturbations that are faster to compute compared to Carlini & Wagner (2017)
with similar or better impact on the policy performance. More intriguingly, the work of Korkmaz
(2022) showed that deep reinforcement learning policies learn similar adversarial directions across
MDPs intrinsic to the training environment. On the defense side Pinto et al. (2017) model the inter-
action between an adversary producing perturbations and the deep neural policy taking actions as a
zero-sum game, and train the policy jointly with the adversary in order to improve robustness. More
recently Huan et al. (2020) formalized the adversarial problem in deep reinforcement learning by
introducing a modified MDP definition which they term State-Adversarial MDP (SA-MDP). Based
on this model the authors proposed a theoretically principled certified robust adversarial training
algorithm called SA-DQN. While recent studies raised some concerns on the drawbacks of adver-
sarial training techniques Korkmaz (2021) in terms of limiting the generalization capabilities of the
trained policy, these studies lack a method of explaining and understanding the main problems of
the adversarial training techniques.

3     P RINCIPAL H IGH -S ENSITIVITY D IRECTION A NALYSIS
In our paper our goal is to seek answers for the following questions:
       • How can we inspect the correlated non-robust features across time and space in deep rein-
         forcement learning policies?
       • How does distributional shift affect the vulnerabilities of learned representations?
       • Do correlated non-robust features transform for policies under adversarial perturbations?
       • Does adversarial training prohibit learning correlated non-robust features?
To be able to answer these questions we propose a novel policy imaging technique that traces corre-
lated high-sensitivity directions in the deep neural policy landscape across time. In the remainder of
this section we explain in detail our proposed method.
Definition 3.1. Let v ∈ Rd be a vector with kvk2 = 1. Let Q be a state-action value function and
for a state s let ŝ = s +  w. For   > 0, the vector v is an  -high-sensitivity direction for Q in state s
if
                      v = arg max Q(ŝ, arg max Q(ŝ, a)) − Q(ŝ, arg max Q(s, a)).                    (7)
                          kwk2 =1              a                       a



                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In words, v is a high-sensitivity direction if adding a perturbation of `2 -norm epsilon along v maxi-
mizes the difference between the optimal state-action value in the new state and the value assigned
in the new state to the previously optimal action. Eqn 7 can be approximated by using the softmax
cross entropy loss. Hence, we define π(s, a) as the softmax policy of the state-action value function.
                                                        e(Q(s,a)/T )
                                      π(s, a) = P            (Q(s,a0 )/T )
                                                                           .
                                                      a0 ∈A e

The cross entropy loss between the softmax policy in state sg and the argmax policy τ (s, a) =
1a=arg maxa0 π(s,a0 ) (a) at state s is
                                     X
                    J(s, sg ) = −       τ (s, a) log(π(sg , a)) = − log(π(sg , a∗ (s))).
                                    a∈A

Therefore by definition of the softmax policy we have
                         X            0
        J(s, sg ) = log       eQ(sg ,a )/T − Q(sg , a∗ (s)) ≈ Q(sg , a∗ (sg )) − Q(sg , a∗ (s))
                          a0 ∈A

where the final approximate equality becomes an equality as T → 0. Setting v = sg − s, shows that
maximizing the softmax cross entropy approximates the maximization in Definition 7. Hence, the
gradient ∇sg J(s, sg )|sg =s gives the direction of the largest increase in cross-entropy when moving
from state s. Intuitively this is the direction along which the policy distribution π(s, a) will most
rapidly diverge from the argmax policy. Hence, ∇sg J(s, sg )|sg =s is a high-sensitivity direction in
the neural policy landscape in state s. Most importantly, the reason we trace high-sensitivity direc-
tions is to uncover the non-robust features learnt by the deep neural policy. To capture the correlated
non-robust features we must aggregate the information on high-sensitivity directions from a collec-
tion of states visited while utilizing the policy π in a given MDP. We thus define a single direction
which captures the aggregate non-robust feature information from multiple states as follows:
Definition 3.2. Given a set of n states S = {si }ni=1 the principal high-sensitivity direction is the
vector GS given by
                                                      n
                                                  1X
                         GS =        arg max            hv, ∇sg J(si , sg )|sg =si i2 .
                                  {v∈Rd |kvk2 =1} n i=1

Proposition 3.1. Given a set of n states S = {si }ni=1 define the matrix L(S) by
                                     n
                                  1X
                      L(S) =           ∇s J(si , sg )|sg =si [∇sg J(si , sg )|sg =si ]> .
                                  n i=1 g

Then GS is the eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue of L(S).

Proof. Observe that by linearity of the inner product
       n                                    n
    1X                                   1X >
                                      2
          hv, ∇sg J(si , sg )|sg =si i =       v ∇sg J(si , sg )|sg =si [∇sg J(si , sg )|sg =si ]> v
    n i=1                                n i=1
                                                      n
                                                                                                          !
                                              >   1X
                                         =v            ∇s J(si , sg )|sg =si [∇sg J(si , sg )|sg =si ]>       v
                                                  n i=1 g
                                         = v > L(S)v.
Thus GS = arg max{v∈Rd |kvk2 =1} v > L(S)v. Therefore, by the variational characterization of
eigenvalues, GS is the eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue of L(S).

Intuitively, GS is the direction that has the highest average correlation with the gradients of the states
in S. Also note that GS has the same dimensions as each state s, and so can easily be rendered in the
same format as the states to visualize non-robust features. In Proposition 3.1 we show that GS can
be computed by solving an eigenvalue problem. Proposition 3.1 is the basis for Algorithm 1, which
computes GS by first calculating L(S) by summing over states, and then outputs the maximum
eigenvector.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: RADEN: Robustness Analysis via Dominant Eigendirections in Neural Manifold
  Input: State-action value function Q(s, a), actions a ∈ A, states s ∈ S, policy π(s, a)
  Output: Principal high-sensitivity direction G(i, j)
  for s = s0 to sT do
    τ (s, a) = 1a=arg maxa0 Q(s,a0 ) (a)
    π(sg , a) = P
                softmax(Q(sg , a))
    J(s, sg ) = a∈A τ (s, a) log(π(sg , a))
    L += ∇sg J(s, sg )|sg =s [∇sg J(s, sg )|sg =s ]>
  end for
  Return: Eigenvector G corresponding to largest eigenvalue of L



Next we show how RADEN can be used to measure the effects of environment changes on the
correlated non-robust features both visually and quantitatively. Let S be the set of states encountered
when utilizing policy π in an MDP M, and let S 0 be the set of states encountered when utilizing π
where the environment in M is modified by applying some change to each state s. In this setting,
comparing the visualization of GS and GS 0 can give a qualitative picture of how the environmental
change affects the learned correlated non-robust features. In order to give a more quantitative metric
for this change we define
Definition 3.3. For two sets of states S and S 0 , the feature correlation quotient is given by
                                                     GS>0 L(S)GS 0
                                      Λ(S 0 , S) =                 .
                                                     GS> L(S)GS

Next we show that the feature correlation quotient is bounded between zero and one.
Proposition 3.2. For any two sets of states S and S 0
                                          0 ≤ Λ(S 0 , S) ≤ 1.

Proof. By Proposition 3.1,
                           GS>0 L(S)GS 0 ≤ max v > L(S)v = GS> L(S)GS
                                           kvk2 =1

Thus the numerator of Λ(S 0 , S) is always less than or equal to the denominator i.e. Λ(S 0 , S) ≤ 1.
Furthermore, L(S) is positive semidefinite, as it is a sum of rank one projection matrices, and so
Λ(S 0 , S) ≥ 0.

Therefore, the feature correlation quotient Λ(S 0 , S) is a number between zero and one which intu-
itively measures how correlated the non-robust features from S 0 are to those from S. When mea-
suring how an environmental change affects non-robust features, it is also important to take the
stochastic nature of the MDP into account. In particular, the non-robust features observed with two
different executions of the same policy may differ slightly due to the inherent randomness of the
MDP. To account for this, we first collect a baseline set of states with no modification S0 . We then
collect a set of states S1 with no modification, and S10 with modification. By comparing Λ(S1 , S0 )
to Λ(S10 , S0 ) we can see how much of the decrease in average correlation is caused by the stochastic
nature of the MDP, and how much of the decrease is caused by the environmental change.

4   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
The deep reinforcement learning policies evaluated in our experiments are trained with the Dou-
ble Deep Q-Network algorithm Hasselt et al. (2016) with the architecture proposed by Wang et al.
(2016), and State-Adversarial Double Deep Q-Network (see Section 2.3) with experience replay
Schaul et al. (2016). The set of states S is collected over 10 episodes. The adversarial perturbation
hyperparameters are: for the Carlini&Wagner formulation κ is 10, learning rate is 0.01, initial con-
stant is 10, for the elastic-net regularization formulation β is 0.0001, learning rate is 0.1, maximum
iteration is 300, for Nesterov Momentum   is 0.001, and decay factor is 0.1. These hyperparameters


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: RADEN results of untransformed states and states under adversarial perturbations com-
puted via Carlini&Wagner, Nesterov Momentum, and elastic-net regularization for Pong. Column1:
Untransformed. Column2: C&W. Column3: Nesterov Momentum. Column4: Elastic-Net


Figure 2: RADEN results of untransformed states and states under adversarial perturbations com-
puted via Carlini&Wagner, Nesterov Momentum, and elastic-net regularization for BankHeist. Col-
umn1: Untransformed. Column2: C&W. Column3: Nesterov Momentum. Column4: Elastic-Net
Table 1: The feature correlation quotient Λ(S 0 , S) in BankHeist, Freeway, RoadRunner, and Pong
for the adversarial transformations: Carlini&Wagner, Nesterov Momentum, DeepFool, Elastic-Net.
 MDP            Untransformed    Carlini&Wagner         Nesterov          DeepFool          Elastic-Net
 Freeway        0.9917±0.0023    0.9499±0.02056     0.7868±0.02162    0.6869±0.02981     0.72590±0.0592
 BankHeist      0.8360±0.0116    0.2837±0.02316     0.3407±0.02412    0.1748±0.04421     0.30917± 0.0521
 RoadRunner     0.7652±0.0385    0.1621±0.02199     0.3826±0.03118    0.5353±0.03127     0.52506± 0.0782
 Pong           0.4934±0.0391    0.0408±0.04056     0.3444±0.01981    0.3277±0.02871     0.10529± 0.0629



are consistent with prior work to achieve the most effective adversarial perturbations (i.e. perturba-
tions causing the largest decrease on the discounted expected cumulative rewards obtained by the
policy).

4.1   I MAGING N ON -ROBUST F EATURE S HIFTS UNDER A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS

In this section we investigate the effects of adversarial attacks on the learnt correlated non-robust fea-
tures. Figure 2 shows the RADEN results for the untransformed states and the adversarially attacked
states in the Pong and BankHeist environments. In particular, these perturbations are computed via
the Nesterov momentum, Carlini&Wagner, and elastic-net regularization formulations (see Section
2.2). Figure 2 demonstrates that different adversarial formulations surface different sets of corre-
lated non-robust features. Depending on the perturbation type, the correlated non-robust features can
change quite noticeably. In fact, while the Carlini&Wagner formulation leaves a distinct signature
on the vulnerable representation pattern, the non-robust features under Nesterov momentum appear
most similar to those of the untransformed states. Our imaging technique can help to understand
the vulnerabilities of deep reinforcement learning policies by allowing us to visualize precisely how
non-robust features change with different perturbations.
Table 1 shows the feature correlation quotient Λ(S 0 , S) results where S consists of untransformed
states and S 0 consists of states modified by the Nesterov Momentum, Carlini&Wagner, elastic-net
regularization and DeepFool formulations respectively. Note that in all games the setting where
S 0 consists of a set of untransformed states from an independent execution has the highest feature
correlation quotient Λ(S 0 , S). Therefore the additional decrease of Λ(S 0 , S) when S 0 is modified
by adversarial perturbations can be attributed to changes in non-robust features caused by the per-
turbations. Observe also that the qualitative similarity between the visualizations in Figure 2 of the
different transformed states is matched by their ranking under Λ(S 0 , S) i.e. sorting from largest to
smallest correlation quotient for BankHeist yields Nesterov momentum, elastic-net, and then Car-
lini&Wagner. The fact that the feature correlation quotient has distinct results for untransformed
states and for states under all the types of adversarial formulations indicates that RADEN can facil-
itate detecting different types of adversarial perturbations.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      RoadRunner                    BankHeist                  Pong                     Freeway
Figure 3: RADEN results of the state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep reinforcement learning
policies for BankHeist, Pong, Freeway and RoadRunner.


Figure 4: Standardized gradients k∇sg J(si , sg )k2 for vanilla trained and state-of-the-art adversari-
ally trained deep reinforcement learning policies.

4.2   E XISTENCE OF C ORRELATED N ON -ROBUST F EATURES IN A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

In this section we investigate the effects of adversarial training on the correlated non-robust features.
In particular, the SA-DDQN algorithm adds the regularizer R,
                                X
                                                                             ∗
                      R(θ) =           max max    ∗
                                                      Q θ (s̄, a) − Qθ (s̄, a  (s))   .
                                      s̄∈D  (s) a6=a (s)
                                s

during training in the temporal difference loss. Figure 3 shows the RADEN results for the state-
of-the-art adversarially trained deep reinforcement learning policies. The non-robust features of
the adversarially trained deep reinforcement learning policies are much more tightly concentrated
on a small number of coordinates in the state observations, and these areas of concentration have
moved significantly from where they were under vanilla training. Thus, the visualization allows us
to see that correlated, non-robust features persist in adversarially trained policies, albeit in different
locations with sparser patterns than vanilla trained deep reinforcement learning policies.
In Figure 6 we plot the Fourier transform of GS where S is collected from a vanilla trained and an
adversarially trained policy in RoadRunner, BankHeist, Pong and Freeway. The Fourier transform
reveals clear differences in the spatial frequencies occupied by GS under vanilla and adversarial
training. There is a consistent trend that the larger entries of the Fourier transform are more evenly
and smoothly spread out for the adversarially trained policies. Thus, adversarial training leaves a
consistent signature on the non-robust features detectable via the Fourier transform of GS . There
is also a change in orientation: if the larger entries of the Fourier transform for the vanilla trained
policy are more spread out along one axis, the adversarially trained Fourier transform is more spread
along the other.
To complete our analysis of adversarial training we further include results on how non-robust fea-
tures vary across time. To do so we record the `2 -norm of the gradient k∇sg J(si , sg )k2 in each
state si ∈ S for both adversarially trained and vanilla trained policies in RoadRunner, Pong, and
Freeway. The results are plotted in Figure 4. In both RoadRunner and Freeway, the adversarially
trained policy has relatively small gradients except for a few dramatic spikes corresponding to much
higher sensitivity. This is in contrast to the vanilla trained policy in these games which tends to
have a much smoother distribution which remains closer to the mean. These results indicate that
adversarial training introduces higher jumps in sensitivity over states (i.e. extreme sensitivity for a
new set of states) when compared to vanilla training.

4.3   T HE E FFECTS OF D ISTRIBUTIONAL S HIFT ON THE N ON -ROBUST F EATURES L EARNT

To evaluate the effects of distributional shift on the learnt policy we go over several environment
modifications with RADEN. These transformations include blurring, perspective transform, rotation,


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Untransformed                            Rotated                            Blurred


        Compression Artifacts                Perspective Transform               Brightness and Contrast
Figure 5: RADEN results of untransformed states and states under natural transformations with
rotation, perspective transformation, blurring, compression artifacts, and brightness and contrast for
Pong.
Table 2: The feature correlation quotient Λ(S 0 , S) in BankHeist, Freeway, RoadRunner, and Pong
for the natural transformations: brightness and contrast, compression artifacts, rotation modification,
perspective transform, blurred observations.
  Distributional Shift             Freeway             BankHeist          RoadRunner               Pong
  Untransformed States          0.9917±0.0023       0.8360±0.0116       0.7652±0.0385        0.4934±0.0391
  Brightness and Contrast      0.86756±0.0271       0.3095±0.0429       0.4369±0.0334        0.1678±0.0427
  Compression Artifacts         0.90564±0.237       0.38814±0.022       0.24358±0.0204       0.49341±0.0191
  Rotation Modification         0.1381±0.0081       0.2951±0.0062       0.3350±0.0050        0.13648±0.0032
  Perspective Transform         0.3010±0.0281       0.1723±0.0311       0.3308±0.0274         0.4278±0.0196
  Blurred Observations          0.2657±0.0148       0.0954±0.0127       0.2496±0.0162         0.0847±0.0083


brightness, contrast, and compression artifacts.1 To keep these transformations small we bound by
the LPIPS metric proposed by Zhang et al. (2018). Figure 5 shows the visualizations of GS for
states S collected under the six environment modifications mentioned above. For the untransformed
setting the visualization of GS clearly emphasizes the center of the region where the agent’s paddle
moves up and down to hit the ball. The components of GS take larger positive values at the center
of this region and transition to negative values along the boundary. A similar emphasis can be
found for the case of compression artifacts, but with the signs reversed (i.e. the center of the region
is negative and the boundary is positive). The other transformations exhibit larger changes in the
regions emphasized in the visualization with perspective transform, blurring, rotation, and brightness
and contrast causing the emphasized region to move to different locations.
Table 2 contains the values of Λ(S 0 , S) where S is collected from an untransformed run and S 0 is
collected from each of the six different transformations. In every game the largest value of Λ(S 0 , S)
occurs when S 0 comes from an independent untransformed run, indicating that the additional de-
crease observed for S 0 from transformed runs is caused by the respective environmental transfor-
mations. It is notable that in Pong the second highest value for Λ(S 0 , S) occurs for S 0 collected
with compression artifacts, as this corresponds precisely to the qualitative similarity between the
regions emphasized in the visualization of GS for untransformed and compression artifacts. Hence,
the results for Λ(S 0 , S) help us to quantitatively understand the effects of the environmental trans-
formations, while agreeing well with the qualitative results of the RADEN visualizations. While
the RADEN visualizations give us semantically meaningful information on the non-robust features
learnt by the deep neural policy, also provides a detailed understanding of how these non-robust
features change under environmental modifications.
   1
     In particular, blurring refers to median blur, brightness and contrast to linear transformation, and compres-
sion artifacts to diminution in high frequency components due to JPEG conversion.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        RoadRunner                BankHeist                  Pong                   Freeway


         RoadRunner               BankHeist                  Pong                   Freeway
Figure 6: Fourier spectrum of the RADEN results of the state-of-the-art adversarially trained and
vanilla trained deep neural policies. Row1: Adversarially trained. Row2: Vanilla trained.


The fact that RADEN can provide fine-grained vulnerability analysis of deep reinforcement learn-
ing policies under adversarial attacks, with distributional shift and with adversarial training can
help with diagnosis of deep reinforcement learning policy vulnerabilities in the development phase.
Conducting ablation studies with RADEN in reinforcement learning algorithm design can prevent
building policies with embedded non-robust features, and our algorithm can be utilized to visualize
and identify the effects of several design choices (e.g. algorithm, neural network architecture) on
the non-robust features learnt by the policy from the MDP. In particular, given a visualization of the
vulnerability pattern for a trained policy, one can try to modify the training environment in a way
that will make the policy invariant to the non-robust features revealed by the visualization. Such
modification could include changing the state representation in a way that does not change the se-
mantics of the MDP, but does change the non-robust features in question. Furthermore, the effect
of modifications to training algorithms can also be directly visualized, as exemplified by our results
for adversarial training. Thus our method gives a straightforward way to diagnose or debug any
proposed methods in terms of their effects on high-sensitivity directions.


5   C ONCLUSION

In our paper we aim to seek answers for the following questions: (i) How do non-robust features
learned by deep reinforcement learning policies correlate temporally and spatially? (ii) Do the cor-
related non-robust features remold under adversarial attacks? (iii) Does adversarial training result
in policies that still end up learning non-robust features? (iv) How does distributional shift affect
the learnt correlated non-robust features? To be able to answer these questions we analyze high-
sensitivity directions in the deep neural policy landscape and we propose a novel tracing technique
to detect correlated non-robust features learned by deep reinforcement learning policies. We show
that deep reinforcement learning policies do end up learning correlated non-robust features, and
that adversarial attacks lead to surfacing a new set of non-robust features or highlighting the exist-
ing ones. Most importantly, we show that the state-of-the-art adversarial training techniques also
end up learning temporally and spatially correlated non-robust features. Finally, we show that dis-
tributional shifts introduce different sets of correlated non-robust features compared to adversarial
attacks. Hence, our analysis not only allows us to effectively visualize correlated non-robust fea-
tures, but also allows for precise understanding of changes in the learnt non-robust features caused
by different training algorithms and different methods for altering states. Thus, we believe that our
analysis can be useful both in diagnosing the vulnerabilities of deep neural policies, and in designing
algorithms to improve robustness.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Daniel Cullina, and Prateek Mittal. Lower bounds on adversarial robustness
  from optimal transport. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence
  d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS
  2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 7496–7508, 2019.

Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 39–57, 2017.

Lin Chen, Yifei Min, Mingrui Zhang, and Amin Karbasi. More data can expand the generalization
  gap between adversarially robust and standard models. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1670–1680. PMLR, 2020.

Pin-Yu Chen, Yash Sharma, Huan Zhang, Jinfeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. EAD: elastic-net attacks to
  deep neural networks via adversarial examples. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger
  (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18),
  the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium
  on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
  February 2-7, 2018, pp. 10–17. AAAI Press, 2018.

Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. Boost-
  ing adversarial attacks with momentum. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9185–9193, 2018.

Korkmaz Ezgi. Nesterov momentum adversarial perturbations in the deep reinforcement learning
  domain. International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, Inductive Biases, Invari-
  ances and Generalization in Reinforcement Learning Workshop., 2020.

Ian Goodfellow, Jonathan Shelens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaning and harnessing adversarial
  examples. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2016.

Zhang Huan, Chen Hongge, Xiao Chaowei, Bo Li, Mingyan Boning, Duane Liu, and ChoJui Hsiesh.
  Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on state observatons. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Sandy Huang, Nicholas Papernot, Yan Goodfellow, Ian an Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Adversar-
  ial attacks on neural network policies. Workshop Track of the 5th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2017.

Ezgi Korkmaz. Adversarial training blocks generalization neural policies. International Conference
  on Learning Representation (ICLR) Robust and Reliable Machine Learning in the Real World
  Workshop, 2021.

Ezgi Korkmaz. Deep reinforcement learning policies learn shared adversarial features across mdps.
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.

Jernej Kos and Dawn Song. Delving into adversarial attacks on deep policies. International Con-
   ference on Learning Representations, 2017.

Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial examples in the physical world.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533, 2016.

Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan. Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arX-
  ivpreprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yen-Chen Lin, Hong Zhang-Wei, Yuan-Hong Liao, Meng-Li Shih, ing-Yu Liu, and Min Sun. Tactics
  of adversarial attack on deep reinforcement learning agents. Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3756–3762, 2017.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian. Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, arc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles
  Beattie, Amir Sadik, Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg,
  and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518:
  529–533, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Badia Puigdomenech, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray. Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928–1937, 2016.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Deepfool: A simple and
  accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 2574–2582. IEEE
  Computer Society, 2016.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
  ment learning. International Conference on Learning Representations ICLR, 2017.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonogloua, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay.
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, atthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
  Hui, Laurent Sifre, van den George Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 500:354–359, 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dimutru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Florian Tramèr, Jens Behrmann, Nicholas Carlini, Nicolas Papernot, and Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen.
  Fundamental tradeoffs between invariance and sensitivity to adversarial perturbations. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July
  2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9561–9571.
  PMLR, 2020.
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Van Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando. De Fre-
  itas. Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. Internation Conference on
  Machine Learning ICML., pp. 1995–2003, 2016.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver. Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2018.


                                               11
