Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING BY D ISTILLING C ONTEXT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Language models significantly benefit from context tokens, such as prompts or
         scratchpads. They perform better when prompted with informative instructions,
         and they acquire new reasoning capabilities by generating a scratch-pad before
         predicting the final answers. However, they do not internalize these performance
         gains, which disappear when the context tokens are gone. Our work proposes to
         apply context distillation so that a language model can improve itself by internal-
         izing these gains. Concretely, given a synthetic unlabeled input for the target task,
         we condition the model on “[instructions] + [task-input]” to predict “[scratch-pad]
         + [final answer]”; then we fine-tune the same model to predict its own “[final an-
         swer]” conditioned on the “[task-input]”, without seeing the “[instructions]” or
         using the “[scratch-pad]”.
         We show that context distillation is a general method to train language models, and
         it can effectively internalize 3 types of training signals. First, it can internalize
         abstract task instructions along with explanations, so we can recursively update
         the model parameters with new instructions and overwrite old ones. Second, it
         can internalize concrete training examples, and it outperforms directly learning
         with gradient descent by 9% on the SPIDER Text-to-SQL dataset; furthermore,
         combining multiple context distillation operations can internalize more training
         examples than what the context window size allows. Finally, we show preliminary
         evidence that it can internalize step-by-step reasoning on 8-digit addition, and such
         a newly acquired capability proves to be useful for other downstream tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent work has shown that language models significantly benefit from context tokens. When
prompted with task definitions, language models can perform zero-shot learning (Wei et al., 2022a;
Sanh et al., 2022), and the performance further improves with additional in-context examples and
explanations (Chen et al., 2022; Scheurer et al., 2022). They also acquire the capability to perform
more complex tasks by generating step-by-step reasoning in the context window before predicting
the final answer (Nye et al., 2021b; Wei et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022).
However, language models cannot internalize these performance gains, which disappear when the
context tokens are gone. Consequently, we always need to pay extra computation for running infer-
ence on context tokens; this is undesirable, as sometimes the task instructions and the scratch-pad
can be more than 10x longer than the actual task inputs. Furthermore, it is unclear how to leverage
the context tokens when their total length exceeds the context window size. These shortcomings are
analogous to how humans are slow at performing complex cognitive tasks (Wason & Evans, 1974)
and can hold only a limited amount of information in the working memory (Baddeley, 1992).
Humans get around this by practicing. Consider, for example, learning to type your friends’ phone
numbers. The first few times you type it, you need to consciously recall the number using working
memory and slowly decide which button to press. After repeatedly typing the same number, it be-
comes a habit and you can type the number quickly without conscious reasoning. Through repeated
practice, the knowledge of your friend’s phone number is “distilled” into your muscle memories.1
This mechanism for distilling knowledge is critical for learning complex tasks because it allows us
  1
    See declarative learning vs. procedural learning for a friendly but more in-depth discussion. https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Declarative_learning


                                                   1
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                Model Input                                         Model Output
                                                                   Tteacher(x)                       Sample                  y
                                                                                                   Comple ons
                                                   [Instruction with Extra Information]                             [Scratch-pad]
                               Teacher                                                                            + [final answer]
                                                 + [Raw Task Input]

                        x∼
           Raw Task
            Input
                                                                   Tstudent(x)                      Fine-tune               f(y)
                                                                                                    to predict
                               Student              [Minimal Instruction]
                                                                                                                   [final answer]
                                                  + [Raw Task Input]


                                                         Teacher’s Template Tteacher                             Teacher’s Output y
                                         You will need to add two numbers, and state your
                                         reasoning process before outputting the final answer.                    1 1 + 4 1 C : 0
                                         Example Input: 2 4 + 1 7                                                 => 1 + 4 , 2 C :
                                                                                                     Sample
                                         Example Output: 2 4 + 1 7 C : 0 => 2 + 1, 1 C: 1 => , 4                  0 => , 5 2 C : 0
                                                                                                   Comple ons
                               Teacher   1 C : 0 => 0 4 1. The final answer is 4 1                                => 0 5 2. The
                                                                                                                  final answer is
                        x∼               Now add the following two numbers.
                         2 4 + 6 6       Input: 1 1 + 4 1                                                                  5 2
          Random                         Output:
          Addi on        2 2 + 3 7
          Expressions
                         1 1 + 4 1
                                                         Student’s Template Tstudent                             Student’s Output f(y)
                                                                                                    Fine-tune
                                         Perform the following calculation.
                                                                                                    to predict
                               Student                                                                                     5 2
                                         Input: 1 1 + 4 1
                                                                                                                     (Extracted from the
                                         Output:                                                                      teacher’s output)


    Figure 1: Top. An overview of our context distillation framework. We sample a raw task input, form
    the teacher’s prompt by pre-prending a detailed instruction that might contain more examples and
    explanations, and ask the language model to conditionally sample a scratch-pad and a final answer.
    Then we fine-tune the same language model to directly predict the final answer with a minimal
    instruction. We formalize this framework mathematically in Section 2. Bottom. An instantiation of
    our framework that internalizes step-by-step reasoning for 8-digit addition.


    to incrementally build up our knowledge and skills, so that we can learn to accomplish increasingly
    complex tasks.
    We propose to apply a similar method, context distillation, to fine-tune language models. For exam-
    ple, as shown in Figure 1, to make language models internalize the step-by-step addition capability,
    we first synthesize a large number of “practice” addition questions; we then ask the model to follow
    the more informative instruction to reason step-by-step before generating the target answer; finally,
    we fine-tune the language model to directly predict the answer conditioned on a simpler student
    prompt. As a result, by practicing on a lot of addition problems, the ability to add is distilled into its
    parameters. We formally state our generalized context distillation framework in Section 2.
Section 3 shows that we can apply context distillation to a wide range of settings: learning from
abstract statements, learning from concrete examples, and learning from step-by-step reasoning.
Section 3.1 (Figure 2) shows that context distillation can effectively internalize task instructions
along with natural language explanations from Natural-Instructions-V2 (Wang et al., 2022b); ad-
ditionally, we can teach the student to associate numerical indices with certain tasks, and then we
can recursively re-assign these task indices, overwriting the student’s past associations. Section 3.2
(Figure 3) shows that context distillation can be used to internalize Text-to-SQL training examples
from the SPIDER dataset (Yu et al., 2018) into Incoder (Fried et al., 2022), and it outperforms di-
rectly learning with gradient descent by 9% for 8-shot adaptation; additionally, we show that as we
distill more training examples than can fit in the context window, we observe continual improve-
ments in performance. Section 3.3 (Figure 3) shows that we can internalize step-by-step reasoning
to perform 8-digit addition, and such a capability can transfer to downstream question answering
tasks; we hope this preliminary results can generalize to more complex and realistic tasks that larger
models can perform with chain-of-thoughts reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022).
𝒟
   Overall, context distillation demonstrates promising potential as a general method for learning. As
   discussed in Section 4, we predict that future models will be better able to learn from context than
   today’s
  ti  ti models, and researchers will use these models to tackle increasingly complex tasks that

                                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


require more background knowledge and longer reasoning chains. Therefore, we anticipate our
method to be increasingly useful in the future.


2     C ONTEXT D ISTILLATION

We introduce the main components and the intuition of our context distillation framework in Section
2.1, describe our algorithm for single round distillation in Section 2.2, explain how to distill multiple
contexts recursively or simultaneously in Section 2.3, and describe various implementation details
to make it efficient and stable in Section 2.4.

2.1   I NTUITION AND M AIN C OMPONENTS

We explain our method by contrasting it with the classical distillation methods (Hinton et al., 2015a).
These classical methods ask the teacher model with parameter θTEACHER to generate a label y for a
given input x, and train the student θSTUDENT to mimic the teacher by predicting y conditioned on x.
Typically, θTEACHER ̸= θSTUDENT when the algorithm starts, and the distillation process is driven by
the difference between their parameters. In contrast, under context distillation, θTEACHER = θSTUDENT
when the training starts, and the distillation process is instead driven by the differences in the x and
y that they see and predict.
To design such a difference that drives the distillation process, our framework requires the model
developers to provide four components: a raw task input distribution D, a teacher template TTEACHER ,
a student template TSTUDENT , and an answer extractor f . We introduce them below.

Raw Task Input Distribution D. D is a distribution of strings, which are typically the “core”
inputs of the target task of interest. For example, if the target task is to classify movie review
sentiment, the input distribution could be defined as random movie reviews. Generally, there are
many ways to define a raw task input distribution: we can use rule-based method to generate random
strings, sample from a pool of unlabeled data, or conditionally sample from a language model. We
explicitly distinguish raw task inputs from the whole “input prompt” to the language model, which
will be obtained after applying the templates below.
Except for the synthetic experiments in Section 3.3, all experiments in our paper create D via few-
shot prompting and do not assume access to a pool of unlabeled data.

Teacher Template TTEACHER . TTEACHER is a mapping from strings to strings, which transforms raw
task inputs to the input prompts for the teacher model. As shown in Figure 1, the teacher template
usually contains more detailed instructions, explanations, and examples about the task.

Student Template TSTUDENT . TSTUDENT is a mapping from strings to strings, which transforms raw
task inputs to the input prompts for the student model. As shown in Figure 1, this template usually
still contains minimal information about the task so that the request in the prompt is not under-
specified. However, compared to the teacher prompt, it incorporates far fewer explanations and
training examples of the task, and such a difference transfers this useful context information into the
student parameters.

Answer Extractor f . f is a mapping from token sequences to token sequences, which extracts the
final answer (a sub-sequence of tokens) from the full teachers’ generation. As shown in Figure 1, f
strips away the intermediate reasoning process, and the students need to internalize the step-by-step
reasoning process to directly predict what the teacher predicts at the end.
We now describe context distillation formally using the mathematical terms we just introduced.

2.2   F ORMAL D ESCRIPTION

Our algorithm first samples an x from D and ask the language model to sample a completion y
conditioned on TTEACHER (x); we then fine-tune the language model to predict f (y) conditioned on
TSTUDENT (x). Throughout the distillation process, θTEACHER is fixed.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Formally, let θSTUDENT and θTEACHER be the parameters of a language model, and define Pθ (·|PROMPT)
to be the probability distribution of the completions conditioned on the prompt. We optimize


LD,TSTUDENT ,TTEACHER ,f,θTEACHER (θSTUDENT ) = Ex∼D [Ey∼PθTEACHER (·|TTEACHER ) [log PθSTUDENT (f (y)|TSTUDENT (x))]]
                                                                                                                  (1)
Notice that the definition of L depends on five variables D, TSTUDENT , TTEACHER , f , and θTEACHER . To
keep the notation uncluttered, we will only include the necessary subscripts if the rest can be inferred
from the surrounding text.

2.3       C OMBINING M ULTIPLE U PDATES

We now introduce simultaneous distillation and recursive distillation, two straightforward variants
that combine multiple context distillation operations, allowing us to internalize ensembles or se-
quences of contexts, enabling a form of learning that is not possible with just a single prompt.

Simultaneous Distillation. To simultaneously perform K different context distillation operations
represented by D1...K , TTEACHER/STUDENT,1...K , f1...K , we can optimize the total loss:
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                      LTOTAL :=         LDk ,TSTUDENT,k ,TTEACHER,k ,fk                           (2)
                                                  k=1

Simultaneous distillation is especially useful when the prompts contain independent instructions and
in-context training examples, but their total length exceeds the language model context window size.

Recursive Distillation. To perform R rounds of context distillation operations recursively, we can
inductively define θ0 as the initial language model, and θk+1 to be the parameters after fine-tuning
with the loss function
                                    Lr := LDr ,TSTUDENT,r ,TTEACHER,r ,fr ,                           (3)
with θr as the initialization. Essentially, for each round r of context distillation we can obtain a new
student, which then becomes the teacher and the student’s initialization for the next round. This
allows a language model to recursively update itself via context distillation.2

2.4       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A naive method to optimize Equation 1 is to sample y and directly fine-tune the student to predict
the hard label of f (y): such a method wastes the token logit information and results in noisy gradi-
ents. Instead, we minimize the token-level KL divergence between the student and the teacher (i.e.,
learn from the soft labels). However, this leads to another issue: the vocabulary space of language
models is often on the order of 50k, and the full soft labels consume as much as 200KB memory
per decoding step. Therefore, we approximate the it with an empirical distribution of 100 token
samples. Such a technique saves memory by a factor of 500. Appendix 8.1 shows more details.

3       E XPERIMENTS
Overview. We apply context distillation to three types of settings. Section 3.1 applies context dis-
tillation to internalize abstract instructions and natural language explanations; additionally, language
models can recursively update themselves via context distillation to associate each task instruction
with a task id. Section 3.2 applies context distillation to internalize concrete training examples, and
it can outperform directly learning with gradient descent on the SPIDER Text-to-SQL dataset; ad-
ditionally, we show that simultaneous distillation can be used to internalize more training examples
than the context window can fit. In Section 3.3, we apply context distillation to internalize the ability
to perform 8-digit addition step-by-step; additionally, such a capability can transfer to other down-
stream question-answering tasks even when the scratch-pad is not present. In all cases, the student’s
input length is significantly shorter than the teacher’s, and we may reduce the context length by as
much as 11 times, saving us a large amount of compute at inference time.
    2
        Choi et al. (2022) first proposed this recursive formulation but only evaluated it qualitatively.


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            You will need to write some movie reviews.
                                                                            Sample       I have a mixed feeling.
            Prompt to       Example Input: N/A                              Comple*ons
                            Example Output: Really liked this movie.                     A total waste of time.
            Generate Raw
            Task Input      Now write more movie reviews.                                  Highly recommended.
                            Example Input: N/A
                            Example Output: ___________
                                                                                                . . . . . .


                            You will need to classify reviews. 1 means good, 0
                            means not good.

                            Example Input: I am impressed by the plot before                 Sample
                            Chapter 130, but everything between 131-139 is trash.          Comple*ons
            Teacher’s       Example Output: 0                                                            0
            Template        Explanation: answer 0 when it is ambiguous.
                            Now classify the following review.
                            Input: I have a mixed feeling.
                            Output:

                                                                                            Fine-tune
                                                                                            to predict
            Student’s              I have a mixed feeling.    [Task Index “0”]                           0
            Template-A
                                                                                            Fine-tune
                                                                                            to predict
            Student’s                                            [Instruction without
                                    I have a mixed feeling.                                              0
            Template-B                                           explanations.]


Figure 2: We use context distillation to internalize abstract task instructions and associate each of
them with a task id. For example, after distilling the context with the teacher’s template and student
template-A, the student should perform sentiment classification whenever it sees the index “[0]”.
We perform an additional ablation study by using the student template-B without the explanation to
verify that context distillation can be used to learn from natural language explanations. The raw task
inputs are sampled from the same teacher model via few-shot prompting (top).


Baselines and Oracles. At the beginning of the distillation, the teacher and the student networks
have identical parameter values. However, the teacher has an advantage because it has access to
additional context while the student does not. The student’s goal is to mimic the teacher to inter-
nalize the teacher’s context. Therefore, the student’s performance needs to improve after context
distillation to support the claim that context distillation is successful. The teacher’s performance is
generally an upper bound on the student’s performance.

Naming Conventions. We use the following names when reporting the results.

       • “Teacher” = initial language model’s (LM) performance with additional context.
       • “Pre-distill Student” = the initial LM’s performance without additional context.
       • “Post-distill Student” = the distilled LM’s performance without additional context.

Note that whether a system is called teacher or student is not based on its parameter values (e.g.,
initial vs. distilled) but on whether it uses context.

3.1   L EARNING F ROM A BSTRACT I NSTRUCTIONS AND E XPLANATIONS

We apply context distillation to internalize abstract instructions. In all experiments, unless men-
tioned otherwise, the answer extractor is the identity function and we use few-shot prompting to
sample raw task inputs (see Figure 2).

Dataset and Language Models. We use Natural-Instructions-V2 for all the experiments on this
section. Natural Instructions is a dataset of 1600+ diverse language tasks, where each task is asso-
ciated with a natural language task description, input-output examples, and explanations about why
certain outputs are correct or incorrect (Wang et al., 2022b). We trained our teacher language model
(TK-Instruct) by fine-tuning LM-adapted T5-11B (Raffel et al., 2020) on its training set, and the
details can be seen in Appendix 8.5. For evaluation, we use their dataset’s official metric, Rouge-L,
to calculate the performance averaged across the 10 tasks we selected.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Design Choice. We select 5 tasks from their evaluation split where the teacher can most signifi-
cantly improve the performance when prompted with extra natural language explanations compared
to task description only, and 5 where they improve the least. We chose these tasks because they also
allow us to investigate how well context distillation can internalize natural language explanations in
Appendix 8.2 under different teacher’s performance.
Hypothesis 1: context distillation can internalize abstract task instructions. To test this hypoth-
esis, we defined the student template as the identity mapping, i.e., the student only sees the raw task
input, while the teacher template contains the task instruction, which consists of a task description, 2
positive in-context examples, and 2-negative in-context examples (Figure 2 teacher’s template). The
teacher’s performance is 43.4 Rouge-L, establishing an upper bound for the student. Before context
distillation, the student’s performance is 9.0, since it does not know what task it should perform. Af-
ter context distillation, the student’s performance significantly increases to 34.7. Context distillation
successfully internalized abstract task instructions. Finally, we used 11.1 times fewer inference time
tokens when evaluating the student verses the teacher.
In light of emerging trends to learn from from natural language explanations (Scheurer et al., 2022;
Lampinen et al., 2022), we present experiments on distilling in-context explanations in Appendix8.2.
Hypothesis 2: recursive distillation can overwrite past updates. We study recursive distilla-
tion using four classification tasks, superglue copa text completion, meta woz task classification,
tweetqa classification and rocstories title classification. We define a new task id association chal-
lenge: each task is associated with an index, and when the student model sees an index, it needs
to perform the corresponding task without looking at its instruction; we train the student model to
do this via simultaneous context distillation, where the student sees the task index while the teacher
sees the task instruction (Figure 2 student template A). After we use context distillation to train the
student to associate each task-id with the corresponding instruction, we shuffle the task-id associ-
ation, perform context distillation again, and then evaluate the model’s performance on the newly
defined association to measure the ability of context distillation to overwrite previous updates.
We define two metrics for this task id association challenge. First, we will measure the average
accuracy (correct association accuracy) of the student on the four tasks when they are prompted with
the corresponding index. Second, it is plausible that the student can learn to associate the task input
distributions, rather than the index, with the corresponding instructions. For example, suppose that
id “[0]” corresponds to classifying sentiment and the task input distribution is movie reviews, while
“[1]” corresponds to whether it is sports related and the raw input distribution is news articles, then
the student might cheat by always classifying sentiment whenever it sees a movie review, regardless
of what id it sees. Therefore, we also measure the average accuracy when we prompt the model with
the wrong task id, and we want this number to be low (wrong association accuracy): for example,
if the model sees “[0]” and a news articles, it should have low accuracy at classifying whether it
corresponds to sports, because “[0]” corresponds to sentiment classification.
We experimented with two variants of simultaneous distillation: 1) the “naı̈ve” one, where each Dk
contains only the input distribution for one single task, and 2) the “mixed” one, where we define
each Dk as a mixture of all the raw task input distributions. As shown in Table 1, under the “naı̈ve”
input distribution, the student model can cheat by associating the task input distribution, rather than
the task id, with the task it needs to perform; on the other hand, the “mixed” variant successfully
over-writes the past task id association.
Can the language model recursively update itself based on new task-id associations? It is not obvious
that it would work, since it is plausible that the model forgets how to follow the instruction properly
after being fine-tuned to associate task with Ids. We recursively apply context distillation for three
rounds and find in Table 1 right that the performance does not drop. Along with findings from
(Ramasesh et al., 2022), these results suggest that catastrophic forgetting might pose little trouble to
recursively applying context distillation on larger instruction-tuned models.


3.2   L EARNING FROM C ONCRETE E XAMPLES

We show that context distillation can internalize training examples, and therefore can be a potential
alternative to directly learning from these examples with gradient descent; additionally, simultaneous
distillation allows the model to learn from more in-context examples when their total length exceeds


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: We apply context distillation to train the student to associate task instructions with task
ids, and then recursively apply context distillation repeatedly to overwrite the previous associa-
tion. We report the correct association accuracy (“correct”) and the wrong association accuracy
score (“wrong”) over all four tasks we associate. For all entries we report the 95% confidence in-
terval. Left: Performance significantly improves after context distillation, and mixed distillation
successfully prevents the model from cheating by memorizing the input distribution. Right: Task-id
association performance does not drop after several rounds of recursive updates.
                  model                  correct ↑ wrong ↓
                                                                       model        correct ↑
                 Teacher                  81 ± 4         -
                                                                   Round r = 1       68 ± 5
            Pre-distill Student           49 ± 5      48 ± 5
                                                                   Round r = 2       66 ± 5
   “Naı̈ve” Post-distill Student (r = 2)  68 ± 5      61 ± 5
                                                                   Round r = 3       68 ± 5
   “Mixed” Post-distill Student (r = 2)   66 ± 5      16 ± 4


                         CREATE TABLE people(NAME string, AGE
                         integer); // schema                                Sample         How old is Eren?
          Prompt to                                                         Comple*ons
                         How old is Pieck?                                                 How many people …
          Generate Raw
                         SELECT AGE from people WHERE NAME = “Pieck”
          Task Input
                                                                                         Who is the youngest …
                         [Example Input 2]
                         [Example Output 2]
                                                                                              . . . . . .

                                                       Sample
                         [Schema]                      Comple*ons
                                                                                                                 [Schema]
          Teacher’s      [Example Input Output 1-4]                 SELECT AGE from people       Teacher’s       [Example Input Output 5-8]
          Template-A                                                 WHERE NAME = “Eren”         Template-B
                              How old is Eren?                                                                        How old is Eren?



                                                       Fine-tune
          Student’s      [Schema]                      to predict
                                                                                                 Student’s           Teacher’s
                                                                    SELECT AGE from people
          Template-A                                                 WHERE NAME = “Eren”         Template-B
                                                                                                                 =   Template-A
                              How old is Eren?


Figure 3: The teacher template A contains additional training examples 1-4 compared to the student
template A, and context-distilling them outperforms directly learning from them with gradient de-
scent. Additionally, by simultaneously applying the teacher’s templates A and B (Section 2.3), more
in-context examples (5-8) can be distilled, even though their total length might exceed the context
window size. The raw task inputs are sampled from the same teacher model via few-shot prompting
(top).


the context window length. In all experiments, the answer extractor is the identity function and we
use few-shot prompting to sample raw task inputs (Figure 3).

Dataset and Language Models. We use the SPIDER text-to-SQL dataset (Yu et al., 2018) for our
experiments. Each database in SPIDER is associated with a schema and a list of English questions
annotated with SQL query. The task is to predict the SQL query given the schema and the question.
For the teacher language model, we chose Incoder-6.7B (Fried et al., 2022), which is pre-trained
on code. For each experiment, we randomly sampled eight text-to-SQL pairs for each database as
in-context examples and evaluate on the rest by calculating the exact set match accuracy.

Design Choice. We chose this task because prior work (Rajkumar et al., 2022) has demonstrated
that SOTA models are able to effectively utilize in-context examples for this task; therefore, our
approach is more likely to outperform gradient descent. More generally, in-context learning perfor-
mance improves when we scale up (Chen et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020), and hence we conjecture
that context distillation can outperform gradient descent on more tasks for future models.

Hypothesis 3: context distillation sometimes outperform directly learning with gradient de-
scent. We define the student template to be a database schema followed directly by the question,
whereas the teacher template contains the database schema followed by four in-context examples
(see Figure 3 teacher’s template-A). As we see in Table 2, context distillation outperforms learning
via gradient descent on four examples by 8.6% in exact-set match accuracy, a margin which further
increases by 0.4% when training on eight examples. Therefore, context distillation can be used as
an alternative to directly learning from training examples with gradient descent.


                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 Model              4 Examples      8 Examples
                                Teacher                27.7            28.2
                           Pre-distill Student          0.3             0.3
                          Post-distill Student         22.1            27.9
                        Direct Gradient Descent        13.4            18.9

Table 2: Comparing context distillation to gradient descent on the SPIDER text-to-SQL validation
set. We see that context distillation outperforms directly learning via gradient descent on four exam-
ples by 8.6% (exact set match); this margin further increases when learning from eight examples.


Hypothesis 4: context distillation enables learning from more training examples when their
total length exceeds the context window size. For this experiment, we select four databases from
the SPIDER training set which have particularly long database schema, such that it is possible to
fit four training examples into Incoder’s context window but not eight. Therefore, we include 4
training examples in the student template (Figure 3, student’s template B.), which would lead to the
best in-context learning performance ex-ante given the context window size. To internalize more
training examples, we perform simultaneous distillation and sample teacher templates by including
a random subset of four in-context examples out of eight (Figure 3, teacher’s template A and B).
After context distillation, our student achieves an exact set match of 16.2 ± 0.6, which improves
over the pre-distillation student performance of 14.22 ± 0.8, hence confirming our hypothesis.

3.3   P RELIMINARY E VIDENCE FOR L EARNING FROM S TEP -B Y-S TEP R EASONING

We show that context distillation can effectively internalize a skills acquired by generating step-by-
step reasoning, and such a skill can benefit the model for other downstream tasks. Unless otherwise
mentioned, in this section we use an f that will extract the final answer from the teacher’s full output,
as shown in Figure 1 bottom.

Dataset. We define the input distribution D to be uniform over all possible 1 through 8 digit
addition questions, identical to those used by Nye et al. (2021a). We report addition accuracy for
each experiment. We hope that these results can generalize to more complex and realistic tasks that
larger models can perform with chain-of-thoughts reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022).

Hypothesis 5: context distillation can internalize step-by-step reasoning. To test this hypoth-
esis, we obtain a teacher model that can use scratch-pad to perform step-by-step reasoning by fine-
tuning the LM-adapted T5-small on a dataset of 500 addition expressions, where the model needs to
first generate a scratch-pad before predicting the final answer. We then perform context-distillation
with an f that extracts the final answer from the teacher’s output as shown in Figure 1 bottom.
As shown in Table 3, after distillation, the ability of the student to perform direct additions (with-
out using scratch-pad) improves from 0% to 94.7%, implying that context distillation internalizes
step-by-step reasoning.
We compare this to several other transfer learning and multi-task learning baselines that use the same
amount of training data in Table 3. Under transfer learning, we first fine-tune the student model to
predict the scratch pad, and then fine-tune it to directly predict the final answer. Under multi-
task learning, we fine-tune the model to predict scratch-pad and the final answer independently.
Both variants perform significantly worse (> 20%) than context distillation. In addition to the
gains in reasoning ability over baselines, we also saved inference time compute in our evaluations:
specifically we used 8.0 times fewer tokens at inference time when evaluating the student compared
to the teacher.

Hypothesis 6: the reasoning cability internalized by scratchpad distillation can transfer to
other related reasoning tasks. To test this hypothesis, we distill the addition scratch-pads on our
TK-Instruct model, and evaluate capability transfer to other tasks. We obtain the teacher language
model by fine-tuning TK-Instruct on a distribution of both natural instructions data and 500 addition
scratchpad examples (see Appendix 8.9). For the context distillation training, we define the student
template to be a description of the addition task followed by two direct answer in-context exam-
ples, and similarly the teacher template contains the task description and two in-context examples


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Teach     Pre-Dist    Post-Dist     Sc→Dir      Sc+Dir
        8 Digit Addition Accuracy %         93           0          95           72          61

Table 3: Distilling addition scratchpads on T5-small. “Teach” refers to the teacher LM’s per-
formance using scratch-pad. “Pre-Dist” refers to the student’s performance before distillation;
“Post-Dist” refers to the student’s performance of direct addition (without scratch-pad) after
distillation;“Sc→Dir”/“Sc+Dir” refers to our transfer/multi-task learning baseline. Context Dis-
tillation performs the best for direct addition.


with scratch-pad answer. To prevent the student from catastrophically forgetting its in-context learn-
ing ability during distillation, we mix our 10k distillation data-points with a distribution of 65536
randomly selected examples from Natural Instruction-V2.
The student’s accuracy on directly answering 8-digit addition questions improves from 1% to 17%,
while the student’s performance on Natural Instructions remains roughly the same (from RougeL 57
before distillation to 58 after), implying that the student did not lose its original capabilities to follow
instructions. Additionally, we evaluate the student’s performance on a set of related reasoning tasks.
We then use a template to synthesize simple questions that require knowledge to add two numbers,
for example, “A has 7 turkies. B has 2 turkies. How many turkies do they have altogether?”.
On this synthetic dataset, the student’s performance significantly increases from 17% to 30% after
context distillation, implying that the capability to perform direct addition can transfer to other
related applications.


4    R ELATED W ORK

Prompting and Instruction Tuning. Many recent works show that language models can learn
from abstract task definitions (Zhong et al., 2021; Mishra et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a), natural
language explanations (Scheurer et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b), and concrete in-context examples
(Min et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). We anticipate the in-context learning performance to improve
further in the future (Kaplan et al., 2020), thus increasing the upper bound of what context distillation
can achieve.

Scratch Pad. Many recent works show that language models perform better when it is required
to generate a chain of reasoning steps before outputting the final answer (Zhou et al., 2021; Nye
et al., 2021b; Cobbe et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022).
We anticipate context distillation to be increasingly useful, as the research community starts to
tackle more difficult problems, which require more sophisticated skills and have longer problem
descriptions and reasoning chains.

Distillation. There has been a large literature on distilling knowledge in a neural network (Hinton
et al., 2015b; Adriana et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020). Most related
to our work, different sub-variants of context distillation have been independently discovered by
different researchers. Wang et al. (2021) emphasizes the aspect of creating a dataset without any
human annotations and uses a language model to generate task inputs and their labels. Choi et al.
(2022); Askell et al. (2021) formulated the method of context distillation (also referred to as prompt
injection), which distills a fixed input prompt; their method is a special case of our framework with
an identity student template and an identity output selector. Additionally, they focused more on the
benefit of saving computational resources, while we considered it as a general learning method.


5    C ONCLUSION

We present context distillation as a general learning method, which can internalize abstract state-
ments, concrete examples, and step-by-step reasoning. Given that 1) it is general and delivers strong
performance, 2) future models will have stronger in-context learning capability, and 3) future tasks
will have longer descriptions and reasoning chains, we anticipate our methods to be increasingly
useful in the future.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   E THICS S TATEMENT
Our method is still far from perfect for internalizing context information and should not be applied
to high stake scenarios.

7   R EPRODUCIBILITY
We include more experiment details in the appendix and release code for reproducing all experi-
ments.

R EFERENCES
Romero Adriana, Ballas Nicolas, K Samira Ebrahimi, Chassang Antoine, Gatta Carlo, and
  B Yoshua. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. Proc. ICLR, 2, 2015.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Her-
 nandez, Jackson Kernion, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack
 Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. A general language assistant as a labora-
 tory for alignment, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00861.
Alan Baddeley. Working memory. Science, 255(5044):556–559, 1992.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Yanda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Sheng Zha, George Karypis, and He He. Meta-learning via lan-
  guage model in-context tuning. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 719–730, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.53. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.53.
Eunbi Choi, Yongrae Jo, Joel Jang, and Minjoon Seo. Prompt injection: Parameterization of fixed
  inputs, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11349.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher
  Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing factual knowledge in language models, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08164.
Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong,
  Wen-tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Incoder: A generative model for code infilling
  and synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05999, 2022.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network, 2015a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015b.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Andrew K Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta, Stephanie CY Chan, Kory Matthewson, Michael Henry
  Tessler, Antonia Creswell, James L McClelland, Jane X Wang, and Felix Hill. Can language
  models learn from explanations in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02329, 2022.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
  reasoning problems with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14858, 2022.
Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Improving multi-task deep neu-
  ral networks via knowledge distillation for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.09482, 2019.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150,
  Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P11-1015.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. MetaICL: Learning to learn
  in context. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2791–2809, Seattle,
  United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  naacl-main.201. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.201.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–3487, Dublin,
  Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
  244. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.244.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D. Manning. Fast
  model editing at scale, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.11309.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
 gustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models,
 2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
 David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show
 your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.00114, 2021b.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Evaluating the text-to-sql capabilities of
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498, 2022.
Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Aitor Lewkowycz, and Ethan Dyer. Effect of scale on catastrophic
  forgetting in neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=GhVS8_yPeEa.
Amit Sabne. Xla : Compiling machine learning for peak performance, 2020.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
  Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
  Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, De-
  bajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
  Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
  Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le
  Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan
    Perez. Learning from natural language feedback. In ACL Workshop on Learning with Natural
    Language Supervision, 2022.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, Eshaan
  Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Gary Lai, Ishan Purohit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Anderson,
  Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Maitreya Patel, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir Par-
  mar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh Puri,
  Rushang Karia, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Savan Doshi, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan Reddy, Sumanta
  Patro, Tanay Dixit, Xudong Shen, Chitta Baral, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  and Daniel Khashabi. Benchmarking generalization via in-context instructions on 1,600+ lan-
  guage tasks, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.07705.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Benchmarking generalization via in-context instructions on 1,600+ language tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.07705, 2022b.
Zirui Wang, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, and Yuan Cao. Towards zero-label language learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.09193, 2021.
Peter C Wason and J St BT Evans. Dual processes in reasoning? Cognition, 3(2):141–154, 1974.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022b.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V. Le. Self-training with noisy student
  improves imagenet classification. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01070.
Ze Yang, Linjun Shou, Ming Gong, Wutao Lin, and Daxin Jiang. Model compression with two-
  stage multi-teacher knowledge distillation for web question answering system. In Proceedings of
  the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 690–698, 2020.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene
  Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Spider: A large-scale
  human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-SQL task. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  3911–3921, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1425. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1425.
Ruiqi Zhong, Kristy Lee, Zheng Zhang, and Dan Klein. Adapting language models for zero-
  shot learning by meta-tuning on dataset and prompt collections. In Findings of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2856–2878, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
  public, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  findings-emnlp.244.   URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.
  244.


Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schu-
  urmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.


Pei Zhou, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Behnam Hedayatnia, Seokhwan Kim, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren,
  Yang Liu, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Think before you speak: Using self-talk to generate implicit
  commonsense knowledge for response generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08501, 2021.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    p*( ⋅ | t1 = A)

                                            Token A (p = 0.8)                         Token G (p = 1)


                                                                   p*( ⋅ | t1 = B)                         ̂ ⋅ | t1 = B)
                                                                                                          p*(
               Ground Truth                                                          Token C (p = 0.54)
        Teacher Output Distribu;on          Token B (p = 0.2)                        Token D (p = 0.33)    [C, C, D, E, D, C, C, C, F, D, C …. ]
         (auto-regressive nota;on)                                                   Token E (p = 0.12)   (100 i.i.d. samples from p*( ⋅ | t1 = B) )
                                                                                     Token F (p = 0.01)
                                            Other 1K tokens                           Other 1K tokens
                                                (p = 0)                                   (p = 0)


                                                  AG                       Soft Labels,
                                                  AG                                                  Approximate soft labels,
         Empirical Distribu;on of                               represented as real-valued logits represented as a list of discrete
                                                  AG            over all vocabs for each time step   tokens for each time step.
          Teacher’s Output (n=6)                  AG
                                                  BC
                                                  BF


                                             Hard Labels,
                                      represented as one discrete
                                        token for each time step



Figure 4: A concrete example used to illustrate how we performed context distillation by approx-
imately optimizing token level KL divergence. The red ones are hard labels, which are noisy. The
green ones are soft labels that are less noisy, but consumes a lot of memory. Therefore, we create
a list of samples from the soft labels distribution, and use the empirical distribution to approximate
the soft label distribution.

8       A PPENDIX
8.1       O PTIMIZING A PPROXIMATE T OKEN -L EVEL KL D IVERGENCE

We illustrate the intuition in greater details using a concrete example shown in Figure 4. The ground
truth teacher’s distribution over all output sequence is shown at the top. Ideally, we want the student’s
output token distribution pθ to match the teacher’s distribution p∗ (also referred to as the “ground
truth” in this section); however, optimizing this object exactly requires enumerating all possible
output sequences, which is computationally inefficient. Therefore, we sample n (=6 in the figure,
100 in the actual experiments) output sequences from the teacher output distribution, and our goal
is to use these output samples and the logit information to approximate p∗ and use it to efficiently
train pθ .
First, naı̈vely training the student to predict the empirical distribution (red) is noisy and sample
inefficient, since it might not contain lower probability sequences, e.g., the sequence BD, which
occurs only 2% of the time. It wastes the logit information the teacher has provided us. Therefore,
we should optimize
                                 L(θ) = L1st Token (θ) + L2nd Token (θ),
where
                                 L1st Token (θ) = KL(p∗ (t1 )||pθ (t1 )),
and
                    4                                         2
  L2nd Token (θ) = KL(p∗ (t2 |t1 = A)||pθ (t2 |t1 = A)) + KL(p∗ (t2 |t1 = B)||pθ (t2 |t1 = B)),
                    6                                         6
                                                                                                 (4)
and we got the coefficient 4/6 for the KL term for t1 = A because 4 out of 6 the samples in the
empirical distribution starts with token A.
Since our hardware does not have enough memory to hold two large models at the same time, we
need to compute the teacher’s logits on a large set of inputs, store them, and then load the student
model, load the teacher’s logits, and train the student accordingly. However, exactly computing
KL(p∗ (·|t1 = B)||pθ (·|t1 = B)) requires the full information of the probability distribution of
p∗ (·|t1 = B), which requires 200 KB in memory3 . Therefore, the teacher’s logit will incur a large
storage, which makes it impossible to fit them on the specialized hardware (i.e., GPU or TPU);
    3
        Using float32 representation and Incoder tokenizer


                                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Distilling explanations for 10 tasks from the Natural Instructions V2 test set. Each point
corresponds to a task in the figure. “In-context Margin” quantifies how much the explanations help
the teacher by measuring the difference in RougeL of TK-Instruct with and without explanations
on each task, and “Distillation Margin” quantifies how much the student learns from the teacher by
measuring the difference between the RougeL score of the student after distillation and the RougeL
score of TK-Instruct without explanations on each task. We observe a positive correlation between
the utility of the explanations to the teacher and how much our student learns.


consequently, we might need to store these information on Secondary memory, which incurs a
large communication cost. To compress the information of (p∗ (·|t1 = B) to fit on our special-
ized hardware, we need to use a compact and unbiased representation; therefore, we approximate
(p∗ (·|t1 = B) with an empirical distribution of 100 sample tokens from this distribution (as shown
in pˆ∗ Figure 4), which now only takes 0.4KB4 .

8.2      L EARNING FROM NATURAL L ANGUAGE E XPLANATIONS

Hypothesis 7: context distillation can learn from natural language explanations when they
benefit the teacher. In this experiment, we use the same teacher template as the experiment above;
in contrast, in this experiment, we define a student template that is exactly the same as the teacher,
but without explanations (Figure 2 student template B). We run context distillation to internalize the
effect of natural language explanations, using the task’s training split as D.
Ideally, we want the student to fully internalize the effect of natural language explanations and match
the teacher’s performance. To measure how much the student internalizes, we define two quantities
for each task: 1) the in-context margin, which measures the performance increase after we add the
explanations to the context, and 2) the distillation margin, which measures the performance increase
after we perform context distillation. We plot the margins for each task in Figure 5, and we observe
a positive and statistically significant correlation (r = 0.75, p = 1%). Therefore, context distillation
can learn from natural language explanations when they benefit the teacher.
Notice that for our current model, not all tasks benefit from internalizing natural language explana-
tions. However, we anticipate that future language models be more capable of responding to natural
language explanations (Kaplan et al., 2020; Scheurer et al., 2022), hence improving the performance
of context distillation.

8.3      C ONTROLLED T EXT G ENERATION WITH C ONTEXT D ISTILLATION

By distilling prompts that describe desired behavior (e.g. don’t output toxic language or only gen-
erate positive sentiment text), we can instill a form of control in language models. To test this,
we prompt our TK-Instruct model to complete negative movie reviews from the IMDB sentiment
classification dataset (Maas et al., 2011).
   4
       100 int32


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           teacher               student w/o PI                student w PI
                   sent    RougeL       ent   sent RougeL ent           sent     RougeL ent
        positive   94.0      4.8       13.0   0.24     0.6      2.5     0.96       4.8      14.4
        neutral    0.54      3.6        9.9   0.24     0.6      2.5     0.34       7.0      14.2

Table 4: Controlled generation via-context distillation. The “sent” column reports the average sen-
timent score of generations from the model, and the “ent” column refers to the model’s estimated
output entropy in nats. We see that By injecting positive control directions into the model, we can
obtain a model which outputs greater postive sentiment text without significantly sacrificing output
coherence (RougeL) or output diversity (entropy).



The teacher template contains directions to complete the movie review specifically to end the review
on a positive note, and the student template contains directions just to complete the review without
any other specification. After distillation, the student should learn to internalize the abstract control
preference that we expressed to the teacher model. We evaluate our models by querying GPT-3 for
a sentiment classification on the model’s output. We generate questions using a few-shot prompt
to TK-instruct, and take 64 distillation steps with batch size 16 and AdamW optimizer with 1e-5
learning rate and 0 weight decay.
We see in Table 4, that by applying this procedure we are able to successfully control our language
model.


8.4   FACTUAL K NOWLEDGE E DITING WITH C ONTEXT D ISTILLATION

Context distillation also enables a very natural way to edit the factual knowledge implicitly inter-
nalized by language models, by distilling a prompt that states a new or edited declarative fact. This
is in contrast to prior works (Mitchell et al., 2021; De Cao et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022) on fact
editing, which instead perform a constrained optimization procedure that directly learns an edit to
the model parameters, corresponding to the factual knowledge update.
We use the challenging Counterfact dataset from Meng et al. (Meng et al., 2022) to test our method’s
fact editing ability. Each instance of the Counterfact task involves editing the object of a given fac-
tual relation. Ideally the language model’s should consistently apply the new fact under significant
paraphrases to the original relation and context changes; the model should also not edit unrelated
knowledge. To measure this, the Counterfact dataset provides a set of paraphrase prompts (signifi-
cant paraphrases of the original fact, which the LM should consistently edit), neighborhood prompts
(un-related facts that share the same object as the original pre-edit fact, which should not change),
and attribute prompts (un-related facts which share the same object ad the new post-edit fact, which
should not change).
We perform fact editing experiments on our TK-Instruct model. For a randomly selected fact cor-
responding to each of the 34 unique relations in the Counterfact dataset, we synthesize a teacher
template, which includes a description of the fact to be edited and instructions to not edit unrelated
facts. We also use GPT-3 to help us generate a new attribute, paraphrase, and neighborhood prompt
for each fact edit to use as demonstrations of desired behavior in the prompt, alongside a natural
language explanation of why the fact edit is or is not applied in each case. We generate the inputs
P (x) using a few-shot prompt to TK-Instruct.
In Table 5, we evaluate our model on the set of paraphrase and neighborhood prompts in the
dataset. We report both the average score – 1[P (correct object) > P (incorrect object)] – and the
average magnitude – P (correct object) − P (incorrect object) – under the language model, where
P (correct object) and P (incorrect object) are the probability of the correct and incorrect objects
under the model, when conditioned on the relevant subject and relation. We see that context distil-
lation is largly able to recover the fact editing performance of the teacher, and preforms comparably
in absolute score to current SOTA approaches to fact editing – ROME (Meng et al., 2022) and
MEND (Mitchell et al., 2021) – even though our method makes slightly different assumptions and
therefore isn’t directly comparable (i.e. our prompt contains more information than these methods
use).


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        method               paraphrase           neighborhood
                                          score magnitude       score magnitude
                        Teacher            73       29           58         8
                   Pre-distill student     34       -3           80         4
                   Post-distill student    79       28           48        -2
                         GPT-3             65        3           75        17
                        MEND               65       12           38       -12
                         ROME              89       33           74         4

Table 5: Performance of context distillation on fact editing. We see that context distillation is able
to recover the paraphrase score of the teacher, but slightly under-performs in neighborhood score.


However, our prompted TK-Instruct teacher model generally performs poorly on neighborhood
prompts, which also carries over to our distilled model. We expect this issue to be largely resolved by
context distilling larger and more capable language models. To demonstrate this, we evaluate GPT-
3 on this task with the same prompt, which we can see in Table 5 performs much better on these
neighborhood prompts. While we cannot perform context distillation on GPT-3 due to limitations in
OpenAI’s API, we expect these improvements to also carry over to the distilled model.

8.5   I NSTRUCTION - TUNED T5-11 B .

Following the procedure of (Wang et al., 2022a), we fine-tuned the 11B T5 LM-adapted model (Raf-
fel et al., 2019), on Natural Instructions V2 (Wang et al., 2022a), a large dataset of 1600+ language
tasks which includes, for each task, a task description, positive and negative in-context examples,
and natural language explanations of why the output is right or wrong for each of the in-context
examples. Prior work (Wang et al., 2022a) has used this dataset to train instruction-tuned models on
prompts consisting of only 2-positive examples or only 2-positive and negative examples with ex-
planations. To maximize the flexibility of our instruction-tuned model, we instead instruction-tuned
on a distribution of randomized prompts, which consist of randomly chosen 0 to 3 positive exam-
ples, 0 to 3 negative examples, and whether there is an explanation or not. We trained the model for
9728 steps with a batch size of 16 and AdamW optimizer on 32 TPU-V3 cores. The model achieves
a RougeL score of 58 on the 2 positive, 2 negative with explanation test split, of unseen natural
instructions tasks.

8.6   F INETUNING L ANGUAGE M ODEL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We run all experiments on 32 TPU-V3 cores, with the model parameters and optimizer states for
fine-tuning sharded equally across all cores. Our codebase is built in Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018;
Sabne, 2020) using the PJIT function to handle the model parallel training and inference.

8.7   G ENERAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

For all experiments, except where denoted otherwise, we distill on 4096 examples for 1 epoch with
batch size 16 with AdamW optimizer. We use a learning rate of 1e-5 with TK-Instruct and 1e-4 with
Incoder. We use 0 weight decay for all experiments.

8.8   D ISTILLING C ONCRETE E XAMPLES D ETAILS

Gradient descent details (hypothesis 4). For gradient descent we fit all training examples into
a single batch and train for a 25 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-5.
We report the performance of the epoch with the highest average exact set match score across all
databases.

Distilling long contexts details (hypothesis 5). To estimate the per-token log-probabilities of the
y sampled from the teacher ensemble for distillation, we average the probabilities of each y under
8 teacher prompts. We estimate the teacher performance by performing greedy decoding on the
ensemble of 8 prompts uniformly sampled from the set of all 4 choose 8 teacher prompts. For each


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


database, we distill two students with different in-context examples in the prompt, and we report the
average exact-set match accuracy for both of these students.

8.9   D ISTILLING S TEP - BY-S TEP R EASONING D ETAILS

Distilling scratchpads with T5-small (hypothesis 6). All baselines were trained for 1000 epochs
– except “Scratchpad then Direct” which was trained for 1000 epochs to predict scratchpads and
then 1000 epochs to directly predict the answer – with a batch size of 8, a learning rate of 3e-4, and
AdamW optimizer. We report performance at the end of training on 10k unseen addition problems.

Transfering step-by-step reasoning details (hypothesis 7). Since TK-Instruct cannot success-
fully do scratchpad addition from a few shot prompt, to initialize the teacher, we first fine-tune TK-
Instruct on the same distribution of 500 scratchpad examples from the previous experiment mixed in
with 4096 randomly selected examples from the “2 positive” split of Natural Instructions-V2 train-
ing set, such that the teacher doesn’t lose its ability to respond to prompts. We train the teacher for
32 epochs, at which point it achieves 97% accuracy on 2000 held-out scratchpad addition problems.


                                                  18
