Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


NOTELA: A G ENERALIZABLE M ETHOD FOR S OURCE
F REE D OMAIN A DAPTATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is a compelling problem as it allows to
         leverage any off-the-shelf model without requiring access to its original training
         set and adapts it using only unlabelled data. While several SFDA approaches
         have recently been proposed, their evaluation focuses on a narrow set of distribu-
         tion shifts for vision tasks, and their generalizability outside of that scope has not
         yet been investigated. We put those recent approaches to the test by evaluating
         them on a new set of challenging—due to extreme covariate and label shift—
         and naturally-occurring distribution shifts in the audio domain. We study the
         task of adapting a bird species classifier trained on focalized recordings of bird
         songs to datasets of passive recordings for various geographical locations. Inter-
         estingly, we find that some recent SFDA methods underperform doing no adap-
         tation at all. Drawing inspiration from those findings and insights, we propose a
         new method that improves on noisy student approaches by adjusting the teacher’s
         pseudo-labels through Laplacian regularization. Our approach enjoys increased
         stability and significantly better performance on several of our proposed distribu-
         tion shifts. We then look back at SFDA benchmarks in the vision domain and find
         that our approach is competitive with the state-of-the-art there as well.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has made significant progress on a wide range of application areas. An important
contributing factor has been the availability of increasingly larger datasets and models (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2022). A downside of this trend is that training state-of-the-art models has also
become increasingly expensive. This is not only wasteful from an environmental perspective, but
also makes the training of such models inaccessible to some practitioners due to the prohibitive
resources required, or potential difficulties with data access. On the other hand, directly reusing
already-trained models is often not desirable, as their performance can degrade significantly in the
presence of distribution shifts during deployment (Geirhos et al., 2020). Therefore, a fruitful avenue
is designing adaptation methods for pre-trained models to succeed on a new target domain, without
requiring access to the original (source) training data, i.e., “source-free”. Preferably this adaptation
can be performed unsupervised. This is the problem of source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) that
we target in this work.
Several models have been proposed recently to tackle SFDA. However, we argue that evaluation in
this area is a significant challenge in and of itself: We desire SFDA methods that are general, in that
they can be used for different applications to adapt an application-appropriate pre-trained model
to cope with a wide range of distribution shifts. Unfortunately, the standard evaluation protocol
only considers a narrow set of shifts in computer vision tasks, leaving us with a limited view of
the relative merits among different SFDA methods, as well as their generalizability. In this work,
we address this limitation by studying a new set of distribution shifts. We expand on the existing
evaluation methods, in order to gain as much new information as possible about SFDA methods.
We also argue that we should target distribution shifts that are naturally-occurring. This maximizes
the chances of the resulting research advances being directly translated into progress in solving
real-world problems.
To that end, we propose to study a new set of distribution shifts in the audio domain. Specifically,
we use a bird species classifier that was trained on a large dataset of bird song recordings as our pre-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Relationship of problem settings. x and y denote inputs and labels, and s and t “source”
and “target”, respectively (note that in some cases, as in DG, s might be a union of source domains /
environments). For TTA and SFDA, the ∗ in their training data and loss reflects that they are entirely
agnostic to how source training is performed, allowing the use of any off-the-shelf model.

                                            DA                      DG                 TTT              TTA      SFDA
                                        s    s    t                 s    s              s     s
     Data used for training           x ,y ,x                    x ,y                  x ,y              ∗        ∗
    Data used for adaptation          xs , y s , x t            xs , y s , xt           xt               xt       xt
         Training loss         L(xs , y s ) + L(xs , xt )       L(xs , y s )    L(xs , y s ) + L(xt )     ∗        ∗
        Adaptation loss                    —                       —                   L(xt )           L(xt )   L(xt )


trained model. This dataset consists of focalized recordings, where the song of the identified bird
is at the foreground of the recording. Our goal is to adapt this model to a set of passive recordings
(soundscapes). The shift from focalized to soundscape recordings is substantial, as the recordings
in the latter often feature much lower signal-to-noise ratio, several birds vocalizing at once, as well
as significant distractors and environmental noise like rain or wind. In addition, the soundscapes we
consider originate from different geographical locations, inducing extreme label shifts.
Our rationale for choosing to study these shifts is threefold. Firstly, they are challenging, as evi-
denced by the poor performance on soundscape datasets compared to focalized recordings observed
by Goëau et al. (2018); Kahl et al. (2021). Secondly, they are naturally occurring and any progress
in addressing them can support ecological monitoring and biodiversity conservation efforts and re-
search. Finally, our resulting evaluation framework is “just different enough” from the established
one: It differs in terms of i) the modality (vision vs. audio), ii) the problem setup (single-label vs
multi-label classification), and iii) the degree and complexity of shifts (we study extreme covariate
shifts that co-occur with extreme label-space shifts). Existing SFDA methods designed for vision
tasks can also be evaluated using this new framework, since audio inputs are often represented as
spectrograms and thus can be treated as images.
We perform a thorough empirical investigation of established SFDA methods on our new shifts.
Interestingly, not only do some of the methods not improve the performance of the pre-trained
model, they often degrade it. Studying this striking finding generates insights that lead us to make
substantial modelling improvements. Notably, in the presence of extreme shifts, we observe that the
confidence of the pre-trained model drops significantly and its calibration is poor as a result. This
in turn poses a challenge for entropy minimization. While Noisy Student (Xie et al., 2020) copes
best with this shift, it exhibits poor stability, necessitating careful early-stopping. This violates
our assumption that labelled target data is unavailable. Our insight is that we can leverage the
model’s feature space as another “source of truth”, as this space carries rich information about the
relationship between examples. We propose Noisy Student Teacher with Laplacian Adjustment
(NOTELA), a new model that enhances the Noisy Student model with a Laplacian regularizer. This
model enjoys significantly increased performance on our new shifts as well as increased stability
and resilience to model miscalibration. Closing the loop, we also evaluate our model on established
vision benchmarks and observe that it is competitive with the state-of-the-art there; in fact largely
surpassing it on two datasets.


2     R ELATED WORK

Our discussion of related work is summarized in Table 1.
Domain adaptation (DA). DA assumes a setting in which labelled data is available for a source
domain, and unlabelled data for a target domain. The goal is to maximize performance on the
target domain. DA methods can be roughly divided into three types (Sagawa et al., 2022): domain-
invariant training (also called feature alignment) aims to ensure that the features generated by the
model for the source and target domain are indistinguishable by some metric (Sun et al., 2016;
Sun & Saenko, 2016; Tzeng et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015; Ganin et al., 2016; Long et al., 2018;


                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tzeng et al., 2017; Sankaranarayanan et al., 2018); self-training involves generating pseudo-labels
for the unlabelled data (Xie et al., 2020); and self-supervision involves training an unsupervised/self-
supervised model, later finetuned or jointly trained with a supervised objective (Shen et al., 2022).

Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) and Test-time Adaptation (TTA). These methods
additionally assume that the source data itself is not available, e.g., because of resource, privacy,
or intellectual property concerns. The distinction between SFDA and TTA is subtle: the latter is
transductive, motivated by an online setup where adaptation happens on (unlabelled) target examples
as they appear and evaluation is subsequently performed on the same examples. SFDA considers
an offline adaptation phase and the adapted model is then evaluated on a different set of held-out
examples. In practice, though, the methods developed for either are similar enough to be applicable
to both. Related problems also include black-box (Zhang et al., 2021), online (Yang et al., 2020),
continual (Wang et al., 2022b), and universal (Kundu et al., 2020) source-free domain adaptation.
Of the three types of DA methods discussed above, self-training most easily transfers to the SFDA
and TTA settings (Liang et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021), and in this work we focus on this category
since it’s also the most generalizable to new modalities. Other methods use output prediction uncer-
tainty for adaptation (Yang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Roy et al., 2022) or generative training
to transform target domain examples or synthesize new ones (Li et al., 2020; Hou & Zheng, 2020;
Kurmi et al., 2021; Morerio et al., 2020; Sahoo et al., 2020). Interestingly, Boudiaf et al. (2022)
show that previous methods suffer from large hyperparameter sensitivity, and may degrade the per-
formance of the source model if not tuned in a scenario-specific manner; an unrealistic setting that
violates the assumption of unavailability of labelled target data.

Test-time Training (TTT). TTT (Sun et al., 2020) is a related problem where, like in TTA, a
pre-trained model is adapted on the target test examples using a self-supervised loss, before making
a prediction on those examples. Unlike SFDA and TTA, though, TTT modifies the source training
phase by incorporating a similar self-supervised loss there too.

Domain generalization (DG). In DG (Wang et al., 2022a), like in SFDA, the target domain is
unknown. However, unlike SFDA, no adaptation set is available. Instead the aim is to train a
robust source model which works directly on new target distributions. Another important distinction
is that DG assumes that information about the source domain is available during deployment on
the target domain. A popular strategy for DG is to increase the source model’s generalizablity by
exposing it to diverse “conditions” at training time via domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017) or
adversarial data augmentation (Volpi et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2020), or to learn domain-invariant
representations by training to match all available training “environments” (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Creager et al., 2021), minimizing the worst-case loss over a set of such environments (Sagawa et al.,
2020), or decomposing the latent space or model weights into domain-specific and domain-general
components (Ilse et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2012).

3     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARY I NVESTIGATION
3.1   P ROBLEM FORMULATION

Notation. In SFDA for classification, we assume access to a pre-trained model fθ : X → RC ,
where X denotes the input space and C represents the number of classes. This model was trained on
a source dataset Ds sampled from a source distribution ps (x), and needs to be adapted to a shifted
target distribution pt (x) 6= ps (x). We assume we only have access to unlabelled data Dadapt
                                                                                        t     sampled
                                                                        adapt
from pt . The goal is to formulate an adaptation procedure A : (θs , Dt ) → θt that produces an
adapted version of the original model using the unlabelled dataset. The adapted model’s performance
is then evaluated on held-out data Dtest
                                       t sampled from pt .


Single- vs. multi-label classification. SFDA methods have traditionally addressed single-label
classification, in which exactly one category of interest is present in a given sample. Multi-label
classification relaxes this assumption by considering that any number of categories (or none) may
be present in a given sample, which is common in real-world data. In the single-label case the
output probability for sample xi is noted pi,θ = softmax(fθ (xi )) ∈ [0, 1]C . In the multi-label


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


case, the predictions for each class are treated as separate binary classification problems, resulting
                                        >
in pi,θ = [σ(fθ (xi )), 1 − σ(fθ (xi ))] ∈ [0, 1]2×C , where σ is the logistic function.

3.2   B IOACOUSTICS TASK

We use Xeno-Canto (XC; Vellinga & Planqué, 2015) as the source dataset Ds for bird species clas-
sification in the audio domain. XC is a large collection of user-contributed recordings of wild birds
from across the world. Recordings are focal (targeted recordings of an individual, captured in natu-
ral conditions, as opposed to the passive capture of all ambient sounds). Each recording is labeled
with the species of the targeted individual; other birds may appear in the recording.
To evaluate adaptation to distribution shifts, we use multiple collections of passive (also called
soundscape) recordings from various geographical locations as our target datasets. The soundscape
datasets exhibit major covariate and label distribution shift from the source dataset. By virtue of
being passively recorded, the annotated species are more occluded by environmental noise and dis-
tractors. Additionally, the geographical concentration of the datasets means that only a subset of
XC’s large number of species is present in each dataset, and the label distribution of those species
does not necessarily follow that of XC. As a result, models trained on focal recordings have trouble
generalizing to soundscapes recordings (Goëau et al., 2018; Kahl et al., 2021).

3.3   C ATEGORIZATION OF APPROACHES

We will evaluate several methods which have been proposed both for (source-free) domain adapta-
tion on our new shifts. We choose to investigate methods that fit two criteria: generality across tasks
and modalities, and high performance. In this section we present our categorization of methods we
consider, which we then build upon in Section 4.

Entropy Minimization (EM). These methods enforce the cluster assumption, i.e., that the bound-
aries described by the model’s head should not cross any high-density region of samples in the
feature space. Geometrically, this enforces large margins between the classifier’s boundaries and
the provided samples by encouraging the model to output increasingly confident predictions for the
unlabelled samples (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2004).
We evaluate TENT (Wang et al., 2021) as a representative example of the EM approach. TENT
adapts the source model by minimizing the entropy of its predictions though tuning the normal-
ization layers’ channel-wise scaling and shifting parameters, and updating the layers’ population
statistics estimates accordingly.

Teacher-Student (TS). This is a self-training paradigm where a teacher provides pseudo-labels for
the unlabelled examples, and a student is then trained to predict them. More formally, TS minimizes
                                    N
                                                          !
                                 1 X >
                                       y log pi,τ (θ) , s.t 1> yi = 1, yi ≥ 0 ,

                  min       Tr −                                                                (1)
              yi ,...,yN ,θ      N i=1 i
where yi and pi,τ (θ) represent the pseudo-label and the model’s soft predictions for the sample xi .
The pseudo-label is dependent on the model’s weight’s, θ, which are transformed using a weight
transformation, τ , which is typically set to the identity in TS methods.
Optimization happens in an alternating fashion between student and teacher updates. Specifically,
the teacher-step minimizes equation 1 w.r.t the pseudo-labels {yi , . . . , yN } while the student-step
minimizes equation 1 w.r.t θ using gradient descent. Different TS methods utilize soft (Xie et al.,
2020) or hard (Lee et al., 2013) pseudo-labels.
Intuitively, TS can be seen as an indirect way of minimizing entropy: By training to predict each
example’s pseudo-label (i.e., its most likely label, based on its confidence), the model reinforces its
own predictions, thereby increasing its confidence. At the same time, though, it has a consistency
maximization flavour: Because of the alternation between teacher and student updates, predicting
the correct pseudo-label requires consistency throughout time.
We consider two methods from this category in our investigation: First, pseudo-labelling (PL;
Lee et al., 2013) assigns pseudo-labels to unlabelled examples by picking the maximum-probability


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     NOTELA             Pseudo-Labelling      Dropout Student      SHOT           TENT        AdaBN

                    Sierra Nevada                              Powdermill                                 Hawaii
                                                  0.6
      0.6                                                                               0.6
      0.5                                         0.5                                   0.5
                                                                                        0.4
      0.4                                         0.4
                                                                                        0.3
      0.3                                         0.3                                   0.2
mAP


                    Caples Creek                            SapSucker Woods                              Colombia
                                                  0.5                                  0.50
      0.5                                         0.4
                                                                                       0.45
                                                  0.3
      0.4                                                                              0.40
                                                  0.2
                                                                                       0.35
      0.3                                         0.1
            0   2      4      6     8       10          0   2     4      6    8   10          0    2      4    6      8   10
                                                             Adaptation epoch

Figure 1: All but one SFDA method fail to consistently improve the source model in terms of mAP
on Dtest
     t    across distribution shifts1 . Dropout Student succeeds, but only through early stopping,
which is infeasible in the SFDA setting. NOTELA achieves consistently stable convergence while
improving upon Dropout Student’s performance.


class according to the trained model. In the context of SFDA, this translates into assigning pseudo-
labels to unlabelled target domain examples using the model trained on the source dataset. Second,
SHOT (Liang et al., 2020) adapts the feature extractor to the target domain while freezing the
classifier head. It performs adaptation through a combination of nearest-centroid pseudo-labelling
and an information maximization loss.

Denoising Teacher-Student (DTS). This method builds upon the TS framework by adding some
form of “noise” to the student, while keeping the teacher clean. Intuitively, predicting clean pseudo-
labels from noisy student predictions leads to maximizing another type of consistency: between
different views of the same inputs. Mathematically, DTS differs from TS by setting τ 6= Id during
the student’s forward pass, while keeping it set to the identity during the teacher’s forward pass.
Ideas related to DTS have been explored in semi-supervised (Xie et al., 2020; Miyato et al., 2018)
and self-supervised learning (Grill et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). Notably, Noisy Student (Xie et al.,
2020) is a popular representative that we build upon. However, to keep the approach light, both in
terms of computation and hyper-parameter load, we consider a simplified model in our investigation,
where the same network is used for both the teacher and the student, and dropout is the sole source
of noise. We refer to this variant as dropout student (DS). Our proposed model which will be
presented later on also falls in this category.

3.4     P REVIOUS APPROACHES STRUGGLE ON OUR CHALLENGING SHIFTS

While EM has shown strong performance on various tasks (Wang et al., 2021; Vu et al., 2019), it
performed badly on the new shifts we studied. We hypothesize that this is due to a combination of
the extremity of distribution shift, as well as the multi-label nature of our classification problem.
Specifically, in the single-label scenario minimizing entropy leads to forcing the model to choose
a single class for each example, in an increasingly confident manner. On the other hand, in our
multi-label scenario there is no constraint that a class should be chosen. This fact, combined with
the potential poor calibration and underconfidence caused by very large distribution shifts (Figure 2,
(1,2)) can drive the model to a collapsed state where all class probabilities are zero (Figure 2, (3)).
   1
     Note that this analysis’s purpose is to illustrate the failure modes of SFDA methods; the above plots cannot
be used for hyperparameter selection because we are looking at the test sets.


                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In fact, we find in subsection 5.1 that TENT underperforms the baseline of no adaptation on several
datasets and hyperparameter settings due to these issues. Later, we will show that both SHOT and
pseudo-labelling perform better, but neither systematically prevents the model from degenerating
(see Figure 1). In contrast, we find that DTS works significantly better on our challenging shifts,
but suffers from stability issues and necessitates a precise early-stopping procedure. This is an
important drawback for SFDA, where obtaining a dataset-specific (labelled) validation set may not
be possible. Motivated by these findings, we next present our approach to SFDA that increases both
the performance and stability of DTS methods.

4   L APLACIAN A DJUSTMENT
                                                                           (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)
In this section, we introduce Noisy                                     Source data    Target data        After EM   After NOTELA
TEacher student with Laplacian Ad-
justment (NOTELA), a new method                                 10 2


                                          Model probabilities
we designed for SFDA, inspired by                               10 6
the desiderata of stability and ro-
                                                                10 10
bustness to very large distribution
shifts and different problem settings                           10 14
(single- and multi-label, different hy-                         10 18
perparameter configurations).                                            am o
                                                                        am fi
                                                                               d


                                                                                       am o
                                                                                      am fi
                                                                                             d


                                                                                                      am o
                                                                                                     am fi
                                                                                                            d


                                                                                                                      am o
                                                                                                                     am fi
                                                                                                                            d
                                                                             r


                                                                                           r


                                                                                                          r


                                                                                                                          r
                                                                           ere


                                                                                         ere


                                                                                                        ere


                                                                                                                        ere
                                                                            eg


                                                                                          eg


                                                                                                         eg


                                                                                                                         eg
We begin by exploiting the intuitions
                                                                           ec


                                                                                         ec


                                                                                                        ec


                                                                                                                        ec
                                                                   am


                                                                                      am


                                                                                                     am


                                                                                                                     am
obtained from our preliminary inves-
tigation. Firstly, EM may not be ap- Figure 2: (1) and (2): When shifted to a new domain , the
propriate in the face of severe dis- source model exhibits poorer calibration than on the origi-
tribution shifts which result in very nal source model, as seen from the lower per-class probabil-
poorly calibrated models. On the ity distributions assigned by the model. (3): Applying en-
other hand, the fact that TS consis- tropy minimization only worsens the problem, and leads to
tently improves upon EM signals that general collapse. (4): Our method largely boosts the source
consistency maximization is a useful model without affecting model calibration. Species names
“auxiliary task”, perhaps due to be- are represented using their corresponding eBird (Sullivan
ing more robust to miscalibration. In- et al., 2009; 2014) species code.
deed, the fact that DTS further im-
proves, with the additional consis-
tency maximization “task” between clean and noisy views, further strengthens this hypothesis. Tak-
ing DTS as our starting place then, we seek to further improve it by utilizing another source of
information that we hypothesize is also robust to miscalibration. Specifically, our insight is that,
while the head of the model may be poorly calibrated, its feature space may still carry useful infor-
mation about the relationship between examples. In fact, we find that adapting only the linear head
using labels on the validation domain described in section 5 boosts the source model by 30% in
mAP.
Stemming from this observation, we advocate probing the feature space directly as an auxiliary
source of truth. Drawing inspiration from classic ideas on manifold regularization (Belkin et al.,
2006), NOTELA instantiates this idea by encouraging that nearby points in the feature space be
assigned similar pseudo-labels. We hypothesize that this may also help with stability, since the
targets that the student is asked to predict will vary less over time, due to the slower-changing
similarity in feature space.
Formalization. We augment the denoising teacher-student formulation in equation 1 with a Lapla-
cian regularization:
                                                                                       
                          N                      N                    N X N
                       1 X                    α X                 λ  X
                            y> log pi,τ (θ) +       y> log(yi ) −            wij yi> yj  (2)

       min       Tr −
   yi ,...,yN ,θ       N i=1 i                N i=1 i             N i=1 j=1

There are two changes in Equation 2 compared to Equation 1. First, we introduce a scalar weight
α ∈ R that controls the softness of pseudo-labels, which we treat as a hyperparameter. Second, we
have added the third term that represents a Laplacian regularizer. The value wij denotes the affinity
between samples i and j and is obtained by the penultimate layer of the network.


                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Optimization. Disregarding the pairwise Laplacian term allows to directly obtain a closed-form
                                      1/α
solution to Equation 2, namely yi ∝ pi . However, adding the pairwise affinities makes optimiza-
tion more challenging. We simplify the problem by linearizing the Laplacian term, which allows us
to recover a closed-form solution:
                                                               
                                                     N
                                      1/α         λ  X
                                yi ∝ pi     exp         wij pj  .                           (3)
                                                  α j=1

The full proof of Equation 3 can be found in the Appendix. Furthermore, we show in Appendix
A.6 that under the assumption of positive semi-definite affinity matrix (wij ), Equation 3 becomes
an instance of a concave-convex procedure (CCP; Yuille & Rangarajan, 2003).
Complexity. Theoretically, the added Laplacian regularization scales quadratically in the number
of samples N . In practice, we set wij = wji = d1 where 0 < d ≤ k is the number of mutual
k-nearest neighbours (Brito et al., 1997) of samples i and j, and wij = wji = 0 if these samples are
not in each other’s k-nearest neighbours lists. Finding the k-nearest neighbours can be done with
O(N log N ) average time complexity. Equation 3 scales as O(N Ck), but can be fully vectorized
across samples.

5       E XPERIMENTS
Data processing and source model. XC is a large dataset containing a total of 10,932 species. We
process XC recordings by resampling the audio to 32 kHz and extracting 6-second slices of relevant
audio (see Appendix A.2 for details). We process soundscape recordings by extracting 5-second
slices using the provided bounding-box labels (see Appendix A.3 for details).
During training, we take a random 5-second crop and the audio signal’s gain is normalized to a
random value between 0.15 and 0.25. A technique similar to LEAF (Zeghidour et al., 2021) is used
to convert the waveform into a spectrogram. Unlike LEAF, we do not learn a Gaussian lowpass filter
and instead apply the Gabor filters with a stride of 320. The resulting output is a power-spectrogram
with a time resolution of 100 Hz. For each soundscape target dataset, we use a 75-25% split to obtain
Dadapt
  t    , used to adapt the model, and Dtest
                                         t   , used to evaluate the adapted model. These datasets are
described in more detail in the appendix.
The most comprehensive bird species classifier we are aware of is BirdNet (Kahl, 2019; Kahl et al.,
2021), however the publicly available checkpoints are trained with a combination of focal and sound-
scape recordings (including many of the test sets considered in this paper),2 which is incompatible
with our SFDA methodology. We instead use an EfficientNet-B1 (Tan & Le, 2019) model we trained
ourselves. The output of this model is flattened and projected into a 1280-dimensional embedding
space. In addition to species prediction, the model is trained with three auxiliary losses for the bird’s
order, family, and genus (each having a 0.25 weight).

Metrics. We use sample-wise mean average precision (mAP) and class-wise mean average preci-
sion (cmAP) for evaluation. Both of these metrics are threshold-free and appropriate for multi-label
scenarios. Each can be interpreted as a multi-label generalization of mean reciprocal rank, where
ranking of model logits is performed either per-sample (for mAP) or per-class (for cmAP). See
subsection A.4 in the appendix for formal definitions.
The mAP metric measures the ability of the model to assign higher logits to any species present
in an example. By contrast, cmAP is the mean of the model’s per-species classification quality
(similar to the average of per-species AUC scores). Note that class-averaging in cmAP corrects for
class imbalance, while mAP reflects the natural data distribution. To avoid noisy measurements we
only consider species with at least five vocalizations in the dataset when computing cmAP.

Baselines. In addition to TENT, pseudo-labelling (PL), SHOT, and dropout student (DS),
which we described in section 3.3, we also consider AdaBN (Li et al., 2018). This method re-
computes the population statistics of batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) layers in the
pre-trained model using the unlabelled target dataset.
    2
        Personal correspondence with the authors.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Test results on the 6 test target domains (averaged over 5 random seeds) using the optimal
hyperparameter configuration found on the validation domain. See Figure 1 for convergence plots.

               S. Nevada            Powdermill        Hawai’i                 Caples               SSW         Colombia
 Method
             mAP      cmAP        mAP    cmAP     mAP      cmAP        mAP       cmAP       mAP      cmAP    mAP    cmAP
 Source      56.2     36.4        51.1   32.2     51.8     33.2        48.5      41.2       42.2     24.7    48.9   37.7
 AdaBN       46.6     34.6        37.5   29.8     28.5     27.7        40.3      38.3       37.7     25.4    47.1   36.1
 SHOT        57.8     37.8        53.8   32.5     57.6     29.0        52.1      43.0       36.8     20.0    49.2   38.1
 TENT        26.5     25.2        24.9   23.9     16.4     16.1        30.2      25.4       8.1      5.8     32.8   29.3
 PL          57.9     38.2        54.8   32.5     25.7     22.6        49.3      42.0       51.6     29.0    49.3   38.0
 DS          59.8     37.6        52.1   32.2     62.7     36.4        56.3      43.0       47.5     26.2    51.1   40.6
 NOTELA      65.4     40.0        61.6   33.7     65.8     35.4        58.2      44.2       54.1     31.2    52.5   40.6



          Table 3: Validation and ablation results from the High Sierras bioacoustics dataset.

 Method        mAP         cmAP                  Dropout        Softness        Laplace Reg.        mAP     cmAP
 Source        60.7        46.1                                                                     60.7    46.0
 AdaBN         48.4        35.8                                    3                    3           55.8    44.8
 SHOT          65.4        48.7                     3                                   3           70.2    48.6
 TENT          50.7        40.7                     3              3                                72.7    47.9
 PL            65.2        47.9                     3              3                    3           75.0    50.9
 DS            72.7        47.9
 NOTELA        75.0        50.9          (b) Dropout Noise, Softness and Laplacian regularization ingredients act
                                         symbiotically to provide the best performances. Removing any ingredi-
(a) Best validation results for          ent leads to significant drops in performances. The first row reflects the
each method on High Sierras.             source model’s performance (no adaptation).



Hyperparameter selection. SFDA is fully unsupervised and hence there is no annotated valida-
tion set for each target domain. Therefore, we approach hyperparameter selection in a non-standard
way: We assume we have one annotated domain which can be used for validation and finding the
optimal hyper-parameter configuration. Those hyper-parameters are then fixed, and used to evalu-
ate each method’s generalization ability on held-out target domains. We employ the High Sierras
dataset for validation and use the remaining domains described in subsection 3.2 for testing only. For
every method, we search over hyperparameters such as the learning rate, the subset of parameters to
adapt, and whether to use dropout during adaptation. Additionally, we search over specific hyper-
parameters such as the β weight in SHOT, the confidence threshold in PL, or the weights {α, λ} in
NOTELA. The overview of tuned hyperparameters can be found in the appendix.

5.1   TAKEAWAYS

Existing SFDA methods can degrade the baseline. We found neither AdaBN nor TENT were
able to improve the source model, regardless of the hyperparameter configuration or the domain. As
for SHOT and PL, we were able to find hyper-parameters that improved over the source model’s
performance on the validation set, as observed in Table 3a. We observed however that the gains did
not consistently translate to the test domains. For example, the PL method was able to boost the
source model by 5% mAP on the validation domain, while degrading it by more than 25% mAP on
the Hawai’i test domain.
NOTELA improves stability and performance. We found that all existing methods displayed a
plateau followed by a degradation of the model’s performance. This is a serious drawback given the
absence of a domain-specific labelled validation set for tuning the training schedule. This is true
even for Dropout Student, which was the only previous approach able to consistency outperform
the baseline of no adaptation. In contrast, we find that NOTELA not only addresses these stability
issues, as demonstrated by Figure 1, but also outperforms all considered baselines, setting the state
of the art on our new challenging shifts.
Laplacian regularization, softness, and noise are symbiotic. Following our previous observa-
tions, we try to gain insights into the relative importance of each ingredient in NOTELA. We find in


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Top-1 accuracy (averaged over 5 random seeds) on vision test benchmarks. NOTELA ap-
proaches best methods on CIFAR-10-C, and surpasses them on ImageNet variants. † : Aggregat-
ing confidence intervals across the 15 corruptions is not trivial. Instead, we report per-corruption
confidence-intervals in Appendix subsection A.7

                                            CIFAR-10-C†
      Method                                                                ImageNet-R     ImageNet-Sketch
                                  (Average across severity 5 corruptions)

      Source                                     56.66                       23.16 ± 0.0     21.67 ± 0.0
      AdaBN (Li et al., 2018)                    80.10                      24.54 ± 0.08    22.55 ± 0.14
      SHOT (Liang et al., 2020)                  82.62                      25.76 ± 0.15     24.9 ± 0.75
      TENT (Wang et al., 2021)                   83.41                      28.55 ± 0.09    25.04 ± 0.15
      PL (Lee et al., 2013)                      83.85                       26.16 ± 1.6     0.76 ± 0.34
      Dropout Student                            82.17                      29.15 ± 0.05    27.68 ± 0.08
      NOTELA (ours)                              83.67                      35.23 ± 0.14    32.50 ± 0.09



Table 3b that the presence of the noise is crucial, and that removing it leads to worse performances
than the non-adapted model. Furthermore, removing softness in labels (α = 0) or Laplacian Regu-
larization (λ = 0) significantly under-performs the full method, thereby highlighting the symbiosis
of all three components.

5.2    NOTELA P ERFORMS S TRONGLY ON V ISION TASKS

Since our objective is to develop a general approach, we turn back to vision to see how NOTELA
fares in that modality.
Data. We evaluate on several robustness benchmarks, most of which are used by prior SFDA ap-
proaches. First, we use CIFAR-10-C and ImageNet-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019), a collection
of corruptions applied to the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet test sets, spanning 15 corruption types and 5
levels of severity. Second, we use ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021), which consists of 30,000
images of 200 of ImageNet’s classes obtained by querying for renditions such as “art”, “cartoon”,
“graffiti”, etc. Finally, we experiment on ImageNet-Sketch (Wang et al., 2019) consisting of 50,000
images constructed by querying Google Images for “sketch of {class}” for all ImageNet classes.
Models. We adopt model architectures from previous works, namely a ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016)
for ImageNet benchmarks and a Wide ResNet 28-10 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) for CIFAR-
10 benchmarks. We use the same CIFAR-10 Wide ResNet model checkpoint (provided by Croce
et al., 2021) as Wang et al. (2021) for fair comparison. We reimplemented all SFDA methods to
ensure they could be tuned and evaluated in the exact same conditions. For each vision dataset we
again use a 75-25% split to obtain Dadapt
                                     t     and Dtest
                                                t    . We use the most challenging corruption from
ImageNet-C (contrast) as the validation domain for vision tasks. We report top-1 accuracy for all
vision SFDA benchmarks.
Results. From Table 4, we find that NOTELA is very competititve on vision benchmarks, despite
the change in modality and the single-label setup. It performs on-par with the top performer on
CIFAR-10-C, but sets the new state-of-the-art on ImageNet-R and ImageNet-Sketch domains.

5.3    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we investigate the generalization of recent source-free domain adaptation methods in a
new modality to a new and challenging set of distribution shifts: going from focal to passive record-
ings of wild bird vocalizations for multi-label audio classification. While trying to adapt it, we made
the surprising observation that recent approaches sometimes degrade the source model. Building on
our observations, we proposed an approach called NOTELA, which builds upon Dropout Student
by incorporating a Laplacian regularizer when computing the Teacher’s pseudo-labels and offer-
ing a lightweight optimization procedure. Our proposed approach greatly outperformed existing
SFDA approaches on both the studied bioacoustic domains, as well as the established vision SFDA
benchmarks. We believe that NOTELA represents a promising first step towards making SFDA
approaches applicable to a wide range of modalities and distribution shifts.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Mikhail Belkin, Partha Niyogi, and Vikas Sindhwani. Manifold regularization: A geometric frame-
 work for learning from labeled and unlabeled examples. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
 2006.
Malik Boudiaf, Romain Mueller, Ismail Ben Ayed, and Luca Bertinetto. Parameter-free online test-
 time adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, 2022.
M.R. Brito, E.L. Chávez, A.J. Quiroz, and J.E. Yukich. Connectivity of the mutual k-nearest-
 neighbor graph in clustering and outlier detection. Statistics & Probability Letters, 35(1):33–42,
 1997. ISSN 0167-7152. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7152(96)00213-1. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167715296002131.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2020.
Lauren M Chronister, Tessa A Rhinehart, Aidan Place, and Justin Kitzes. An annotated set of audio
  recordings of eastern north american birds containing frequency, time, and species information,
  2021.
Elliot Creager, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Francesco Croce, Maksym Andriushchenko, Vikash Sehwag, Edoardo Debenedetti, Nicolas Flam-
  marion, Mung Chiang, Prateek Mittal, and Matthias Hein. Robustbench: a standardized adver-
  sarial robustness benchmark. In NeurIPS Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Madhav Desai and Vasant Rao. A characterization of the smallest eigenvalue of a graph. Journal of
 Graph Theory, 18(2):181–194, 1994.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Hervé Goëau, Stefan Kahl, Hervé Glotin, Robert Planqué, Willem-Pier Vellinga, and Alexis Joly.
  Overview of BirdCLEF 2018: monospecies vs. soundscape bird identification. In Working Notes
  of CLEF 2018-Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum, 2018.
Yves Grandvalet and Yoshua Bengio. Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2004.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2016.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common cor-
  ruptions and perturbations. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In Pro-
  ceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Yunzhong Hou and Liang Zheng. Source free domain adaptation with image translation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2008.07514, 2020.

Maximilian Ilse, Jakub M Tomczak, Christos Louizos, and Max Welling. Diva: Domain invari-
 ant variational autoencoders. In Proceedings of the Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep
 Learning,, 2020.

Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2015.

Stefan Kahl. Identifying Birds by Sound: Large-scale Acoustic Event Recognition for Avian Activity
  Monitoring. PhD thesis, Chemnitz University of Technology, 2019.

Stefan Kahl, Connor M Wood, Maximilian Eibl, and Holger Klinck. BirdNET: A deep learning
  solution for avian diversity monitoring. Ecological Informatics, 61:101236, 2021.

Stefan Kahl, Russell Charif, and Holger Klinck. A collection of fully-annotated soundscape record-
  ings from the Northeastern United States, August 2022a. URL https://doi.org/10.
  5281/zenodo.7079380.

Stefan Kahl, Connor M. Wood, Philip Chaon, M. Zachariah Peery, and Holger Klinck. A collection
  of fully-annotated soundscape recordings from the Western United States, September 2022b. URL
  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7050014.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Aditya Khosla, Tinghui Zhou, Tomasz Malisiewicz, Alexei A Efros, and Antonio Torralba. Undoing
  the damage of dataset bias. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision,
  2012.

Youngeun Kim, Donghyeon Cho, Kyeongtak Han, Priyadarshini Panda, and Sungeun Hong. Do-
  main adaptation without source data. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.

Jogendra Nath Kundu, Naveen Venkat, R Venkatesh Babu, et al. Universal source-free domain adap-
  tation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2020.

Vinod K Kurmi, Venkatesh K Subramanian, and Vinay P Namboodiri. Domain impression: A
  source data free domain adaptation method. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference
  on Applications of Computer Vision, 2021.

Dong-Hyun Lee et al. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for
  deep neural networks. In Workshop on Challenges in Representation Learning, ICML, 2013.

Rui Li, Qianfen Jiao, Wenming Cao, Hau-San Wong, and Si Wu. Model adaptation: Unsuper-
  vised domain adaptation without source data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.

Yanghao Li, Naiyan Wang, Jianping Shi, Xiaodi Hou, and Jiaying Liu. Adaptive batch normalization
  for practical domain adaptation. Pattern Recognition, 80:109–117, 2018.

Jian Liang, Dapeng Hu, and Jiashi Feng. Do we really need to access the source data? Source
   hypothesis transfer for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the International Con-
   ference on Machine Learning, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Learning transferable features with
 deep adaptation networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
 2015.
Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Conditional adversarial
 domain adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Takeru Miyato, Shin-ichi Maeda, Masanori Koyama, and Shin Ishii. Virtual adversarial training: a
  regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2018.
Pietro Morerio, Riccardo Volpi, Ruggero Ragonesi, and Vittorio Murino. Generative pseudo-label
  refinement for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Confer-
  ence on Applications of Computer Vision, 2020.
Amanda Navine, Stefan Kahl, Ann Tanimoto-Johnson, Holger Klinck, and Patrick Hart. A collection
 of fully-annotated soundscape recordings from the Island of Hawai’i, September 2022. URL
 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7078499.
Subhankar Roy, Martin Trapp, Andrea Pilzer, Juho Kannala, Nicu Sebe, Elisa Ricci, and Arno Solin.
  Uncertainty-guided source-free domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the European Conference
  on Computer Vision, 2022.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tony Lee, Irena Gao, Sang Michael Xie, Kendrick Shen, Ananya
  Kumar, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Henrik Marklund, et al. Extending the WILDS bench-
  mark for unsupervised adaptation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Roshni Sahoo, Divya Shanmugam, and John Guttag. Unsupervised domain adaptation in the absence
  of source data. In ICML 2020 Workshop on Uncertainty and Robustness in Deep Learning, 2020.
Swami Sankaranarayanan, Yogesh Balaji, Carlos D Castillo, and Rama Chellappa. Generate to
  adapt: Aligning domains using generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Kendrick Shen, Robbie Matthew Jones, Ananya Kumar, Sang Michael Xie, and Percy Liang.
  How does contrastive pre-training connect disparate domains?, 2022. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=vBn2OXZuQCF.
Haoyu Song, Li Dong, Wei-Nan Zhang, Ting Liu, and Furu Wei. CLIP models are few-shot learners:
  Empirical studies on VQA and visual entailment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07190, 2022.
Brian L Sullivan, Christopher L Wood, Marshall J Iliff, Rick E Bonney, Daniel Fink, and Steve
  Kelling. ebird: A citizen-based bird observation network in the biological sciences. Biological
  conservation, 142(10):2282–2292, 2009.
Brian L Sullivan, Jocelyn L Aycrigg, Jessie H Barry, Rick E Bonney, Nicholas Bruns, Caren B
  Cooper, Theo Damoulas, André A Dhondt, Tom Dietterich, Andrew Farnsworth, et al. The ebird
  enterprise: An integrated approach to development and application of citizen science. Biological
  conservation, 169:31–40, 2014.
Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Deep CORAL: Correlation alignment for deep domain adaptation.
  In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision, 2016.
Baochen Sun, Jiashi Feng, and Kate Saenko. Return of frustratingly easy domain adaptation. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-time
  training with self-supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-
 works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
  main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2017.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Deep domain confusion:
  Maximizing for domain invariance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3474, 2014.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial discriminative domain
  adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, 2017.
Willem-Pier Vellinga and Robert Planqué. The xeno-canto collection and its relation to sound recog-
 nition and classification. CLEF (Working Notes), 2015.
Riccardo Volpi, Hongseok Namkoong, Ozan Sener, John C Duchi, Vittorio Murino, and Silvio
  Savarese. Generalizing to unseen domains via adversarial data augmentation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Tuan-Hung Vu, Himalaya Jain, Maxime Bucher, Matthieu Cord, and Patrick Pérez. Advent: Adver-
  sarial entropy minimization for domain adaptation in semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2517–2526, 2019.
Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully
  test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representa-
  tions by penalizing local predictive power. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Jindong Wang, Cuiling Lan, Chang Liu, Yidong Ouyang, Tao Qin, Wang Lu, Yiqiang Chen, Wenjun
   Zeng, and Philip Yu. Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on domain generalization. IEEE
   Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022a.
Qin Wang, Olga Fink, Luc Van Gool, and Dengxin Dai. Continual test-time domain adaptation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022b.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V Le. Self-training with noisy student
  improves ImageNet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
Shiqi Yang, Yaxing Wang, Joost van de Weijer, Luis Herranz, and Shangling Jui. Casting a BAIT
  for offline and online source-free domain adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12427, 2020.
Alan L Yuille and Anand Rangarajan. The concave-convex procedure. Neural Computation, 2003.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Proceedings of the British
  Machine Vision Conference, 2016.
Neil Zeghidour, Olivier Teboul, Félix de Chaumont Quitry, and Marco Tagliasacchi. LEAF: A
  learnable frontend for audio classification. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Haojian Zhang, Yabin Zhang, Kui Jia, and Lei Zhang. Unsupervised domain adaptation of black-box
  source models. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference, 2021.
Kaiyang Zhou, Yongxin Yang, Timothy Hospedales, and Tao Xiang. Deep domain-adversarial im-
  age generation for domain generalisation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2020.
Imtiaz Ziko, Eric Granger, and Ismail Ben Ayed. Scalable laplacian k-modes. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018.


                                                13
