Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NTERACTIVE P ORTRAIT H ARMONIZATION
 Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu1∗, He Zhang2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Yilin Wang2 , Zhe Lin2 ,
 Jose Echevarria2 , Yinglan Ma2 , Zijun Wei2 , Kalyan Sunkavalli2 , Vishal M. Patel1
 1 Johns Hopkins University, 2 Adobe Research



                                              A BSTRACT

            Current image harmonization methods consider the entire background as the guid-
            ance for harmonization. However, this may limit the capability for user to choose
            any specific object/person in the background to guide the harmonization. To en-
            able flexible interaction between user and harmonization, we introduce interactive
            harmonization, a new setting where the harmonization is performed with respect
            to a selected region in the reference image instead of the entire background. A new
            flexible framework that allows users to pick certain regions of the background im-
            age and use it to guide the harmonization is proposed. Inspired by professional
            portrait harmonization users, we also introduce a new luminance matching loss
            to optimally match the color/luminance conditions between the composite fore-
            ground and select reference region. This framework provides more control to the
            image harmonization pipeline achieving visually pleasing portrait edits. Further-
            more, we also introduce a new dataset carefully curated for validating portrait
            harmonization. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets
            show that the proposed approach is efficient and robust compared to previous
            harmonization baselines, especially for portraits. The code can be found here:
            https://github.com/jeya-maria-jose/Interactive-Portrait-Harmonization


1       I NTRODUCTION

With the increasing demand of virtual social gathering and conferencing in our lives, image har-
monization techniques become essential components to make the virtual experience more engaging
and pleasing. For example, if you cannot join a wedding or birthday party physically but still want
to be in the photo, the first option would be to edit yourself into the image. Directly compositing
yourself into the photo would not look realistic without matching the color/luminance conditions.
One possible solution to make the composition image more realistic is to leverage existing image
harmonization methods Cong et al. (2020; 2021); Cun & Pun (2020); Ling et al. (2021); Jiang et al.
(2021); Guo et al. (2021b); Tsai et al. (2017).
Most previous works focus on a more general image harmonization setup, where the goal is to match
a foreground object to a new background scene without too much focus on highly retouched portrait.
However, when we conduct surveys among professional composition Photoshop/Affinity 1 users, we
realized that portrait harmonization is the most common task of image editing in real-world scenario
and professional settings. This makes portrait harmonization the most important use case of image
harmonization. We note that previous harmonization works have not focused on addressing portrait
harmonization on real-world data. In this work, we aim to explore a better solution to obtain realistic
and visually pleasing portrait harmonization for real-world high-resolution edited images.
One common question that pops up when we demo existing image harmonization workflow to these
professional users is: ‘How could we choose a certain person as reference when we do harmo-
nization with existing workflow ?’. The workflow design of existing state-of-the-art harmonization
methods Cong et al. (2020; 2021); Ling et al. (2021); Guo et al. (2021b) limits the capability for
user to choose any person/region as reference during the harmonization process. These frameworks
are designed such that they just take in the composite image and foreground mask as input thus
offering no specific way to help the user to guide the harmonization. Certain frameworks such as
    ∗
        Work done while doing an internship at Adobe
    1
        https://affinity.serif.com/en-gb/photo/


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Reference          Composite
                             Region            Foreground


                                   Reference
                                    Region
                                                   Composite
                                                   Foreground



        Composite Image                 Mask                        Background Harmonization   Interactive Harmonization
                                                                             SOTA                         (Ours)

Figure 1: Testing with in-the-wild portrait composites. Top row- Professional Studio Portrait, Bot-
tom row- Non-studio portrait. It can be observed that the current SOTA harmonization method Ling
et al. (2021) fails to give realistic results as it tries to match the appearance of foreground to the
entire background. Our proposed interactive harmonization framework produces a visually pleasing
portrait harmonization as it matches the appearance of the original portrait in the reference region
instead of the entire background as selected by the user.


Bargain-Net Cong et al. (2021) have the flexibility to be tweaked and converted to serve interactive
harmonization. However, from our experiments we find that they are not robust enough to perform
realistic portrait harmonization.
Furthermore, professional portraits are mostly shot at studios where screens constitute the back-
ground. These screens offer little to no information in harmonizing a new composite when edited
into the photo. This causes current harmonization methods to produce unstable results (see first row
of Figure 1) as they have not been trained to perform harmonization with screens as background.
Also, portraits which are captured by everyday users usually contain a background of spatially vary-
ing luminance characteristics. Using the entire background to guide harmonization here can result in
undesirable outcomes (see second row of Figure 1) as harmonization depends on the location where
the foreground is composited to.
To this end, we introduce Interactive harmonization- a more realistic and flexible setup where the
user can guide the harmonization. The user can choose specific regions in the background as a refer-
ence to harmonize the composite foreground. From a professional stand-point, this is a much-needed
feature as it could enable a lot of control for editors. In this work, we propose a new interactive por-
trait harmonization framework that has the flexibility to take in a reference region provided by the
user. We use an encoder-decoder based harmonization network which takes in the foreground com-
posite region as input and a style encoder which takes in the reference region as its input. The
reference region to guide the harmonization is selected by the user and can be a person, and object
or even just some part of the background. However, it can be noted that in portrait editing it is very
common to choose another person in the picture as reference to obtain an effective harmonization.
We also use a style encoder that extracts the style code of the reference region and injects it to the
harmonized foreground. We carefully align the style information with foreground while also pre-
serving the spatial content using adaptive instance normalization Huang & Belongie (2017) layers
at decoder. To make the harmonization look more realistic it is important to optimally match the lu-
minance, color, and other appearance information between the reference and foreground. To match
these characteristics in manual photo editing, professional photography users usually match statis-
tics of the highest (highlight), lowest (shadow) and average (mid-tone) of luminance points between
the composite foreground image and the reference region. Hence, we propose a new luminance
matching loss that is inspired by professional users 2 . In the proposed loss, we match the highlight,
mid-tone and shadow points between the reference region and foreground composite region.
Current publicly available datasets are developed only for background harmonization problem. So,
we curate a new IntHarmony dataset to enable training for interactive harmonization utilizing aug-

   2
       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SoWefQNcIyY&t=268s


                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


mentations that would work well for general as well as portrait harmonization. We also introduce a
new real-world testing data PortraitTest with ground-truth annotations collected from professional
experts to benchmark the methods. Codes, datasets and pretrained models will be made public after
the review process.
In summary, the following are the key contributions of this work:
• We are the first to introduce Interactive Harmonization and propose a new framework which has
  the flexibility to solve it.
• We propose a new luminance matching loss to better match the foreground appearance to the
  reference region.
• We curate a new synthetic training dataset as well as a professionally annotated benchmark test
  for portrait harmonization and demonstrate state-of-the-art results on it.
• We show that performing interactive harmonization using our proposed method results in visually
  pleasing portrait edits.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Classical methods for image harmonization perform color and tone matching by matching global
statistics Reinhard et al. (2001); Ling et al. (2021). Methods like Pérez et al. (2003); Tao et al.
(2010) try to apply gradient domain methods to transfer the color and tone . Zhu et al. (2015)
proposed the first convolutional network-based method to improve realism of composite images.
The first end-to-end deep learning-based image harmonization method was proposed by Tsai et al.
(2017) where an encoder-decoder based convolutional network was used. Following that Cun &
Pun (2020) proposed an attention-based module to improve harmonization. Dove-Net, proposed
by Cong et al. (2020) used a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based method with an ad-
ditional domain verification discriminator to verify if the foreground and background of a given
image belongs to the same image. Cong et al. (2020) also proposed a public dataset, iHarmony4
for image harmonization. Following that, Cong et al. (2021) proposed Bargain-Net which uses a
domain extractor to extract information about the background to make the harmonized foreground
more consistent with the background. Sofiiuk et al. (2021) proposed a new architecture involving
pre-trained classification models to improve harmonization. Attention-based feature modulation for
harmonization was proposed in Hao et al. (2020). Ling et al. (2021) proposed RainNet which intro-
duces a region-aware adaptive instance normalization (RAIN) module to make the style between the
background and the composite foreground consistent. Guo et al. (2021b) proposed intrinsic image
harmonization where reflectance and illumination are disentangled and harmonized separately. It
can be noted that photo-realistic style transfer methods Li et al. (2018); Luan et al. (2017); Yang
et al. (2019) when adopted for harmonization do not perform well as they require similar layout as
explained in Jiang et al. (2021). Jiang et al. (2021) proposed a self-supervised framework to solve
image harmonization. Recently, Guo et al. (2021a) proposed an image harmonization framework
using transformers. Portrait relighting methods Zhou et al. (2019); Pandey et al. (2021) have also
been explored to produce realistic composite images for a desired scene.


3   I NTERACTIVE H ARMONIZATION

Setting: Given an input composite image C, the goal is to generate a harmonized image H that
looks realistic. Composite image corresponds to the edited image where a new person is introduced
into the scene. This newly introduced region is termed as composite foreground region F and the
scene it was introduced into is termed as background B. In general harmonization, we use the
background B to harmonize F . In interactive harmonization, we propose using a specific region R
of the background B to guide harmonizing F . Note that the region R is a subset of B i.e (R ∈ B).
R can be any region pertaining to the background that the user wants F to be consistent with.
For portrait images, an easy way to perform realistic harmonization would be to select the per-
son/object in the reference portrait as R to guide the edited person/object F . This will make sure
that that the luminance conditions of the reference portrait image is consistent with that of the newly
edited-in portrait. However, we do not hardly constrain the region to be only a portrait in the back-
ground, it can also be objects or even a part of the scene. Please note that portraits here do not only


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Composite Input
                                          Foreground Region               Harmonizer Network   Harmonized Foreground


                                                                                                   Composite with
                                                                                                   reference image


                         User selects
                       Reference region
                                                                               Style Code

                                          Reference Region    Style Encoder                     Harmonized Output

        Figure 2: Overview of the proposed interactive portrait harmonization framework.
correspond to images containing people, it can also contain objects. A photo becomes a portrait
when certain subjects are the main focus of the picture.
Dataset Curation: Publicly available datasets like iHarmony4 Cong et al. (2020) were proposed
for background harmonization and do not provide any reference region information. So, we curate
a synthetic dataset and also introduce a real-world portrait harmonization dataset for validating.

1) IntHarmony: This newly curated synthetic dataset specifies an additional reference region to
guide the harmonization. IntHarmony has the following information for each data instance: com-
posite image, ground truth, foreground mask of the composite foreground and a guide mask which
provides information about the reference region to guide the harmonization. IntHarmony is built
on top of MS-COCO dataset Lin et al. (2014). We make use of the instance masks provided in
MS-COCO to simulate foreground and reference regions. First, we select a random instance mask
to pick the foreground region. The selected foreground region is then augmented using a wide set of
meaningful augmentations focusing on luminance, contrast and color. We use all the augmentations
proposed in Jiang et al. (2021) to create the composite. More details on this can be found in the sup-
plementary document. This augmented foreground is composited with the original image to get the
composite image (I). Another random instance mask is used to get the reference guide mask. The
original image is considered as the ground truth. The number of training images in IntHarmony is
118287 and 959 images are allocated for testing. Note that the instance masks and the augmentations
are chosen at random to induce more generalizabilty to the network. IntHarmony consists of both
objects, backgrounds and people and is not very focused for portraits. We use this dataset to help the
network learn the interactive way to perform harmonization as we have a reference region to access.
We also use a similar dataset creation scheme on Multi-Human People Parsing (MHP) dataset Zhao
et al. (2018); Li et al. (2017); Nie et al. (2017) to synthesize another data further finetune the models
for portrait harmonization. Note that MHP dataset contains only images with people.
2) PortraitTest: To validate our performance for real-time applications, we introduce a real-world
test data consisting of high resolution composite portrait images. The ground truth is annotated with
the help of multiple professionals using PhotoShop curve adjustment layers to change brightness,
hue, saturation layer and contrast of the composite foreground to make it look more natural and
pleasing. The number of images in this test dataset is 50 and the composite foreground is of varied
luminance conditions, contrast and color.

4   M ETHOD
In this section, we first explain the details of the framework we propose to solve interactive harmo-
nization. We then give the training details and the loss functions we introduce for this task.
Network Details: An overview of the proposed framework is shown in Figure 2. It consists of two
sub-networks: a harmonizer network and a style encoder network.
Harmonization Network is an encoder-decoder architecture which takes in two inputs: composite
foreground image (I), a foreground mask and a style code (ϕ) extracted from the style encoder which
is of dimension 1 × D. The encoder is built using 4 convolutional blocks where each conv block has
a conv layer that increases the number of channels and performs downsampling, followed by a set of


                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


residual blocks. The latent features from the encoder have a spatial dimension of (H/16) × (W/16).
The decoder is also built using 4 conv blocks where each block has an upsampling layer and a set of
residual blocks similar to the encoder. In addition, we use adaptive instance norm (AdaIN) layers in
each conv block that takes in the style code (ϕ) and the features from previous conv block in decoder
as their input. Thus, the decoder uses the style code extracted from the reference object to guide the
harmonization. The output from decoder is the harmonized foreground image. It is then composited
with the original reference image to get the complete harmonized output.
Style Encoder takes in the reference region chosen by the user as the input. The style encoder
consists of a series of partial convolutional layers Liu et al. (2018) to downsample the input image,
extract meaningful features and output a style code. The partial convolution layers take in both the
reference image and guide mask as their output. The latent embedding is fed through a average
pooling layer to obtain the 1D style code (ϕ).
Training Details: Training the network for interactive harmonization is performed stage-wise. In
the first stage, we train the network to perform background harmonization, where the training data
of iHarmony4 Cong et al. (2020) is used. The input to the harmonizer network is the masked
out foreground image concatenated with the style code of the background extracted from the style
encoder. In the next stage, we finetune our network for interactive harmonization on IntHarmony.
Here, the input to the style encoder is the reference region. Thus, the network here is trained in such
a way that a reference region guides the harmonization which is also due to the loss functions we
introduce (see Section 4.3). Finally, we further fine-tune the network on the augmented MHP dataset
for portrait harmonization to be used in professional settings. The input to the harmonizer network
is the masked out foreground image (rather than entire composite image) concatenated with the style
code of the background extracted from the style encoder. From our experiments, we realized that
using the entire composite as input to the harmonizer network does not result in optimal training.
This happens because the style code information bleeds out to the background of the composite,
reducing its influence to the foreground. Masking out the background makes sure that the style code
affects only the composite foreground and not the entire image.
Loss Functions: We use a combination of the proposed luminance matching loss, consistency loss,
harmonization loss, and triplet losses for training our framework.
Luminance Matching loss: The main objective of interactive portrait harmonization is to make
sure that the harmonized foreground matches the appearance of the reference region. To achieve
this, we introduce three new losses - highlight, mid-tone and shadow losses, which are used to
match the highlight, mid-tone and shadow between the reference region and foreground region to be
harmonized. We define these losses as follows:
                                   Lhighlight = ∥Hmax − Rmax ∥1                                    (1)
                                  Lmid−tone = ∥Hmean − Rmean ∥1                                    (2)
                                    Lshadow = ∥Hmin − Rmin ∥1 ,                                    (3)
where H corresponds to the harmonized image and R corresponds to the reference region. These
losses try to match the intensities of the foreground with the reference region at the highest, lowest
and average luminescence points thus matching the contrast. For the highest and lowest points, we
choose the 90th and 10th percentile respectively to improve stability. We define luminance matching
loss (LLM ) as the sum of these 3 losses:
                            LLM = Lhighlight + Lmid−tone + Lshadow .                               (4)
Luminance matching loss (LLM ) is illustrated in Figure 3. Note that LLM is an main addition to our
training methodology which helps to make sure that the statistics between the reference and fore-
ground are matched. This loss penalizes the network if the statistics of the harmonized foreground
and the reference region are not matched.
Consistency loss: We also introduce a consistency loss Lconsis between style codes of the harmo-
nized foreground and the reference region to penalize the network whenever the style code of the
reference region and harmonized foreground region are different from each other. The consistency
loss is defined as:
                                  Lconsis = ∥ϕ(h) − ϕ(b)∥1 .                                  (5)
Harmonization loss: We also use a generic harmonization loss which is an L1-loss between the
prediction and the ground-truth as follows:
                                    Lharmonization = ∥H − Î∥1 .                         (6)


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Luminance Matching Loss                               Highlight Matching   Midtone Matching   Shadow Matching


                                                   Foreground Region
                         ℒshadow


                        ℒhighlight


                        ℒmidtone


                                                     Reference Region
          Foreground                   Reference
            Region                      Region
                           Highlight

                           Mid-Tone

                           Shadow



                       Figure 3: Overview of the proposed Luminance Matching loss.


where H corresponds to the harmonized image and Î represents the ground truth. This loss tries to
minimize the distance between the prediction and input thus making sure the prediction is always
consistent in appearance with that of the ground truth.
Triplet losses: We introduce two triplet losses similar to Cong et al. (2021) based on the style codes
of the composite foreground (c), harmonized foreground (h), real foreground (r) (ground truth) and
that of the reference region (b). The first triplet loss is as follows:
                        Ltriplet1 = max(∥ϕ(h), ϕ(b)∥2 −∥ϕ(h), ϕ(c)∥2 +m, 0).
This loss tries to make the style code generated by the style encoder for harmonized foreground (h)
to be closer to that of style code of reference region (b) while being far away from the style code of
composite foreground (c). m here corresponds to the margin.
We define another triplet loss which forces the real foreground style code (r) to be close to harmo-
nized foreground style code (h) while making sure the style code of harmonized foreground style
code (h) is far away from composite foreground (c):
                      Ltriplet2 = max(∥ϕ(h), ϕ(r)∥2 −∥ϕ(h), ϕ(c)∥2 +m, 0),
The total loss used to train the network is as follows:
             LIP H = Lharmonization + αLLM + λLconsis + β(Ltriplet1 + Ltriplet2 )
where α, β and λ are the factors that control the contribution the triplet losses have in the total loss.


5   E XPERIMENTS

Implementation Details: Our framework is developed in Pytorch Paszke et al. (2019) and the
training is done using NVIDIA RTX 8000 GPUs. The training is done stage-wise as explained
in the previous section. We use an Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of
10−4 , 10−5 , 10−6 at each stage respectively. The batch size is set equal to 48. The images are
resized to 256 × 256 while training. During inference, to get the high resolution images back, we
use a polynomial fitting like in Afifi et al. (2019). We composite the high resolution harmonized
foreground with the reference image to get the high resolution harmonized image.
Comparison with State-of-the-art: We compare our proposed framework with recent harmoniza-
tion networks like Dove-Net Cong et al. (2020), Bargain-Net Cong et al. (2021), and Rain-Net Ling
et al. (2021). We note that Bargain-Net has a domain extractor branch that directly takes in the
background of the image to make the harmonization consistent with the background. In addition to
comparing with the original model, we also re-train Bargain-Net in a interactive setup similar to our
proposed approach for fair comparison. Here, we feed in the reference region as the input to the do-
main extractor and use similar protocols as our method. We call this configuration Bargain-Net (R).
Note that Bargain-Net (R) is trained with the same data and stage-wise training as our method for
fair comparison. We explain why the other frameworks cannot be converted for interactive harmo-
nization in the supplementary material. We use publicly available weights of Dove-Net, Bargain-Net
and Rain-Net to get their predictions on PortraitTest and IntHarmony. We denote our approach as
IPH (Interactive Portrait Harmonization). While testing with IntHarmony, Bargain-Net (R) and IPH
are trained on the training data of IntHarmony. While testing with PortraitTest, we compare with two
more configurations: Bargain-Net (R) (++) and IPH (++) which are further finetuned on augmented


                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Quantitative comparison in terms of reference based performance metrics with previous
methods. We compare our proposed method IPH in terms PSNR, SSIM and CIE Delta with previous
methods across 2 test datasets. Red and Blue corresponds to first and second best results. ++
corresponds to the configuration where the model is further finetuned on augmented MHP dataset.
    Dataset           Type                        Method                     Venue    PSNR (↑)   SSIM (↑)   CIE Delta (↓)
                Direct Composite                     -                         -       27.21      0.9709       37.27
                                        DoveNet Cong et al. (2020)          CVPR 20    27.44      0.9314       23.49
                    Generic
                                       BargainNet Cong et al. (2021)        ICME 21    28.47      0.9364       20.95
                 Harmonization
                                         RainNet Ling et al. (2021)         CVPR 21    28.55      0.9315       18.32
 PortraitTest
                                     BargainNet (R) Cong et al. (2021)      ICME 21    28.56      0.9389       19.91
                  Interactive      BargainNet (R) (++) Cong et al. (2021)   ICME 21    30.10      0.9787       12.31
                 Harmonization                  IPH (Ours)                     -       30.86      0.9553       12.16
                                             IPH (++) (Ours)                   -       36.52      0.9871        4.21
                Direct Composite                     -                         -       25.22      0.8957       54.02
                                        DoveNet Cong et al. (2020)          CVPR 20    26.60      0.9011       32.45
                    Generic
                                       BargainNet Cong et al. (2021)        ICME 21    27.94      0.9102       28.65
 IntHarmony      Harmonization
                                         RainNet Ling et al. (2021)         CVPR 21    24.92      0.9113       20.48
                  Interactive        BargainNet (R) Cong et al. (2021)      ICME 21    27.09      0.9078       21.52
                 Harmonization                  IPH (Ours)                     -       30.22      0.9190       15.62



portrait images from the MHP dataset as explained in Section 3.3. As IntHarmony actually contains
objects, people and natural scenes, validating on it helps us prove that the interactive feature helps in
even normal harmonization. Validating on PortraitTest helps us prove if our method will work well
on real-world high resolution portrait images. It also helps us understand where our method stands
when compared to professional editors.
Referenced Quality Metrics: We use referenced quality metrics like PSNR, SSIM and CIE Delta
to quantitatively compare the performance of IPH with the previous methods. Table 1 consists of
the performance comparison on both the PortraitTest and IntHarmony test datasets. We note that
IPH achieves the best performance in terms of PSNR, CIE Delta and SSIM when compared to
the previous harmonization networks. IPH outperforms all previous methods across all metrics in
both datasets. It can be noted that BargainNet (R)/ BargainNet (R) (++) do not perform as well as
IPH/IPH (++) even though they are trained with the same pipeline and training conditions of IPH.
Prior methods fail as they do not consider arbitrary regions to guide the harmonization and also
don’t account for luminance matching. We get the best performance as the proposed approach is
more effective at improving the performance compared to the previous frameworks.
Visual Quality Comparison: In Figure 4, we show results on composite portraits from PortraitTest
dataset. It can be seen that the harmonized foreground generated by generic harmonization meth-
ods like Dove-Net, Bargain-Net, and Rain-Net is inconsistent with color and luminance conditions
when compared to the reference portrait. Also, the predictions of Bargain-Net and Rain-Net fail to
harmonize the local lighting conditions present in the composite as they fail to explicitly match the
highlight, mid-tone and shadow. Bargain-Net (R) (++) performs interactive harmonization however
it still fails to match the contrast of the reference. Our method harmonizes the composite well even
considering the local luminance conditions and is close to the annotations done by a professional.
User Studies: We conduct two different human subjective reviews to compare the performance of
IPH with other methods. First, we select 15 images from the PortraitTest dataset and present the
predictions of Dove-Net, Bargain-Net (R) (++), Rain-Net and IPH (++) on a screen. We ask 30
subjects to independently rank the predictions from 1 to 3 based on the visual quality considering if
the color and luminance conditions of all the portraits in the image look consistent. We give scores
3,2, and 1 for ranks 1,2 and 3 respectively. Additionally, we also conduct a pair-wise A/B user study.
Here, we show the input image and the output of two methods to a user. We then collect these votes
and report the preference of the users. We apply the Thurstone Case V analysis to these votes to
get the preference values. We also report the Bradley-Terry (BT) score . All these scores have been
tabulated in Table 2 where our proposed method is observed to be desired the most.

6     D ISCUSSION

Ablation Study: We conduct an ablation study to analyse the importance of each component of
our proposed method. We evaluate these models on the PortraitTest dataset. We start with just the
Harmonizer Network (H-Net) without AdaIN layers trained for generic harmonization. Then we add


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Direct Composite                Mask                   Dove-Net                   BG-Net


        RainNet              BG-Net (R) (++)               IPH (++)               Ground Truth


   Direct Composite                Mask                   Dove-Net                   BG-Net


        RainNet              BG-Net (R) (++)               IPH (++)               Ground Truth

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on the Portrait Test dataset. Ground Truth annotations here are
created by human professional experts. Red mask corresponds to the composite foreground region
and blue mask corresponds to the reference region chosen from the background.


                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: User Study: Quantitative Comparison with respect to scores from human subjects while
evaluating on PortraitTest dataset.
                          Method           Ranking Score (↑)   Preference (↑)     BT score (↑)
                        Composite                 -                -0.439           0.1577
                         DoveNet                19.40              -0.224           0.1602
                    Bargain-Net (R) (++)        26.40               0.102           0.1965
                         Rain-Net               12.26              -0.215           0.1600
                      IPH (++) (Ours)           28.33               0.782           0.3252



Table 3: Ablation study: We perform an ablation study on real test data to understand the contribu-
tions brought about by different techniques proposed in IPH.
                               Method              PSNR (↑)     SSIM (↑)        MSE (↓)
                           Direct Composite         27.21        0.9709         155.75
                                H-Net               28.40        0.9342         120.35
                                 w SE               30.91        0.9656          53.89
                            w Mid-tone loss         31.25        0.9715          40.54
                            w Shadow loss           32.56        0.9668          50.34
                           w Highlight loss         34.21        0.9612          45.28
                         w SE + LM loss (IPH)       36.52        0.9872          18.33



the style encoder and AdaIN layers in the decoder and train for interactive harmonization (H-Net+
SE). All of these methods are trained using the losses Lharmonization , Lconsis and Ltriplet . Then
we add the novel losses introduced in this work - Lhighlight , Lmid−tone , and Lshadow individually.
From Table 3, it can be observed that all the new components introduced in this work are important
and play a key role in achieving better performance. Making the framework interactive by using the
style encoder and injecting the style code of reference region to guide the harmonization is sufficient
the push the performance above previous methods. Furthermore, the proposed luminance matching
loss helps improve the performance by a significant margin proving that matching the highlight,
mid-tone and shadow of the foreground and reference help obtain better harmonization.
Robustness to chosen reference region: One key advantage our framework has over generic har-
monization is that it is more flexible and robust. We show that IPH is robust to different regions
chosen by the user. We note that the output harmonization adjusts itself with the select region cho-
sen from the background. This is very useful in cases where the luminance conditions vary across
different parts of the background image. We illustrate this in Figure 10.


     Direct Composite           Harmonized Image               Harmonized Image              Harmonized Image


Figure 5: Qualitative results with different regions of background chosen as reference. The first
image is the direct composite and the red box in other images show the reference region chosen by
the user and the resultant harmonization of the boat can be seen in the respective images.
7   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we proposed a new framework called interactive portrait harmonization where the user
has the flexibility of choosing a specific reference region to guide the harmonization. We showed
that this helps the user obtain more realistic harmonization results while providing more control
and flexibility to the compositing workflow. We also proposed a new luminance matching loss to
carefully match the appearance between the foreground composite and reference region. In addition,
we introduced two datasets: a synthetic IntHarmony dataset for training and a real-world PortraiTest
dataset for testing. Extensive experiments and analysis showed that IPH performs better and is more
robust and useful to solve real-world portrait harmonization problems in practical settings compared
to the previous methods.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Mahmoud Afifi, Brian Price, Scott Cohen, and Michael S Brown. When color constancy goes wrong:
 Correcting improperly white-balanced images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1535–1544, 2019.
Wenyan Cong, Jianfu Zhang, Li Niu, Liu Liu, Zhixin Ling, Weiyuan Li, and Liqing Zhang. Dovenet:
 Deep image harmonization via domain verification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8394–8403, 2020.
Wenyan Cong, Li Niu, Jianfu Zhang, Jing Liang, and Liqing Zhang. Bargainnet: Background-
 guided domain translation for image harmonization. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
 Multimedia and Expo (ICME), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Xiaodong Cun and Chi-Man Pun. Improving the harmony of the composite image by spatial-
  separated attention module. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 29:4759–4771, 2020.
Zonghui Guo, Dongsheng Guo, Haiyong Zheng, Zhaorui Gu, Bing Zheng, and Junyu Dong. Image
  harmonization with transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 14870–14879, 2021a.
Zonghui Guo, Haiyong Zheng, Yufeng Jiang, Zhaorui Gu, and Bing Zheng. Intrinsic image harmo-
  nization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 16367–16376, 2021b.
Guoqing Hao, Satoshi Iizuka, and Kazuhiro Fukui. Image harmonization with attention-based deep
  feature modulation. In BMVC, 2020.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance nor-
  malization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1501–
  1510, 2017.
Yifan Jiang, He Zhang, Jianming Zhang, Yilin Wang, Zhe Lin, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Simon Chen,
  Sohrab Amirghodsi, Sarah Kong, and Zhangyang Wang. Ssh: A self-supervised framework for
  image harmonization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06805, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Jianshu Li, Jian Zhao, Yunchao Wei, Congyan Lang, Yidong Li, Terence Sim, Shuicheng Yan, and
   Jiashi Feng. Multiple-human parsing in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07206, 2017.
Yijun Li, Ming-Yu Liu, Xueting Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Jan Kautz. A closed-form solution to
  photorealistic image stylization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), pp. 453–468, 2018.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Jun Ling, Han Xue, Li Song, Rong Xie, and Xiao Gu. Region-aware adaptive instance normalization
  for image harmonization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 9361–9370, 2021.
Guilin Liu, Fitsum A Reda, Kevin J Shih, Ting-Chun Wang, Andrew Tao, and Bryan Catanzaro.
  Image inpainting for irregular holes using partial convolutions. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 85–100, 2018.
Fujun Luan, Sylvain Paris, Eli Shechtman, and Kavita Bala. Deep photo style transfer. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4990–4998,
  2017.
Xuecheng Nie, Jiashi Feng, Junliang Xing, and Shuicheng Yan. Generative partition networks for
  multi-person pose estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07422, 2017.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rohit Pandey, Sergio Orts Escolano, Chloe Legendre, Christian Haene, Sofien Bouaziz, Christoph
  Rhemann, Paul Debevec, and Sean Fanello. Total relighting: learning to relight portraits for
  background replacement. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–21, 2021.
Youwei Pang, Xiaoqi Zhao, Lihe Zhang, and Huchuan Lu. Multi-scale interactive network for
  salient object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 9413–9422, 2020.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp.
  8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
  9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.
  pdf.
Patrick Pérez, Michel Gangnet, and Andrew Blake. Poisson image editing. In ACM SIGGRAPH
  2003 Papers, pp. 313–318. 2003.
Erik Reinhard, Michael Adhikhmin, Bruce Gooch, and Peter Shirley. Color transfer between images.
  IEEE Computer graphics and applications, 21(5):34–41, 2001.
Konstantin Sofiiuk, Polina Popenova, and Anton Konushin. Foreground-aware semantic representa-
  tions for image harmonization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applica-
  tions of Computer Vision, pp. 1620–1629, 2021.
Michael W Tao, Micah K Johnson, and Sylvain Paris. Error-tolerant image compositing. In Euro-
 pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 31–44. Springer, 2010.
Yi-Hsuan Tsai, Xiaohui Shen, Zhe Lin, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Xin Lu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Deep
  image harmonization. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 3789–3797, 2017.
Shuai Yang, Zhangyang Wang, Zhaowen Wang, Ning Xu, Jiaying Liu, and Zongming Guo. Con-
  trollable artistic text style transfer via shape-matching gan. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4442–4451, 2019.
Jian Zhao, Jianshu Li, Yu Cheng, Terence Sim, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi Feng. Understanding
   humans in crowded scenes: Deep nested adversarial learning and a new benchmark for multi-
   human parsing. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp.
   792–800, 2018.
Hao Zhou, Sunil Hadap, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and David W Jacobs. Deep single-image portrait re-
  lighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  7194–7202, 2019.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Philipp Krahenbuhl, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A Efros. Learning a discriminative
  model for the perception of realism in composite images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3943–3951, 2015.


A    A PPENDIX
Converting user-guided to automatic? Please note that although we provide the flexibility for
the user to point to a reference region to guide the harmonization, our framework can be made
completely automatic. We can make use of saliency detection models Pang et al. (2020) to get the
segmentation mask of the most salient object/person in the background and use that as the reference
region to guide the portrait harmonization. In fact, we can make this the initial outcome for portrait
harmonization and get feedback from the user if they are interested to select a different region or a
sub-part of the current region selected to guide the harmonization.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Different Objects Harmonization: In IPH, the input to the style encoder does not have any con-
straint. It need not even be a region present in the background image. Any region from any image
can be fed as the input to the style encoder thus making the framework more flexible. This can be
useful in the context of style transfer and re-luminance applications. Figure 6 illustrates the harmo-
nization result when the composite foreground is harmonized with a totally different objects from
the different reference images.


                         Reference Region
                      from a different image:


                        Direct Composite        Harmonized Image   Harmonized Image

Figure 6: Qualitative results with reference regions taken from different images. We show that
with IPH we can harmonize the foreground with reference regions present in any image.

Number of Parameters: In terms of parameters, IPH is lighter compared to the previous methods.
IPH has 27M parameters compared to Bargain-Net’s 58M , Dove-Net’s 54M and Rain-Net’s 54M
number of parameters.
Tweaking from Harmonization to Color Transfer: We show that the appearance of the harmo-
nized image can be easily controlled using the style code. If the style code is made to learn the
match color instead of harmonizing the image, we show that our framework can be used to perform
color transfer. We make two simple changes in our framework to obtain this: (1) increase color
augmentations (2) change Lconsis loss to make the style codes of the harmonized foreground and
the reference region to be far apart from each other; we could obtain style encoder which impart
an aggressive color change. We term the style code extracted from this style encoder as ψ and the
original style code as ϕ. Now to control the appearance, we just blend these color codes extracted
from these two encoders using different rations. The new style code γ would be
                                      γ = r1ϕ + (1 − r2) ∗ ϕ,                                     (7)
where r1 and r2 are the blending ratios. In Figure 7, we show the change in appearance for different
combinations of r1 and r2. This shows that IPH can be easily tweaked to make it interactive resulting
in realistic harmonization depending on the user’s choice of r1 and r2.


Figure 7: Modifying our framework for color transfer. Qualitative results with different values of r1
and r2 show how we can perform interactive color transfer.

Limitations: Although interactive portrait harmonization outperforms previous harmonization
methods, there are still some limitations. Our method works fairly well even for in-the-wild com-
posite portraits consisting of people. However, its performance decreases if we test it on portraits
consisting of objects. This can be understood as it is still difficult for the style encoder to extract
meaningful style code if the object material is peculiar. For example, if the reference object chosen


                                                      12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


has a shiny surface or is of a unique material, it is difficult for the style encoder to extract a meaning-
ful style code capturing the texture/material reflectance of the object and use it for harmonization.


Figure 8: Limitations: Learning intrinsic material details is difficult in cases where objects are shiny
or peculiar.

Bargain-Net and Rain-Net: We note that Bargain-Net Cong et al. (2021) and Rain-Net Ling et al.
(2021) specifically focus on using the background to guide the harmonization. Bargain-Net has a
domain extractor to extract the features of background while Rain-Net proposes a RAIN module
which normalizes the background features with the foreground. We tried to make both of these
networks interactive by replacing the background mask with a guide mask to select the reference
region. With the pre-trained weights, while changing the guide mask we did not see any significant
change in terms of performance metrics nor visual quality for both Bargain-Net and Rain-Net. If
we retrain the network to take in the guide mask instead of background mask, we noted a small
improvement in results for Bargain-Net as reported in the main paper. For Rain-Net, we did not
see any improvement. This might be because RAIN module uses the masks in the feature space to
normalize and that might not be an optimal way to actually get meaningful features to inject to the
foreground. Training it in an interactive way in fact is not robust at all and we get a small decrease
in performance. We also not that for these setups changing the guide mask to background mask
does not bring out much effect in the harmonized output which makes it clear that these frameworks
cannot be converted to serve interactive harmonization efficiently.
Augmentations: To generate the composite image in the synthetic dataset IntHarmony, we use a
set of augmentations. For each image, these augmentations are chosen at random. To account for
appearance changes, we use a brightness and contrast augmentation. We also use color jitter to
enforce hue augmentation. In addition, we also use a gamma transformation. Apart from these, we
also use 3D LUT augmentations as proposed in Jiang et al. (2021). We also generate local masks and
enforce augmentations to cover local lighting effects. Here, we apply augmentations such as soft
lighting, dodge, grain merging and grain extraction. Note that all the above set of augmentations
are considered as a set and for each image a random augmentation is selected and applied on a
composite foreground.
Potential Negative Societal Impacts: The proposed method may have negative social impacts if
people are not using this model properly. As this work focuses on making an edited image look
realistic, it can be used to create realistic fake images. Realistic fake images should be contained
as it can act as a tool for harassment and fraud. One potential solution is gated release of trained
models.
More Results: In Figure 9, we show results on composite portraits from IntHarmony dataset. It can
be observed that our method produces realistic harmonization results closer to ground truth when
compared to previous methods. The quality of predictions proves the usefulness of our proposed
approach to solve the interactive harmonization problem. Please refer to the supplementary material
to see many more visualizations.
In-the-Wild Portrait Harmonization Results: To further validate our method for in-the-wild
photos, we randomly create composite images and check the portrait harmonization results. We
visualize these composites and the corresponding results in Figure 5. It can be observed that our
method produces realistic harmonization results with the appearance being close to how it would
have been if the person was photographed in-situ.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Direct Composite                Mask                   Dove-Net                   BG-Net


        RainNet                 BG-Net (R)                    IPH                 Ground Truth

Figure 9: Qualitative comparison on the IntHarmony test dataset. Red mask corresponds to the
composite foreground region and blue mask corresponds to the reference region chosen from the
background. The other columns correspond to the predictions generated by the corresponding meth-
ods. Best viewed zoomed in and in color.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Composite Image                    Our Prediction


Figure 10: Qualitative results while testing our method for in-the-wild composite portraits. The red
box denotes the composite foreground. We use the portrait in background as reference region.


                                                15
