Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


NTF IELDS : N EURAL T IME F IELDS FOR P HYSICS -
I NFORMED ROBOT M OTION P LANNING
 Ruiqi Ni                                              Ahmed H. Qureshi
 Department of Computer Science                        Department of Computer Science
 Purdue University                                     Purdue University
 ni117@purdue.edu                                      ahqureshi@purdue.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Neural Motion Planners (NMPs) have emerged as a promising tool for solving
         robot navigation tasks in complex environments. However, these methods often
         require expert data for learning, which limits their application to scenarios where
         data generation is time-consuming. Recent developments have also led to physics-
         informed deep neural models capable of representing complex dynamical Partial
         Differential Equations (PDEs). Inspired by these developments, we propose Neural
         Time Fields (NTFields) for robot motion planning in cluttered scenarios. Our
         framework represents a wave propagation model generating continuous arrival time
         to find path solutions informed by a nonlinear first-order PDE called the Eikonal
         equation. We evaluate our method in various cluttered 3D environments, including
         the Gibson dataset, and demonstrate its ability to solve motion planning problems
         for 4-DOF and 6-DOF robot manipulators where the traditional grid-based Eikonal
         planners often face the curse of dimensionality. Furthermore, the results show that
         our method exhibits high success rates and significantly lower computational times
         than the state-of-the-art methods, including NMPs that require training data from
         classical planners. Our code is released: https://github.com/ruiqini/
         NTFields.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Motion Planning (MP) is one of the core components of an autonomous robot system that aims to
interact physically with its surrounding environments. MP algorithms find path solutions from the
robot’s start state to the goal state while respecting all constraints, such as collision avoidance. The
quest for fast, scalable MP methods has led from traditional approaches such as RRT* (LaValle
et al., 2001), Informed-RRT* (Gammell et al., 2014), and FMT* (Janson et al., 2015) to NMPs that
exhibit promising performance in high-dimensional spaces. However, a significant bottleneck in
state-of-the-art NMPs is their need for expert trajectories from traditional MP methods, limiting their
application to high-dimensional scenarios where large-scale data generation is time-consuming.
Recent developments have provided us with ways to have physics-informed deep learning models
(Raissi et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2020) that can directly solve complex PDEs such
as Navier-Stokes, Burgers, and Schrodinger equations. Inspired by these neural PDE solvers and to
overcome the expert data needs of NMPs, this paper introduces NTFields for robot motion planning
in cluttered environments. Our NTFields are generated by a physics-informed neural model driven
by a first-order, non-linear PDE called the Eikonal equation, whose solution represents the shortest
arrival time from a source to a destination location under a pre-defined speed model, and leads
to the continuous shortest-path between two locations (Sethian, 1996; Clawson et al., 2014). Our
model generates a continuous time field between the robot’s given start and goal configurations while
respecting collision-avoidance constraints, leading to a path solution in sub-seconds.
Our method’s salient features and contributions are summarized as follows: 1) A novel physics-
informed PDE solving the Eikonal equation formulation for robot motion planning under collision-
avoidance constraints in high-dimensional spaces. 2) A novel neural architecture design that en-
capsulates various properties of our PDE, resulting in a scalable, fast NMP method. 3) A novel
bidirectional algorithm that quickly finds path solutions by iteratively following the gradient of neural
time fields, marching towards each other from the start and goal configurations. 4) Unlike prior,


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


state-of-the-art NMP methods requiring extensive expert motion trajectories, NTFields only require
randomly sampled robot start and goal configurations and learn robot motion time fields by directly
solving the PDE formulation to find path solutions in sub-second times. Our data generation takes
less than 3 minutes, even in complex high-dimensional scenarios, and yet, our method computes paths
significantly faster than traditional planners while retaining high success rates. 5) We demonstrate
our method in various 3D environments, including the Gibson dataset, and also solve motion plan-
ning problems for 4-DOF and 6-DOF robot manipulators where traditional Eikonal equation based
planners such as the Fast Marching Method (FMM) (Sethian, 1996) struggle due to computational
time complexity. 6) Finally, we compare our method against state-of-the-art NMP methods, which
require expert motion trajectories, and against existing Neural PDE solvers for the Eikonal equation
to highlight their limitations in solving complex motion planning problems.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Perhaps the most relevant work is the FMM (Sethian, 1996; Valero-Gomez et al., 2013; Treister &
Haber, 2016), which numerically solves the Eikonal equation to determine the time field for robot
motion planning. However, numerical approaches require discretization of configuration spaces, thus
failing to provide the continuous-time fields and suffering from the curse of dimensionality in terms
of computational tractability. There also exist other traditional methods for solving MP problems
without relying on the Eikonal equation. These methods range from sampling-based MP (Karaman &
Frazzoli, 2011; Janson et al., 2015; Gammell et al., 2015) to gradient-based optimization techniques
(Ratliff et al., 2009; Kalakrishnan et al., 2011). The former techniques relatively scale better than
FMM but still exhibit large computation times in high-dimensional space. In contrast, the latter
methods do not provide global solutions and often lead to local minima.
Recent developments have introduced NMPs, which learn from expert data via imitation and improve
the performance of classical techniques in higher-dimensional problems. For instance, (Ichter et al.,
2018; Kumar et al., 2019; Qureshi & Yip, 2018) generate informed samples in the regions containing
the path solution to guide the underlying classical MP methods. (Qureshi et al., 2019; 2020) generate
end-to-end path solutions and revert to classical planners to inherit their completeness guarantees.
(Ichter & Pavone, 2019) perform MP in latent spaces to find path solutions but lacks interpretability.
In general, NMPs, despite their computational gains, usually rely on classical MP methods to provide
the training data, which hinders their application in scenarios where data generation is challenging.
Recent approaches (Ortiz et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Saulnier et al., 2020; Finean et al., 2021)
use gradient information from Neural Distance Field (NDF) (Chibane et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021)
for collision avoidance resulting in real-time robot motion generation methods. In a similar vein,
(Adamkiewicz et al., 2022) uses gradient information from Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al., 2020) for visual navigation. Other relevant and recent methods to our NTFields are Implicit
Environment Functions (IEF) (Li et al., 2022) and cost-to-go (c2g) function (Huh et al., 2021), which
also generate time fields or c2g function, then compute gradients for robot motion planning. However,
IEF and c2g are not physics-driven methods; instead, they are supervised learning approach that
requires training data from FMM or PRM. Note that, unlike prior NMP methods, our approach
does not require motion path trajectories for imitation learning and instead directly solves the PDE
formulated by the Eikonal equation to generate a continuous-time field for motion planning.
Recent deep learning advances encapsulate various physics-based continuous functions solving PDEs
without relying on explicit numerical derivatives. These methods exploit the neural network’s back-
propagation for gradient computation of output concerning related inputs. Similarly, EikoNet (Smith
et al., 2020) solves the Eikonal equation for modeling the time field concerning seismology. However,
EikoNet, as we show in our experiments, does not generalize to motion planning tasks requiring
speed constraints in obstacle regions. Instead, we introduce novel formulation and architecture design
enabling continuous time field modeling through solving the Eikonal equation for complex robot
motion planning tasks.


3   NTF IELDS : P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK

This section presents our physics-informed NTFields framework (Fig. 1) and discusses its formulation,
architecture design, training details, and overall bidirectional planning execution.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   ROBOT M OTION P LANNING AND E IKONAL E QUATION F ORMULATION

Let robot configuration-space (c-space) be denoted as Q ⊂ Rd with dimensions d ∈ N, and its
surrounding environment, often known as workspace, be denoted as X ⊂ Rm , with dimensions
m ∈ N. The workspace usually contains obstacles, forming formidable Xobs ⊂ X and feasible
Xf ree = X \Xobs workspace, and their corresponding obstacle Qobs ⊂ Q and obstacle-free Qf ree =
Q\Qobs configuration space. The standard robot motion planning objective is to find a path in an
obstacle-free c-space Qf ree connecting a given start qs ∈ Qf ree and goal qg ∈ Qf ree configurations.
In addition, it is often desirable for these paths to fulfill optimality conditions, such as having the
shortest Euclidean distance or minimum arrival time from a given start to goal configurations. In
practice, planning using time fields is preferred as it allows constraints on robot speed near the
obstacles, leading to safe navigation (Herbert et al., 2017). However, since modeling the time field
in configuration space is computationally expensive under speed constraints, especially in higher-
dimensional problems, most existing methods impose distance-based optimality and rely on advanced
path tracking techniques for robot safety around obstacles.
The Eikonal equation is a first-order, nonlinear PDE approximating wave propagation. Its solution
is the shortest arrival time from a source to a destination location under a pre-defined speed model,
which corresponds to the continuous shortest path problem (Sethian, 1996; Clawson et al., 2014). Let
S(x) and T (x, y) represent the speed model on point x and the corresponding wave arrival time from
the given source x to the target y. Then, the Eikonal equation relates the speed and arrival time as
  1
S(y) = ∥∇y T (x, y)∥, where S(y) is the speed at target point y, and ∇y T (x, y) is a partial derivative
of the arrival time model with respect to the target point y. However, the solutions to the Eikonal
equation have singularity near the source point when the arrival time is almost zero. This limitation is
often resolved by a factored formulation represented as T (x, y) = ∥x − y∥ × τ̂ (x, y) (Fomel et al.,
2009; Treister & Haber, 2016; Smith et al., 2020), where τ̂ represents a factorized time field from
time field. However, such factored representation is not suitable for motion planning problems as the
speed inside obstacles, i.e., formidable space Qobs , needs to be zero, making arrival time infinity. In
addition, we also observe that the arrival time model needs to obey the following symmetry property
for motion planning between given start and goal configurations T (qs , qg )=T (qg , qs ). This implies
that the arrival time from start qs to destination qg and vice versa are equal under the assumption that
only one optimal path solution can exist connecting the given configurations. The symmetry property
also applies to partial derivatives of the time field as ∇qs T (qs , qg ) = ∇qs T (qg , qs ). Therefore, we
factorize the arrival time T in the following form and introduce a new factorized time field τ (qs , qg )
as:
                                                           ∥qs − qg ∥
                                          T (qs , qg ) =                                                   (1)
                                                           τ (qs , qg )

In the above equation, the model time field T (qs , qg ) = 0 when qs = qg . As we require speed in
formidable obstacle space to be almost zero, we can explicitly make τ (qs , qg ) → 0 for any arbitrary
configurations in obstacle space, i.e., {qs , qg } ∈ Qobs . Therefore, T (qs , qg ) ∈ [0, ∞) and by our
factorization in Equation 1, τ (qs , qg )’s value range from 0 to 1. Furthermore, the expansion of the
Eikonal equation using the chain rule, with T (qs , qg ) as defined in Equation 1, results in the following
formulation (see Appendix A for full derivation).

                                                  τ 2 (qs , qg )
  S(qg ) = p 2
            τ (qs , qg ) + ∥qs − qg ∥2 · ∥∇qg τ (qs , qg )∥2 − 2τ (qs , qg ) · (qg − qs ) · ∇qg τ (qs , qg )
                                                                                                            (2)


3.2   N EURAL T IME F IELDS

We model the physics governed by Equation (2) using a deep neural network. Our neural architecture
outputs the factorized time field τ for the given robot configurations’ representation concerning the
given environment. We also introduce novel neural architecture to respect the symmetric property of
time field w.r.t motion planning, as described above. In addition, to avoid the numerical issue of the
time field being ∞ caused by zero speed in obstacle space, we introduce a speed model respecting
collision constraints.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                     qs         qg

        qs qg
   Speed Field
                                                                                     Bidirectional Plan

      1
S = ∥∇T                                                       Path Solution                          ∇T
        ∥
                      Workspace Encoder g(·)

        qs
                    C-Space Encoder                        Time Field Generator
       qg                 f (·)                                    τ (·)                        qs        qg
                                                ∇T                                        Time Field (T )

Figure 1: Our method consists of a C-Space encoder, workspace Encoder and time field generator. The
C-space encoder encodes the start (qs ) and goal (qg ) configurations, whereas the workspace encoder
provides environment-centric robot configuration N    representations. These c-space and workspace
features are passed through the symmetric operator , forming the input for our time field generator.
Finally, the gradient of the time field results in the speed field, and the final path is computed by
following those gradients in a bidirectional manner. The black arrows show the forward propagation
of our network, and the red arrows show the backpropagation to compute the loss.


Speed Model S ∗ (q): We define our ground truth speed model, denoted as S ∗ (q), at any robot
configuration q ∈ Q as
                                   sconst
                       S ∗ (q) =          × clip(dM (p(q), Xobs ), dmin , dmax ),                         (3)
                                   dmax
where p ⊂ Rm represents robot surface obtained via forward kinematics for the given configuration
q ∈ Qf ree , and dM computes a distance between robot surface p and obstacles Xobs in the workspace.
The dmin and dmax are minimum and maximum distance thresholds, and sconst is a user-defined
speed constant. The clip functions bound the distance function with range [dmin , dmax ]. We assume
constant speed if a robot’s distance from obstacles exceeds dmax .
Robot configuration and workspace encoding: For a given robot configuration q ∈ Q, our encoders
generate the robot-centric workspace embedding g(q) and direct configuration embedding f (q). The
former enables reasoning about the relative position of obstacles and the robot, including collisions,
for decision-making. Whereas the latter allows direct computation of the gradient of time for input
configurations needed for solving the Eikonal equation.
Workspace encoding g(q): We extend the procedure described in (Chibane et al., 2020) to obtain the
robot-centric workspace embedding g(q). First, we sample the sparse workspace obstacle point-cloud
X ⊂ X and convert it into a voxel grid W0 of dimension N × N × N × 1, where the last dimension
indicates each voxel’s occupancy. Then, the W0 is passed through a 3D CNN layer to get the output
W1 of size N × N × N × K, where K is the number of feature maps. Note that the input W0
and output W1 have the same first 3D dimensions, which we retain via padding. Next, we combine
W0 and output W1 such that the resulting workspace feature representation W becomes of the size
N × N × N × (K + 1). Note that our W is a multi-scale feature representation comprising both
input and output layers of the 3D CNN module. To compute g(q) based on W and q, we generate
several samples {p1 , p2 , · · · , pn } ∈ p(q) on the robot surface p ⊂ R3 using forward kinematics
(FK) at the given configuration q. FK allows computing robot joint positions in the workspace using
the robot joint angles. Therefore, given all joints’ positions and robot geometry, i.e., links’ lengths
and widths, the robot workspace representation as a point cloud, p(q), is obtained. Note that the
robot surface points are in the workspace, as is the obstacle point cloud. Therefore, using both robot
surface point cloud and obstacle point cloud to obtain workspace encoding enables reasoning about
the relative position of obstacles and the robot itself, including collisions, for decision-making. To
do so, we compute the nearest grid cell in W for each point pi . The grid cell is a 3D cube with


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


eight corners. Therefore the feature size for each grid cell is 8 × (K + 1). Next, the feature vectors
8 × (K + 1) are further combined via trilinear interpolation to form a representation for point pi of
size (K + 1). A full robot-centric workspace representation g(q) becomes of size n × (K + 1).
C-space encoding f (q): Finally, to compute a direct latent embedding of q, our c-space encoder
uses a ResNet-style (He et al., 2016) feed-forward neural network, denoted as f . Since we need to
compute the gradient of arrival time with respect to input configurations, the direct encoding of q
with MLP-based ResNet blocks allows gradient computation. In summary, the function f takes the
robot configuration q as an input, passes them through ResNet blocks, and outputs latent embedding.
Hence, given a robot configuration, our encoders provide robot configuration embedding f (q) and
their robot-centric workspace representation g(q), as shown in Fig. 1.
Nonlinear symmetric operator: To address the symmetry property of               Nthe Eikonal Equation, in
this section, we introduce a nonlinear symmetric operator, denoted as , to combine the features
f (qs ), f (qg ), g(qs ), and g(qg ) to form an input to our time fields generator predicting τ . We choose
a nonlinear symmetric operator min and max to combine the given feature vectors. However, since
each of these operators loses some feature information, we observed that concatenating multiple
operators’ output leads to better performance. Therefore, we combine the robot configuration feature
vectors in our setup by concatenating both min and max operations. Let N           the concatenation of two
arbitrary vectors a and b be denoted
                                   N       as [a, b]. Then, our nonlinear operator    combines the arbitrary
feature vectors a and b as a N         b = [max(a, b),  Nmin(a, b)]. Therefore, our configuration feature
vectors are combined as [f (qs ) f (qg ), g(qs ) g(qg )]. In Appendix. B, we further discuss the
details to motivate our choice of nonlinear symmetric operator.
Time field generation: Our time field generation function is a ResNet-styleN     neural architecture
                                                                                           N           that
takes the robot’s start and target configuration embeddings, i.e., [f (qs ) f (qg ), g(qs ) g(qg )], and
outputs the factorized time field τ . Our method learns to output τ and its partial derivative w.r.t inputs
via backpropagation using our Eikonal-based physics model, i.e., Equation 2. The training procedure
and the execution of our NTFields framework are described in the following.
Training details: We randomly sample N ∈ N different start and goal configura-
tion pairs in the given environment and compute their speed field using our model
S ∗ (q) described in Equation 3.                      The resulting dataset to train NTFields is of form
{(qs , qg , S ∗ (qs ), S ∗ (qg ))1 , (qs , qg , S ∗ (qs ), S ∗ (qg ))2 , · · · , (qs , qg , S ∗ (qs ), S ∗ (qg ))N }. The loss
function to train NTFields is computed as follows. For a given start (qs ) and goal (qg ), NTFields
outputs τ (qs , qg ). Next, we use the predicted τ (qs , qg ) to compute the corresponding speed values
S(qs ) and S(qg ) using Equation 2. Finally, the NTFields’ training loss between the ground truth
speed values [S ∗ (qs ), S ∗ (qg )] and the predicted speed values [S(qs ), S(qg )] is defined as:
       p                             q                             p                              q
 |1−       S ∗ (qs )/S(qs )|+|1−         S ∗ (qg )/S(qg )|+|1−         S(qs )/S ∗ (qs )|+|1−       S(qg )/S ∗ (qg )| (4)

Our loss function is isotropic to prevent predicted speed from non-uniform errors due to different
training sample pairs. Furthermore, we use a square root to smooth the loss function’s gradient. We
train our models end-to-end with their objective functions using the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2017) optimizer. Additional training data generation details are available in Appendix Section D.
Execution of bidirectional motion planning: Once trained, we leverage our NTFields model to
parametrize Equation 1, i.e., T (qs , qg ) = ∥qs −qg ∥/τ (qs , qg ), to compute the time field T (qs , qg ) and
its partial derivatives ∇qs T (qs , qg ) and ∇qg T (qs , qg ). The norms of these partial derivatives relate
to the speed model as ∥∇qs T (qs , qg )∥ = 1/S(qs ) and ∥∇qg T (qs , qg )∥ = 1/S(qg ), as described in
Section 1. Since the speed model governs the magnitude of the gradient, the gradient step will be
high when speed is low, especially near obstacles, leading to unsafe robot navigation. To mitigate
such unsafe maneuvers, we multiple gradients with S 2 (q), leading to ∥S 2 (qs )∇qs T (qs , qg )∥ = S(qs )
and ∥S 2 (qg )∇qg T (qs , qg )∥ = S(qg ). Since our speed model is small near obstacles, the term S 2 (q)
dynamically scales down the step size near obstacles. Furthermore, our model’s symmetry behavior
allows us to perform gradient steps bidirectionally from start to goal and from goal to start. Hence,
we compute the final path solution bidirectionally using iterative gradient descent by updating the
start and target configurations as follows, where α ∈ R is a step size hyperparameter.

                   qs ← qs + αS 2 (qs )∇qs T (qs , qg ); qg ← qg + αS 2 (qg )∇qg T (qs , qg )                            (5)


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     E XPERIMENTS

This section evaluates our approach through the fol-
lowing experiment analysis in solving a wide range                                                 5

of motion planning tasks.
(1) We analyze our architecture design by comparing                                                4


                                                        Box
our method with EikoNet (Smith et al., 2020) and
                                                                                                   3
the traditional FMM on a simple task. We also eval-


                                                                                                   Speed
uate our choice of non-linear symmetry operator for                                                2

feature embedding.


                                                        Bunny
(2) We perform a comparative study and compare                                                     1


our approach with the state-of-the-art MP methods.
                                                                                                   0
Baselines: Our baselines comprise NMP and clas-                FMM          NTFields     EikoNet

sical MP methods, including MPNet (Qureshi et al.,
2019; 2020), IEF (Li et al., 2022), FMM (Sethian, Figure 2: We compare our approach against
1996), RRT* (Karaman & Frazzoli, 2011) and lazy- FMM and EikoNet on box and bunny environ-
PRM* (Bohlin & Kavraki, 2000). Our IEF3D stems ment for time field generation. Our method
from the IEF paper, both of which learn via super- is able to generate correct time fields for both
vising learning using the training data from FMM. scenes, whereas EikoNet fails under complex
However, IEF3D introduces the following modifica- environment geometry.
tions and upgrades to IEF: First, unlike IEF, which
used the grid points as goal configurations, IEF3D uses FMM’s nearest numerical solutions on a
fine-grained grid for randomly sampled start and goal pairs. Second, IEF3D uses 3DCNN for 3D
environment encoding. Third, IEF3D uses update steps, as in Equation 5, to prevent large gradi-
ents leading to tangling paths. In contrast, IEF uses a multi-directional gradient search to select
the direction with a lower distance to the goal, which prevents tangling paths but consumes larger
computational times than IEF3D. Evaluation Metrics: Our evaluation metrics include planning
time, path lengths, safety margin, and success rate. The planning time indicates the time it took for
a planner to find a path solution, whereas the path length measures the sum of Euclidean distance
between path waypoints. The safety margin indicates the closest distance to obstacles along the
trajectory. Finally, the success rates represent the percentage of collision-free paths connecting the
given start and goal found by a given planner.
(3) We conduct a scalability analysis of our method to high-dimensional manipulators’ configuration
spaces where methods like FMM and IEF3D are computationally expensive to execute and train,
respectively.

4.1   A RCHITECTURE D ESIGN A NALYSIS

This section analyzes our formulation and architec-
ture design enabling physics-driven neural motion                                                    5

planning under collision-avoidance constraints. We                                                   4

                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                   Speed


compare the generated time field by NTFields (ours),
                                                        Box


                                                                                                     2
EikoNet (Smith et al., 2020), and FMM, where FMM                                                     1
represents the optimal time field for benchmark-                          NTFields(⊗) NTFields(¬ ⊗ )
                                                                                                     0
                                                                FMM
ing. The EikoNet, similar to ours, also parametrizes
the Eikonal equation. However, unlike our frame- Figure 3: We compare NTFields with and
work (see Equation 1), EikoNet overcomes singu- without nonlinear symmetric operator against
larity using the standard factored formulation, i.e., FMM on box environment for time field gen-
T (qs , qg ) = ∥qs − qg ∥ × τ̂ (qs , qg ) (Smith et al., eration. NTFields with nonlinear symmetric
2020), and does not consider c-space and workspace operator recover better quality field.
symmetric embeddings and speed ranges. Therefore,
EikoNet represents an ablation of our framework to highlight the importance of our formulation and
architectural designs.
We consider two 3D environments, named Box and Bunny, to represent simple and complex geome-
tries for time field modeling. Fig. 2 shows all methods’ speed and time field results, depicted for a
single source point. The speed field is shown using the color intensity scale, where yellow and blue
colors indicate the maximum and minimum speed, respectively. The contours represent the time field.
From Fig. 2 contours, we see that NTFields perform similarly to FMM, successfully approximate


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


gradients for pathfinding, and ensure low speed near obstacle space. For EikoNet, they can predict the
speed field in the box environment, but their time field appears as concentric circles in both scenarios.
In summary, Fig. 2 highlights that the formulation presented in Section 3.1 for NTFields enables
solving motion planning problems under-speed constraints. Furthermore, we also observe that our
architecture can represent complex geometries, which are necessary for generalization to various start
and goal configurations for generalizable MP.
We further analyze our NTFields framework’s structure by evaluating the role of non-linear symmetry
operators in recovering time fields. Fig. 3 shows the fields generated by FMM and NTFields with and
without our non-linear symmetric
                          N          operator. In NTFields, without a non-linear symmetry operator,
denoted as NTFields(¬ ), we concatenate all feature       N vectors, i.e., [f (qs ), f (qg ), g(qs ), g(qg )].
It can be seen that our proposed operator NTFields( ) recovers a better quality field, closer      N to
expert FMM,N   whereas excluding it leads to distortion. Furthermore, the loss of NTFields( ) and
NTFields(¬ ) at the same epoch were 2.3e-2 and 2.8e-2, respectively. Hence, we can conclude
that our proposed non-linear symmetric operator improves performance in recovering time fields
from source to destination.

4.2   C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS

This section presents a comparative analysis of our method and other baselines on cluttered 3D and
Gibson environments.
Cluttered 3D environment: Our cluttered 3D environment (Fig. 4) comprises randomly placed ten
obstacles of variable sizes and 2000 unseen start and goal pairs for solving motion planning tasks. We
compare NTFields’ performance with IEF3D, FMM, MPNet, RRT*, and LazyPRM*. The training
data generation for each C3D environment took 3.74 seconds for NTFields, about 2.6 hours for IEF3D
using FMM, and about 5 hours for MPNet (Qureshi et al., 2020) using RRT* to get comparable
performances. For FMM, since it requires discretization, we select the nearest grid cells to our start
and goal pairs for finding solutions. In the case of MPNet, we follow their standard training procedure
using demonstration data from RRT* algorithm. Furthermore, we run RRT* and LazyPRM* on our
test set until they find a path solution of length similar to MPNet’s solution in the given time limit of 5
seconds. Fig. 4 shows the paths for a test start and goal pair where NTFields, IEF3D, FMM, MPNet,
RRT*, and LazyPRM* path solutions are illustrated in orange, purple, green, blue, cyan, and yellow
colors, respectively. It can be seen that the paths by NTFields (ours), IEF3D, and FMM are more
smooth with sufficient safety margins compared to other methods. Additionally, the path lengths of
our method are comparable to FMM since the Eikonal model governs both. However, the MPNet,
LazyPRM*, and RRT* have shorter paths as both do not consider speed constraints near obstacles and
often have sharp turns with lower safety margins. Note that the lower safety margins of LazyPRM*,
RRT*, and MPNet’s paths are considered unsafe for robot navigation (Herbert et al., 2017). The
table in Fig. 4 shows the statistical result of six methods on our test dataset. The computation speed
of NTFields is almost 6 times faster than MPNet and FMM, and over 10 times faster than RRT*
and LazyPRM* in these cluttered scenarios. Although NTFields’ computational speed is similar
to IEF3D, the latter requires a large amount of training data for supervised learning. Furthermore,
the success rates of all methods are high and similar, i.e., NTFields (ours) 99.3%, IEF3D 96.9%,
MPNet 98.5%, FMM 99.8%, LazyPRM* 100%, and RRT* 100%. Finally, Appendix E provides an
additional comparison analysis across eight different cluttered 3D environments.
Large Complex Environments (Gibson):
This section compares our method with IEF3D, FMM, RRT*, and LazyPRM* in cluttered, large Gib-
son environments (Fig. 6) to highlight our approach’s scalability to home-like complex environments.
We excluded MPNet as it performed slower than our method and IEF3D in our earlier comparison
in cluttered 3D scenarios. Our test set contains randomly sampled 500 unseen start and goal pairs.
Fig. 5 presents the speed field of our method and FMM in two environments. Our evaluation metrics
for all methods are presented in Fig. 6 along with paths’ depiction on a test start and goal pair. In
the case of RRT* and LazyPRM*, we set the time limit of 5 seconds. Finally, the time to generate
complete data was 2.2 minutes for NTFields and 2.6 hours for IEF3D.
The results demonstrate that NTFields recover similar, near-optimal speed fields as FMM in complex
Gibson environments Fig. 5, leading to smooth path solutions while not requiring supervised training
data. The paths shown in Fig. 6 are between start and goal pairs selected on two distant corners of the


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                           time (sec)          length       safe margin     sr(%)
                                            NTFields      0.07 ± 0.00      15.06 ± 35.58    1.77 ± 1.20      99.3
                                             IEF3D        0.09 ± 0.00      15.31 ± 41.66    1.84 ± 1.22      96.9
                                              FMM         0.61 ± 0.03      15.01 ± 34.77    1.80 ± 1.20      99.7
                                             MPNet        0.44 ± 0.10      13.78 ± 30.44    0.79 ± 1.63      98.5
                                              RRT*        1.61 ± 0.00      13.79 ± 28.88    0.62 ± 1.63      100
                                            LazyPRM*      0.84 ± 0.00      13.77 ± 27.65    0.84 ± 1.77      100


Figure 4: Comparison in cluttered 3D environments. The left figure shows six paths generated by
our method (orange), IEF3D (purple), FMM (green), MPNet (blue), RRT* (cyan), and LazyPRM*
(yellow). The gray blocks are the obstacles. We make them slightly transparent for visualization. The
right table shows statistical results on 2000 different starts and goals. Our method generates smooth
paths with computational time about 6X faster than other methods besides IEF3D.


depicted environment. In this case, all methods except IEF3D find collision-free paths. According to
our test set evaluation, NTFields and IEF3D perform similarly. The FMM outperforms all methods in
success rate and safety margin, but computational times are almost 10 times slower than our method
and IEF3D. The traditional techniques LazyPRM* and RRT* have the lowest safety margins and
higher computational times. The success rate of RRT*, in this case, is the lowest as it takes significant
computational time to perform collision checking for every path, resulting in failures concerning the
time bound of 5 seconds. LazyPRM* performed faster with a higher success rate than RRT* because
we used the precomputed graph in the former case. Overall, it can be seen that our method scales
well to large complex environments, retains its low computational times, high safety margins, and
success rates, and do not require supervised training data for learning.

              Environment 1                                 Environment 2                                 1.00

                                                                                                          0.75


                                                                                                                 Speed
                                                                                                          0.50

                                                                                                          0.25

         FMM                 NTFields                  FMM                     NTFields                   0.00


Figure 5: Speed Field and Time Field visualization, the colors show speed, and contour lines show
arrival time from a source point, comparing NTFields (our) and FMM in two different, Gibson
environments. Our method recovers expert-like fields required for path planning.



                                                              time (sec)         length       safe margin     sr (%)
                                               NTFields     0.06 ± 0.00      6.91 ± 12.93    1.10 ± 0.51         90.9
                                                IEF3D       0.08 ± 0.00      7.37 ± 15.93    1.06 ± 0.51         90.3
                                                 FMM        0.67 ± 0.01      7.43 ± 14.85    1.33 ± 0.46         97.8
                                                 RRT*       4.86 ± 5.38       6.69 ± 7.68    0.16 ± 0.02         69.9
                                               LazyPRM*     1.15 ± 0.30       6.07 ± 7.60    0.21 ± 0.07         98.7


Figure 6: (Left) Demonstration of paths computed by all methods in a large Gibson environment
from a selected start and goal pair. The paths’ colors are as follows: our method (orange), IEF3D
(purple), FMM (green), RRT* (cyan), and LazyPRM* (yellow). (Right) Evaluation metrics depicting
the performance of all methods on our test sets.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Demonstration of our method in solving motion planning problems of a 6-DOF (left figure)
and 4-DOF (right figure) manipulator in 3D environments. The orange curve shows the final path
with black arrows indicating robot transversal from start to goal configurations.


4.3   S CALABILITY A NALYSIS : H IGH - DIMENSIONAL ROBOT M ANIPULATOR C-S PACE

This section demonstrates the NTFields’ generalization to 4 and 6 DOF robot configuration spaces
with 3D workspace obstacles (Fig. 7). The training data generation for these scenarios took around
60 seconds on our machine. The execution pipeline of this scenario is also highlighted in Fig. 1.
We generate 100 random start and goal configuration pairs in each scenario for testing, where the
training of our neural model is guided by Equation 2. We exclude other baselines due to their large
computational times, especially FMM and IEF3D. The FMM is very computationally expensive
to execute in high-dimensional spaces due to a very large number of grid cells. Consequently, the
IEF3D is bottlenecked by its need for training data from FMM, which also limits its applicability to
high-dimensional C-spaces (see Appendix E for more details). However, since our method directly
solves the Eikonal equation without requiring the supervised training data from FMM, it generalizes
and scales to higher-dimensional robot c-spaces. In the 4-DOF scenario (Fig. 7: Left), NTFields take
about 0.08 ± 0.00 seconds with 96% success rate; whereas in the 6-DOF scenario (Fig. 7: Right) it
takes about 0.11 ± 0.00 seconds with 91% success rate. Hence, our results show that our method
successfully generates a continuous time field leading to path solutions in high-dimensional spaces.
In contrast, it is computationally infeasible for grid-based methods like FMM and their data-driven
methods like IEF3D or IEF to solve motion planning problems using the Eikonal equation.

5     C ONCLUSIONS , L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK
We introduce a physics-informed neural motion planner that requires no expert demonstration data
from classical planners and finds path solutions with significantly low computation times and high
success rates in complex environments. Additionally, we formulate a physics-driven objective function
and reflect it in our architecture design to directly parameterize the Eikonal equation and generate
time fields for different scenarios, including a 6-DOF manipulator space, under collision-avoidance
constraints. Finally, we compare our method with traditional algorithms and state-of-the-art learning-
based motion planners (requiring expert data) and demonstrate up to 10X computational speed gains
while retaining high success rates. Furthermore, our statistics also show that the data generation for
our method takes at max 3 minutes in complex scenarios, whereas for other learning-based methods,
it can take from hours to several days.
Our future work revolves around solving the limitations of our proposed work. First, currently, our
method considers only the collision and speed constraints. Therefore, a possible avenue of research
will be to explore other PDE formulations that have a similar property to the Eikonal equation and
can encode more complex dynamical constraints such as acceleration. Second, our method only
generalizes to the new start and goal configurations in a given environment. Hence, we also aim
to extend our neural field method to generalize across different environments by exploring novel
environment encoding architectures. Third, we also aim to validate our approach on real robot systems
in our future work. Finally, since neural networks (NNs) are an approximation to PDE, there are few
failure cases due to errors in learning the time-field model using the Eikonal equation. Therefore,
another possible research direction could be to leverage a bag of neural networks to bootstrap the
learning for improved performance.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Michal Adamkiewicz, Timothy Chen, Adam Caccavale, Rachel Gardner, Preston Culbertson, Jean-
 nette Bohg, and Mac Schwager. Vision-only robot navigation in a neural radiance world. IEEE
 Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):4606–4613, 2022.

R. Bohlin and L.E. Kavraki. Path planning using lazy prm. In Proceedings 2000 ICRA. Millennium
  Conference. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. Symposia Proceedings
  (Cat. No.00CH37065), volume 1, pp. 521–528 vol.1, 2000. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2000.844107.

Julian Chibane, Gerard Pons-Moll, et al. Neural unsigned distance fields for implicit function learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21638–21652, 2020.

Zachary Clawson, Adam Chacon, and Alexander Vladimirsky. Causal domain restriction for eikonal
  equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 36(5):A2478–A2505, 2014.

Mark Nicholas Finean, Wolfgang Merkt, and Ioannis Havoutis. Predicted composite signed-distance
 fields for real-time motion planning in dynamic environments. In Proceedings of the International
 Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 31, pp. 616–624, 2021.

Sergey Fomel, Songting Luo, and Hongkai Zhao. Fast sweeping method for the factored eikonal
  equation. Journal of Computational Physics, 228(17):6440–6455, 2009.

Jonathan D Gammell, Siddhartha S Srinivasa, and Timothy D Barfoot. Informed rrt*: Optimal
  sampling-based path planning focused via direct sampling of an admissible ellipsoidal heuristic.
  In 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2997–3004.
  IEEE, 2014.

Jonathan D Gammell, Siddhartha S Srinivasa, and Timothy D Barfoot. Batch informed trees (bit*):
  Sampling-based optimal planning via the heuristically guided search of implicit random geometric
  graphs. In 2015 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 3067–3074.
  IEEE, 2015.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.

Sylvia L Herbert, Mo Chen, SooJean Han, Somil Bansal, Jaime F Fisac, and Claire J Tomlin. Fastrack:
  A modular framework for fast and guaranteed safe motion planning. In 2017 IEEE 56th Annual
  Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 1517–1522. IEEE, 2017.

Jinwook Huh, Volkan Isler, and Daniel D Lee. Cost-to-go function generating networks for high
   dimensional motion planning. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 8480–8486. IEEE, 2021.

Brian Ichter and Marco Pavone. Robot motion planning in learned latent spaces. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 4(3):2407–2414, 2019.

Brian Ichter, James Harrison, and Marco Pavone. Learning sampling distributions for robot motion
  planning. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
  7087–7094. IEEE, 2018.

Lucas Janson, Edward Schmerling, Ashley Clark, and Marco Pavone. Fast marching tree: A
  fast marching sampling-based method for optimal motion planning in many dimensions. The
  International journal of robotics research, 34(7):883–921, 2015.

Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Sachin Chitta, Evangelos Theodorou, Peter Pastor, and Stefan Schaal. Stomp:
 Stochastic trajectory optimization for motion planning. In 2011 IEEE international conference on
 robotics and automation, pp. 4569–4574. IEEE, 2011.

Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning. The
  international journal of robotics research, 30(7):846–894, 2011.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rahul Kumar, Aditya Mandalika, Sanjiban Choudhury, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Lego: Leveraging
  experience in roadmap generation for sampling-based planning. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1488–1495. IEEE, 2019.
Steven M LaValle, James J Kuffner, BR Donald, et al. Rapidly-exploring random trees: Progress and
  prospects. Algorithmic and computational robotics: new directions, 5:293–308, 2001.
Xueting Li, Sifei Liu, Shalini De Mello, Xiaolong Wang, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Jan Kautz. Learning
  continuous environment fields via implicit functions. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3ILxkQ7yElm.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew
  Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2020.
Puze Liu, Kuo Zhang, Davide Tateo, Snehal Jauhri, Jan Peters, and Georgia Chalvatzaki. Regularized
  deep signed distance fields for reactive motion generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04739, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.        arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 405–421. Springer, 2020.
Joseph Ortiz, Alexander Clegg, Jing Dong, Edgar Sucar, David Novotny, Michael Zollhoefer, and
  Mustafa Mukadam. isdf: Real-time neural signed distance fields for robot perception. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.02296, 2022.
Ahmed H Qureshi and Michael C Yip. Deeply informed neural sampling for robot motion planning. In
  2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 6582–6588.
  IEEE, 2018.
Ahmed H Qureshi, Anthony Simeonov, Mayur J Bency, and Michael C Yip. Motion planning
  networks. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2118–2124.
  IEEE, 2019.
Ahmed Hussain Qureshi, Yinglong Miao, Anthony Simeonov, and Michael C Yip. Motion plan-
  ning networks: Bridging the gap between learning-based and classical motion planners. IEEE
 Transactions on Robotics, 37(1):48–66, 2020.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Nathan Ratliff, Matt Zucker, J Andrew Bagnell, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Chomp: Gradient
  optimization techniques for efficient motion planning. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, pp. 489–494. IEEE, 2009.
Kelsey Saulnier, Nikolay Atanasov, George J Pappas, and Vijay Kumar. Information theoretic active
  exploration in signed distance fields. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 4080–4085. IEEE, 2020.
James A Sethian. A fast marching level set method for monotonically advancing fronts. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(4):1591–1595, 1996.
Jonathan D Smith, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Zachary E Ross. Eikonet: Solving the eikonal
  equation with deep neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 59
  (12):10685–10696, 2020.
Ioan A. Şucan, Mark Moll, and Lydia E. Kavraki. The Open Motion Planning Library. IEEE Robotics
  & Automation Magazine, 19(4):72–82, December 2012. doi: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2205651.
  https://ompl.kavrakilab.org.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eran Treister and Eldad Haber. A fast marching algorithm for the factored eikonal equation. Journal
  of Computational physics, 324:210–225, 2016.
Alberto Valero-Gomez, Javier V Gomez, Santiago Garrido, and Luis Moreno. The path to efficiency:
  Fast marching method for safer, more efficient mobile robot trajectories. IEEE Robotics &
  Automation Magazine, 20(4):111–120, 2013.
Malcolm CA White, Hongjian Fang, Nori Nakata, and Yehuda Ben-Zion. Pykonal: a python package
 for solving the eikonal equation in spherical and cartesian coordinates using the fast marching
 method. Seismological Research Letters, 91(4):2378–2389, 2020.
Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany, Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico
  Tombari, James Tompkin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields in visual computing
  and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11426, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

This appendix provides details on our model architectures, training and testing parameters, imple-
mentation of benchmark methods, and our computational device specifications.

A    FACTORED E IKONAL E QUATION

Let x and y be the source and destination configurations. We have the Eikonal equation
∥∇y T (x, y)∥ = 1/S(y) and factored time T (x, y) = ∥x − y∥/τ (x, y)


                         1
                             = ∥∇y T (x, y)∥                                                            (6)
                        S(y)
                         1            ∥x − y∥
                             = ∥∇y (           )∥                                                       (7)
                        S(y)          τ (x, y)
                         1      τ ∇y ∥x − y∥ − ∥x − y∥∇y τ
                             =∥                              ∥                                          (8)
                        S(y)                   τ2
                         1         y−x         ∥x − y∥∇y τ
                             =∥              −             ∥                                            (9)
                        S(y)    τ ∥x − y∥           τ2
                               r
                         1         1     ∥x − y∥2 ∥∇y τ ∥2   2(y − x) · ∇y τ
                             =      2
                                      +                    −                                           (10)
                        S(y)      τ              τ4                τ3
                                                     τ2
                        S(y) = p                                                                       (11)
                                  τ 2 + ∥x − y∥2 ∥∇y τ ∥2 − 2τ (y − x) · ∇y τ
                                                  τ2
                        S(x) = p                                                                       (12)
                                τ 2 + ∥x − y∥2 ∥∇x τ ∥2 − 2τ (x − y) · ∇x τ

B    M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

                                    N space (c-space) encoder f (·), workspace (w-space) encoder
Our model has four parts: configuration
g(·), nonlinear symmetric operator , and time field generator. The input to our framework includes
the workspace point cloud, which we convert into a voxel grid X, and the robots start qs and goal qg
configurations in M-dimensional c-space. We use the forward kinematic function to compute the
robot surface points associated with the given configuration. Furthermore, all environments’ network
architecture layer sizes are available in the supplementary source code. The network architecture
flow and motivations are described as follows.

C-space encoder: It takes a robot configuration and passes them through fully connected
(FC), non-linearity ELU, and several ResNet + ELU blocks (He et al., 2016) to generate the
embedding f (q).

W-space Encoder: To generate the configuration-dependent workspace encoding, we use
the structure shown in Fig 1 (b). First, it uses 3D CNN (Conv3d) to extract two-level obstacle features
W0 , W1 from obstacle grid X. Second, a trilinear interpolation function is used to extract the local,
multi-scale features from W0 , W1 for robot surface points p(q). Finally, these local features are
passed through an FC+ELU layer to compute the configuration-dependent workspace embedding
g(q).
Nonlinear symmetric operator: We highlight the two properties of the arrival time field and its
gradient w.r.t source to motivate our choice of a nonlinear operator instead of a linear operator for
combining features. First, assuming there is only one optimal path solution to a motion planning
problem in a static environment, the time field between source (qs ) and destination (qg ) and its
partial derivatives for the source needs to exhibit the symmetry property i.e., τ (qs , qg ) = τ (qg , qs ).
Second, the time field τ (qs , qg ) and its gradient w.r.t source qs changes when qg changes. Therefore,
to explicitly respect both properties, we introduce our nonlinear operator. For brevity, we introduce a


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


few extra notations. Let u(qs ) and u(qg ) be arbitrary robot
                                                          N start and goal feature vectors. Let h be a
neural network that takes N   the combined features u(qs ) u(qg ) as an input and outputs the time field,
i.e., τ (qs , qg ) = h[u(qs ) u(qg )]. Then, their                                    N u(qs ) becomes
                                                   Ngradient w.r.t to start configuration
∇qs τ (qs , qg ) = ∇u(qs ) N u(qg ) h × ∇qs [u(qs ) u(qg )]. Therefore, if operator      is linear (such as
summation or average), the target term u(qg ) will be independent of the start u(qg ) and disappear in
the gradient equation. Hence, if the target configuration changes, the ∇qs τ (qs , qg ) will not change.
Thus linear operator violates the second property described earlier. In contrast, the nonlinear operator
leads to ∇qs τ (qs , qg ) that depends on both source and target features, thus satisfying both symmetry
and gradient properties of the arrival time field.
Time field generator: It takes the robot start and goal embedding f (qs ), f (qg ), g(qs ), g(qg ) and
passes them through the symmetric operator and several FC+ELU and ResNet+ELU layers to
generate the time field T (Fig 1 (c)). For symmetric operator, we concatenate max(f (qs ), f (qg )),
min(f (qs ), f (qg )), max(g(qs ), g(qg )), min(g(qs ), g(qg )).

      c-space point q           w-space points p(q)      obstacle grid X        f (qs ), f (qg ), g(qs ), g(qg )


                                                                                   Symmetric Operator
      (FC + ELU) × 2                                Conv3d + ReLU
                                                                                      FC + ELU



    (ResNet + ELU) × 4                    Trilinear Interpolation                  (ResNet + ELU) × 6



                                               FC + ELU                                 FC + ELU
            FC
                                                  FC                                   FC + Sigmoid


      c-space feature f (q)                w-space feature g(q)                          time field τ

(a) configuration space encoder             (b) workspace encoder                (c) time field generator
Figure 8: NTFields neural architecture: FC is a fully connected layer, ResNet is a Residual Network
block, and Conv3d is a 3D CNN layer. (a): q is configuration space point, and f (·) is a c-space
sample embedding; (b): p(q) denotes robot surface points, X is voxel representation of obstacle point
cloud, and g(·) is a configuration depended w-space encoding; (c): τ is factorized time field from
time field.


C     DATA PRE - PROCESSING
Our training data contains sampled start and goal pairs in robot c-space randomly. We first normalize
robot c-space to [−0.5, 0.5] on each dimension. Then we define the c-space sample range as a
hypercube, i.e., all dimensions have the same range scale. Furthermore, we compute the speed
for those configurations using our speed model. Our workspace point cloud includes 20000 points
on the workspace obstacle surface, which we convert into 128 × 128 × 128 occupied voxel grid
following the procedure described in (Chibane et al., 2020). Finally, our pre-processing and training
hyper-parameters are shown in our released code.

D     T RAINING D ETAILS
During training, we use weighted random sampling to form batches for our model training during
each epoch. The traditional way of forming training batches is randomly sampling a small set of
training data for each epoch. However, we observed that weighted random sampling of data with
sample weights inversely proportional to Euclidean distance between start and goal pairs leads to


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


better performance than traditional random sampling. To train our NTFields framework end-to-end,
we gradually introduce
                 N        our workspace
                                  N       encoder as the training epochs increase using a scalar weight
λ, i.e., [f (qs ) f (qg ), λg(qs ) λg(qg )]. The λ is set to 0 for the first l0 epochs, then increased
linearly to 1 between epoch l0 to l1 , and then remains at 1 for the rest of the epochs. We observed that
gradually increasing λ stabilizes the training process, preventing it from converging to local minima.
We choose l0 = 500, l1 = 1000 for Gibson scenes.


E     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

For benchmark methods, we use OMPL’s RRT*, LazyPRM* implementation (Şucan et al., 2012),
MPNet’s open source code (Qureshi et al., 2019) and the pykonal library (White et al., 2020) for
FMM on 100 × 100 × 100 resolution grids. All experiments were performed on a device with a
3.50GHz × 8 Intel Core i9 processor, 32 GB RAM, and GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. We use 1 million
start and goal pairs to train our models in environments besides Gibson scenes, and we use 2 million
start and goal pairs in Gibson scenes. Furthermore, on our system, the training took around 5-16
hours for each model.

                  Env               Model      Data Generation Time         Training Time
                  Box             NTFields               3.90s             1500 epochs 4.9h
                 Bunny            NTFields              14.15s             1500 epochs 4.9h
                                  NTFields               3.74s             2000 epochs 7.2h
              Cluttered 3D
                                   IEF3D                 2.6h              2000 epochs 7.8h
                                  NTFields              87.49s            2000 epochs 15.9h
                Gibson 1
                                   IEF3D                 2.6h             2000 epochs 16.7h
                                  NTFields              130.36s           2000 epochs 15.9h
                Gibson 2
                                   IEF3D                 2.6h             2000 epochs 16.7h
          4-DOF Manipulator       NTFields              54.86s             1200 epochs 8.5h
          6-DOF Manipulator       NTFields              41.33s            1200 epochs 10.5h

                             Table 1: Data Generation and Training Time


We run FMM on the grid with resolutions 11, 21, and 51 on 4, 5, and 6 DOF robot manipulators to
show its computational time and corresponding approximate IEF3D data preparation times in Table
4.

                 Resolution          4-DOF              5-DOF              6-DOF
                     11         0.008s     2.2h     0.15s    41.7h     3.74s    43.3d
                     21          0.12s     33.3h    8.19s    94.8d    382.5s    4427d
                     51         10.74s    124.3d      -        -         -        -

Table 2: Resolution shows the number of divisions along each axis. The higher number, the better.
Under each robot system, the left column shows the FMM running time from a source point, and the
right column shows approximate data generation times for IEF3D. The notations s, h, and d denote
seconds, hours, and days, respectively. The empty parts in the table mean running out of memory.


E.1   C LUTTERED 3D E XPERIMENTS

We run our method on multiple cluttered 3D environments. The speed and time fields’ visualization
is shown in Fig. 9. In all eight environments, our method recovers similar fields as FMM, thus
validating the correctness of our time-field learning approach. Table 5 shows the statistical results of
our method and traditional planning techniques in these eight environments.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     time (sec)       length       safe margin   sr(%)
                         NTFields   0.05 ± 0.00   15.48 ± 15.75   2.09 ± 1.06    99.95
                          IEF3D     0.04 ± 0.00   15.48 ± 15.75   2.09 ± 1.06    96.35
                           FMM      0.58 ± 0.02   15.45 ± 15.59   2.10 ± 1.06     100
                           RRT*     1.51 ± 0.00   14.43 ± 12.16   0.61 ± 2.45     100
                         LazyPRM*   0.82 ± 0.00   14.10 ± 11.48   0.85 ± 2.52     100


Table 3: The table shows statistical results on 1000 different starts and goals for eight different scenes.


                Env 1                 Env 2                       Env 3                  Env 4
 FMM
 NTFields


                Env 5                 Env 6                       Env 7                  Env 8
 FMM
 NTFields


Figure 9: Speed Field and Time Field visualization, the colors show speed, and contour lines show
arrival time from a source point, comparing NTFields (our) and FMM in eight different cluttered 3D
environments



E.2         G IBSON E XPERIMENTS

We use a Gibson scene (Fig. 10) to discuss the design of our method and our choice of w-space
encoder training parameters l0 and l1 . The value of l0 is selected based on time-field results. We
let the time-field net and c-space encoder train end-to-end without the w-space encoder until they
learn to recover time fields to some extent. We observed that we usually get an approximate time
field in about 500 epochs in all cases. Therefore l0 is set to 500. The l1 is set larger than l0 . In our


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


experiments, it is set to 1000. Thus, the w-space encoder begins training after l0 . Fig. 10 indicates
that directly adding w-encoder (NTFields w/), l0 , and l1 = 0, will lead to the local minimum. Without
w-encoder ((NTFields w/o), i.e., l0 =inf, it can lead to the correct result but takes longer to converge.
Since we want to make our model converge faster, we add a w-encoder after l0 = 500 (NTFields),
which converges to recover the time field quickly and efficiently.

                                                                                              1.00

                                                                                              0.75


                                                                                                     Speed
                                                                                              0.50

                                                                                              0.25

         FMM                 NTFields            NTFields w/          NTFields w/o            0.00


Figure 10: Speed Field and Time Field visualization. The colors show speed, and contour lines show
arrival time from a source point, comparing NTFields, NTFields with w-encoder (NTFields w/),
NTFields without w-encoder (NTFields w/o), and FMM in a Gibson environment


                                                  17
