Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H ARDWARE - RESTRICTION - AWARE TRAINING (HRAT)
FOR MEMRISTOR NEURAL NETWORKS

                                       Anonymous authors
                                 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Memristor neural network (MNN), which utilizes memristor crossbars for vector-
         matrix multiplication, has huge advantages in terms of scalability and energy ef-
         ficiency for neuromorphic computing. MNN weights are usually trained offline
         and then deployed as memristor conductances through a sequence of program-
         ming voltage pulses. Although weight uncertainties caused by process variation
         have been addressed in variation-aware training algorithms, efficient design and
         training of MNNs have not been systematically explored to date. In this work,
         we propose Hardware-Restriction-Aware Training (HRAT), which takes into ac-
         count various non-negligible limitations and non-idealities of memristor devices,
         circuits, and systems. HRAT considers MNN’s realistic behavior and circuit re-
         strictions during offline training, thereby bridging the gap between offline training
         and hardware deployment. HRAT uses a new batch normalization (BN) fusing
         strategy to align the distortion caused by hardware restrictions between offline
         training and hardware inference. This not only improves inference accuracy but
         also eliminates the need for dedicated circuitry for BN operations. Furthermore,
         most normal scale signals are limited in amplitude due to the restriction of non-
         destructive threshold voltage of memristors. To avoid input signal distortion of
         memristor crossbars, HRAT dynamically adjusts the input signal magnitude dur-
         ing training using a learned scale factor. These scale factors can be incorporated
         into the parameters of linear operation together with fused BN, so no additional
         signal scaling circuits are required. To evaluate the proposed HRAT methodology,
         FC-4 and LeNet-5 on MNIST are firstly trained by HRAT and then deployed in
         hardware. Hardware simulations match well with the offline HRAT results. We
         also carried out various experiments using VGG-16 on the CIFAR datasets. The
         study shows that HRAT leads to high-performance MNNs without device calibra-
         tion or on-chip training, thus greatly facilitating commercial MNN deployment.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Memristor neural network (MNN) has emerged as an increasingly feasible option to alleviate the
scalability and energy efficiency challenges in neuromorphic computing. While several small-scale
MNNs have been prototyped Li et al. (2018); Yao et al. (2020); Wan et al. (2022), efficient design and
training of MNNs require an in-depth understanding of various restrictions from device, circuit, and
system perspectives. These hardware restrictions include weight uncertainty noise caused by mem-
ristor variability and a limited number of programming pulse cycles to tune memristor conductance
(e.g., 500 in Yao et al. (2020)), weight quantization noise due to limited states of memristor conduc-
tance (e.g., 5- and 4-bit in Yao et al. (2020); Wan et al. (2022)), non-destructive threshold voltage
of memristors Jo et al. (2010), limited output swing of operational amplifiers Karki (2021), and bias
quantization noise from finite-resolution digital-to-analog converters (DACs). These hardware re-
strictions collectively reduce the accuracy of MNN inference. Ignoring these hardware restrictions
during software offline training may result in poor inference or even functional failure.
As a critical step in network training, batch normalization (BN) can accelerate training convergence
Ioffe & Szegedy (2015). The scale and shift operations of BN can be merged into the previous linear
operation (e.g., fully connected or convolutional layer) after training. In this way, the hardware
complexity and cost of MNNs are alleviated, as BN does not require explicit memristor crossbars in


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


on-chip deployment. We envision that the aforementioned hardware restrictions have a significant
impact on BN fusion (also known as BN folding) in MNNs. For example, bias distortion caused by
DACs and the limited output swing of operational amplifiers should be considered during BN fusion.
Although several BN fusing strategies Jacob et al. (2018); Krishnamoorthi (2018); PyTorch (2022);
Wan et al. (2022) have been reported for quantization-aware training, unfortunately, dedicated BN
fusion strategies for MNN training and hardware deployment has so far received little attention. As
a result, it is imperative to develop hardware-restriction-aware BN fusing strategies to align signal
distortion caused by hardware restrictions before and after BN fusion in MNNs.
In this work, we propose a Hardware-Restriction-Aware Training (HRAT) method, which takes into
account various non-negligible restrictions and non-idealities from device, circuit, and system per-
spectives. HRAT considers realistic behavior and hardware restrictions of MNNs during offline
training, thereby bridging the gap between offline training and hardware deployment. The key con-
tributions of this work are summarized as follows:
       • We model various hardware restrictions of MNNs and integrate them into training, enabling
         hardware-restriction-aware training (HRAT). HRAT uses a new BN fusing strategy to align
         the restriction-induced distortion between offline training and hardware inference. This not
         only improves inference accuracy but also eliminates the need for dedicated circuitry for
         BN operation. To avoid input signal distortion of memristor crossbars, HRAT dynamically
         adjusts the signal magnitude during training using a learned scale factor. These scale factors
         can be incorporated into the parameters of linear operation together with fused BN, so no
         additional signal scaling circuits are required.
       • We conduct various experiments on baseline networks (FC-4, LeNet-5, and VGG-16) on
         datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100) to demonstrate the performance of HRAT.
         To evaluate the proposed HRAT methodology, FC-4 and LeNet-5 are firstly trained by
         HRAT and then deployed in hardware. Hardware simulation results match well with the
         offline HRAT results, indicating that HRAT can bridge the gap between offline train-
         ing and hardware deployment. To investigate the effectiveness of HRAT on large-scale
         networks, we conduct experiments using VGG-16 on the CIFAR datasets. Experimen-
         tal results demonstrate that HRAT can lead to state-of-the-art MNNs without performing
         prohibitively expensive and time-consuming on-chip retraining, enabling low-cost high-
         performance MNNs for large-scale commercialization of neuromorphic systems.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Variation-aware MNN training. Prior work on MNN offline training has predominately focused
on variation-aware training. Liu et al. (2015) address memristor conductance variability (i.e., weight
uncertainties) by introducing an additional term called “penalty of variation” into the training con-
straints. Then, an upper bound for the variation penalty is estimated and used during training. This
method improves the tolerance of trained weights to memristor variability by applying tighter train-
ing constraints. Zhu et al. (2020) propose statistical training to deal with MNN weight uncertain-
ties. Trained weights are modeled as linear functions of random variables, representing memristor
variability. Subsequent network computations are modified to propagate the effects of weight uncer-
tainties. The effectiveness of statistical training has only been validated on small MNNs. Gao et al.
(2021) propose a variation-aware MNN training framework, which develops an analytical model for
weight uncertainties and uses it as a constraint during training. Yang et al. (2021) propose stochastic-
noise-aware training to inject stochastic noise during training. Stochastic noise includes memristor
programming noise (i.e., memristor conductance variability), thermal noise, shot noise, and random
telegraph noise. Mao et al. (2022) propose defect-aware training to account for the effects of mem-
ristor conductance variability, relaxation, and failure during training. Büchel et al. (2022) address
the issue of memristor conductance variability via adversarial regularization. In order to enhance
the MNN robustness to memristor programming noise, weight space is attacked by adding Gaussian
noise Murray & Edwards (1994) to parameters during training. Wan et al. (2022) propose noise-
resilient training to inject Gaussian noise into MNN weights during the forward pass. In summary,
the aforementioned MNN training methods mainly improve noise immunity to memristor conduc-
tance (i.e., weight) uncertainties and address weight mismatch between offline training and on-chip
deployment. However, other non-negligible MNN hardware restrictions, such as the non-destructive
threshold voltage of memristors, have not been incorporated into training.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


BN fusing strategies for quantization-aware training. Several BN fusing strategies have been
proposed for quantization-aware training (Figure 5 in Appendix for details). By incorporating batch
normalization into linear operation (e.g., fully connected layer
                                                                √or convolutional layer), these strate-
gies convert W (i.e., weight of linear operation) into W γ σ 2 + ϵ (i.e., fused weight). Here γ
is a learnable scale factor in BN, σ 2 is output variance of linear operation, and ϵ is a small constant
added to prevent the divide by zero error. Wan et al. (2022) implement BN fusion in a straightfor-
ward manner Ioffe & Szegedy (2015). Jacob et al. (2018) introduce fused linear operation at the
current batch scale. During training, the statistics (i.e., mean and variance) of the current batch are
extracted before performing the fused linear operation. Then, these statistics are used to update the
Moving Average (MA) statistics and generate fused weight and bias. In this way, a fused linear oper-
ation is performed using the obtained fused weight and fused bias. Krishnamoorthi (2018) introduce
fused linear operation at the MA scale with a correction for the current batch scale. During train-
ing, the output of fused linear
                           .√ operation is corrected from the MA scale to the current batch scale
                 p
by multiplying σB + ϵ 2         σ 2 + ϵ , where σB2 is the output variance of linear operation extracted
from current batch. Thus, an additional linear operation is required to compute the current batch
statistics, which is used to update the MA statistics and correct the fused scale of linear operation.
PyTorch (2022) introduces fused linear operation at the MA scale with a plain BN and a correction
to the unfused scale. In order to apply √ a plain BN,
                                                     the scale of fused linear operation is corrected to
the the unfused scale by multiplying σ 2 + ϵ γ . Since the strategies Jacob et al. (2018); Krish-
namoorthi (2018) require two linear operations (i.e., fused linear and linear), they are much more
computationally expensive than PyTorch (2022) whose strategy involves one linear operation.
While these existing BN fusing strategies help align the distortion caused by weight quantization,
the hardware restrictions of MNN systems lead to more aspects of distortion during BN fusion.
For example, since fused bias and outputs of fused linear operation are represented as voltages
in MNNs, effective BN fusion for MNNs needs to ensure that they conform to the limited output
swing of operational amplifiers. Otherwise, voltage saturation and clamping of fused bias or outputs
of fused linear operation will cause distortion and inference degradation. Therefore, a BN fusing
strategy should align the distortion caused by hardware restrictions between training and hardware
inference.


3    MNN HARDWARE DEPLOYMENT AND RESTRICTIONS

An MNN consists of multiple interconnected network layers. The hardware schematic for one layer
is plotted in Figure 1(a), where a memristor crossbar implements a layer of synapses, and each
offline-trained weight is achieved by the difference in memristor conductance between two differen-
tial memristors Prezioso et al. (2015); Li et al. (2018); Yao et al. (2020); Wan et al. (2022), allowing
the realization of positive and negative weight. Each offline-trained bias is downloaded into a register
circuit, which controls a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) for providing a bias voltage to a neuron
summation circuit. The neuron summation circuit and activation circuit work together to generate
an output voltage Krestinskaya et al. (2019). Figure 1(b) shows the measured current-voltage sweep
curve of memristors Yan et al. (2019). Memristors have two distinct modes of operation: a safe op-
eration mode, in which memristor conductance remains unchanged from its previously programmed
value, and a conductance programming mode, in which a series of programming pulse voltages are
applied to a memristor until its conductance approaches its expected value. Since MNNs should run
in the safe operation mode during inference, the input voltage across memristors cannot exceed the
upper voltage limit of its safe operation region, such as 0.2V in Yan et al. (2019). This upper voltage
limit can be viewed as the non-destructive threshold voltage Jo et al. (2010), VT H , below which the
previously programmed memristor conductance (i.e., offline-trained weight) does not change dur-
ing inference. The non-destructive threshold voltage varies with the material, fabrication process,
and physical structure of memristors. To ensure proper inference, the input voltage clamp circuit in
Figure 1(a) should restrict voltages across the memristor crossbar with [−VT H , VT H ].
Figure 1(c) shows the schematic of a neuron summation circuit, which consists of transimpedance
amplifiers and fully differential amplifier to convert and scale the current difference (i.e., I + − I − )
to voltage and then add the DAC generated bias voltage. To avoid the inconvenience caused by
dual power supply, the neuron summation circuit is designed to operate with a single positive power
supply and set the signal ground level of the neuron summation circuit to be at the half of the supply


                                                    3
                  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                         m×n memristor
                                                                                               m×n     crossbar
                                                                                               m×nmemristor
                                                                                                    memristor  crossbar
                                                                                                             crossbar
     VI1      Input Clamp Circuit



                                            Input
                                            Input Clamp
                                    VV
                                     I1I1               M+11VIN1                      - ++
                                                                                     MM                     -M  -   +  + +                 -                                +                      -
                                                                                      M11 11
                                                                                           11            m×n
                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                          M11   12   MM
                                                                                                             11 memristor        M-M
                                                                                                                                   12 12M 1n
                                                                                                                        12 12 crossbar
                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                      -                                                     +
                                                                                                                                                                                           MM  M1n+1n
                                                                                                                                                                                              1n               M-1n M-1n



                                               Input Clamp Circuit
                         VInputs
                          I1                                                     +                   -                           +                   -                            +                    -
                                                                           M 11                  M 11                           M 12               M 12                     M 1n                   M 1n


                                                  ClampCircuit
                                                         Circuit
     VIm                              V
                                    VImIm               M+m1VINm MM
                                                                  -M+ m1
                                                                                          +
                                                                                                           M-m1
                                                                                                             - M+
                                                                                                                                         M+
                                                                                                                                          - m2                   M-m2- M+
                                                                                                                                                                                            + -
                                                                                                                                                                                           MM                  M-mn
                       VIm                                         m1 m1                                   M m1         m2               MM  +
                                                                                                                                           m2 m2                    M m2        mn
                                                                                                                                                                                             mn +
                                                                                                                                                                                                mn M mn               M-mn
                                                                           M+m1                 M-m1                            M+m2           M-m2                             M+mn               M-mn
   Inputs               Inputs                                                                       +
                                                                                                                    I-1-
                                                                                                                    I+n- +    I-n -                      +
                                                                                                                                                                          I-2 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VTH
             Inputs                                                       I+ 1                  I-1II+11              I nI- n
                                                                                                                        I1I 2
                                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                                  In                    II-2I2+2-                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                I 2 I n+                                                                    VTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VTH
                                                                                        I+ 1             I-1            In               I+2                I2                         In
                                     Register                                                                                                                                                                                                               safe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         safe
                                                                                                      + -             +     -                             + -                                                                                                    safe
                                                         -
                                                     + Vbias1               V+bias2-                 ++ S -  ++ -- + S+ -
                                                                                                         Vbiasn                                          + S+ -                                                                                       safe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        operation
                                                   + S 1 ++ S - DAC
                                                                + S 2DAC     + S2 ++ S - +DAC               + S
                                                                                              SDAC                 Vbiasn + S
                                      DAC1
                                            VDAC
                                                   DAC
                                                   1
                                              bias1 V Vbias1
                                                                           DAC
                                                                      Vbias2
                                                                         2
                                                                                     V
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                    V V
                                                                                                          DAC
                                                                                                    n biasn + nS                                                                                                                                     operation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   operation operation
                                       DAC1
                                                       bias1
                                                              VS1
                                                                           V bias2     bias2
                                                                                         VS2
                                                                                                         biasn
                                                                                                                    VSn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          region
                                                  VS1 VS1 VS1              VS2 VS2 VS2                    VV SnSn       VSn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       region region
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    region
                                                                          ReLU Activation Circuit
                                       Vbias1…Vbiasn          ReLUReLUActivation
                                                                           Activation Circuit
                                                                                           Circuit Circuit
                                                                           ReLU      Activation
                                                                 VO1    Outputs            VO2                       VOn
                                       Outputs Outputs
                                                    Outputs                                                                                                                                                                       (c) Measured current-voltage sweep curve of
                                                     VO1 VO1 V               VO2 VO2                        VV OnOn
              (a) Hardware schematic               O1
                                                      of one MNN Vlayer  O2
           (a) Hardware schematic of a one-layer MNN for forward pass.memristor
                                                                               for forward pass.VOn (c) Measured current-voltage sweep curve of
                                                                                                      A Measured
                                                                                                     (c)  (b) (c)
                                                                                                               Measured
                                                                                                          memristor            current
                                                                                                                                     et al.and
                                                                                                                       current-voltage
                                                                                                                        from Yan
                                                                                                                   Measured                    sweep
                                                                                                                                             (2019),
                                                                                                                                  current-voltage    voltage
                                                                                                                                                         curve
                                                                                                                                                         whose
                                                                                                                                                            sweepofcurve of
                                                                                                                                                                 non-
       (a)    crossbar
            Hardware          implements
                               schematic       of aa layer   of
                                                      one-layer  synapses.
                                                                   MNN    for   Each
                                                                               forward  offline-trained
                                                                                          pass.           sweep
                                                                                                     memristor   from
                                                                                                                   from
                                                                                                          destructive  Yan
                                                                                                                    curve  of
                                                                                                                          Yanetmemristors
                                                                                                                         voltageal.
                                                                                                                                et  (2019),
                                                                                                                                    al.
                                                                                                                                   range(2019),
                                                                                                                                            is whose
                                                                                                                                                 Yanwhose
                                                                                                                                                [-0.2V,  non-
                                                                                                                                                        et  al.non-
                                                                                                                                                           0.2V]  and non-
(a) Hardware
           This
         (a)         schematic
                     crossbar schematic
               Hardware                 of a one-layer
                                      implements     of       MNN
                                                        aa layer       for  forward
                                                                    of synapses.
                                                            one-layer    MNN         Each
                                                                                   for   pass.synapse
                                                                                        forward    pass.      memristor from Yan et al. (2019),                 whose
       This weight
               crossbar    is achieved
                                implements    by two    differential
                                                   a layer             memristors.
                                                              of synapses.    Each synapse           destructive
                                                                                                          (2019)  voltage range is [-0.2V, 0.2V] and
           consists
This crossbar             of two memristors
                      implements             a layer  to aallow positivesynapses.
                                                          oflayer
                                                              synapses.    and
                                                                            Eachnegative
                                                                                     synapseweights.      threshold
                                                                                                     destructive      voltage
                                                                                                                    voltage
                                                                                                              destructive       is
                                                                                                                              range0.2V.
                                                                                                                              voltage  is  [-0.2V,
                                                                                                                                          range     is 0.2V]
                                                                                                                                                        [-0.2V, and
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2V] and
         This
       consists  crossbar
                   of two memristors implements to allow    positiveof                 Each
                                                                      and negative weights.     synapse
                                                                                                     threshold voltage is 0.2V.
consists consists
          of two memristors                to allow to positive   and negative      weights.weights. threshold   voltage
                                                                                                              threshold    is 0.2V.
                                                                                                                            voltage   is
                                                                                                                                   Vout   0.2V.
                       of two memristors                R
                                                          allow positive    and negative                                f
                                                                                                                           Vout
                                                   R                                          R             f                 Vout Vout               Saturation                                           3
                        +          -                                        R
                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                             VDD             Saturation                                        3

                I+
                      I
                            I-
                                 I           R+
                                              I -     - R R       R
                                                                       R             RR
                                                                                                 f                    VDD   f
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                  Saturation
                                                                                                                                                                      2


                                        I +
                                                      +                          R
                                                                                            -
                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                        VDD VDD
                                                                                                                                     1                       2
                                                                                                                                                               Saturation                  3 3                    3
                           + - -
                                                                                                                                                                                  3

                                            - + +
       I+          -                                        V       R
                                                                          - R        R
                                                                                     -
               VISGI++ -+ S +I                         VRM1 M1                                                                                      2                                      3
                                                                    R
                                                                                        VSG -
                                                                                            +                           1                                                   2
                                                                     I        RR                             1
                                                                                                               -          3
              VSG                          + S                                  + VISG VRM1                        +
                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                  + R3                                                                                 VS
                                                                                            +VRM2f VVM2M1         VM3R3 M3 - R3R3
                                                                                                                        V                  V-S
              + -              -                                                                              +
             + SVVSGVbias ++ S                                                                            -          -
                                                                                          f
    VSG                                                                     VSG- I- VSG                   R1              R3 +               +
                                    bias                                      I Rf -VM2 - Rf RV1 + R2 VRM3       2
                                                                                                                     +                     V S                                                                               VS
                                             Vo Vo                                          +         M2                     VM3
     Vbias                          Vbias                            I-             -  +      R
                                                                                                                       R3
                                                                                                                            Vbias  V  R
                                                                                                                                     bias3                                                                                                           NormalNormal
                                                                                - VI SG VSG - 1         R2 R1     R2                                                                                                                                     Operation
                  Vo                                      Vo                                            VSG VSG                                                                                                                                     Operation
                                           +                   Vbias            +                                                                                                                                                                      Normal   Normal
                                                                         Vbias
                                                                             VSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Saturation Region
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Saturation            RegionVin Vin
                                      V       VSGamplifiers
                                                        Vand                                                                                                                                                                                             Operation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Operation
           (b)(b) Neuron  summing  circuit.  All          SG and  digital-to-analog
                                        SG
               Neuron circuit schematic. All amplifiers      digital-to-analog                                                                                                                                                                 0     0
           converters
       converters         (DACs)
                     (DACs)           operate
                                operate     fromfrom      a single
                                                     a single        supply
                                                                supply        voltage
                                                                        voltage         and have (d) The
                                                                                  and have                 Saturation
                                                                                                      (d)output
                                                                                                           The      Saturation
                                                                                                                output  voltages
                                                                                                                  voltages         Region   Region
                                                                                                                                   of amplifier
                                                                                                                            of amplifier
                                                                                                                                                  Vin
                                                                                                                                                 circuits Vin
(b) Neuron a (c) A neuron
              circuit          summation
                        schematic.               circuit.
                                          Allregion
                                                amplifiers It as
                                                               uses
                                                                 and resistors and   operational
                                                                      digital-to-analog          am- (d)     Output   voltage   swing ofcircuits
                                                                                                                                           ampli-
       a (b)  Neuron
              limited
          limited  normal circuit
                        normal       schematic.
                                    operation
                               operation               All
                                                         as amplifiers
                                                    region   shown shown
                                                                      in   and
                                                                         (d).   digital-to-analog
                                                                           in Thus,
                                                                               (d).  Thus,
                                                                                       node node and DACs
                                                                                                      and DACs     are limited
                                                                                                             are limited 0between between  0V (ground)
                                                                                                                                    00V (ground)
converters   plifiers
             (DACs)   tooperate
                          V,scale  thefrom
                                       , current    difference
                                              ,aVsingle    supply  of voltage
                                                                      differential   memristors, and Thefiers and DACs    is limited  between circuits
                                                                                                                                              0V
           voltages
       voltages   at VatM1
         converters      (DACs)
                             V ,V
                             M1M2 ,VM2M3 V
                                     operate
                                         ,VM3bias  bias and
                                                   from
                                                  and   VS a V
                                                            are   are
                                                              single
                                                                S clamped  intoand
                                                                      clamped
                                                                       supply    into
                                                                                 [0,  have
                                                                                voltage[0, and
                                                                                     VDD]. VDD]. (d)
                                                                                               have
                                                                                                 and       output
                                                                                                      and(d)
                                                                                                     VDD   VDD
                                                                                                           (the     voltages
                                                                                                                 (the
                                                                                                               The     supply
                                                                                                                     output
                                                                                                                supply          of amplifier
                                                                                                                                voltage)
                                                                                                                               voltages
                                                                                                                        voltage)         of amplifier circuits
            then adds
a limiteda normal       a bias voltage
                    operation           from
                                   region  as  ashown
                                                 digital-to-analog  converter (DAC).   and VDD (the supply voltage).
           limited normal       operation   region   as in  (d). Thus,
                                                         shown    in (d).node     and DACs
                                                                          Thus, node     andare  limited
                                                                                              DACs    are between  0V (ground)
                                                                                                          limited between 0V (ground)
voltagesvoltages
         at VM1, VatM2V, M1
                         VM3  , V
                            , VM2bias and V
                                  , VM3, Vbiasare  clamped    into [0, VDD].
                                            S and VS are clamped into [0, VDD].   and VDD  (the
                                                                                         and    supply
                                                                                              VDD   (thevoltage)
                                                                                                         supply voltage)
                                                                                              Figure 1: MNN hardware overview and deployment restrictions.



                  voltage (i.e., VSG = VDD/2 in Figure 1(c)). In this way, all node voltages are between 0V and
                  VDD (the supply voltage), and the voltages (VIN 1 ...VIN m ) in Figure 1(a) will be clamped into
                  [VSG − VT H , VSG + VT H ]. In addition to the memristor threshold voltage restriction described
                  above, MNN devices, circuits, and systems suffer from the following restrictions and non-idealities:
                  Weight quantization noise. Offline-trained weight is implemented by memristor conductance in
                  MNN. Memristor is typically programmed to several conductance states, resulting in limited weight
                  bitwidth (i.e., 5 bits Yao et al. (2020) and 4 bits Wan et al. (2022)) and weight quantization noise.
                  Weight uncertainty noise. Due to physical mechanisms (e.g., device relaxation Mao et al. (2022);
                  Wan et al. (2022)) and a limited number of programming pulse cycles (e.g., 500 in Yao et al.
                  (2020)), memristor conductance manifests significant variations, leading to considerable mismatch
                  from offline-trained weight Büchel et al. (2022).
                  Limited output swing of operational amplifiers and DACs. The outputs of the amplifier or DAC
                  can only swing within the power supply range (assuming rail-to-rail circuit topologies are used). The
                  circuit outputs will be clamped at the ground or VDD level when the intended signal values exceed
                  the output swing range as shown in Figure 1(d). Such hardware restriction should be considered
                  during training.
                  Bias quantization noise of finite-resolution DACs. DAC circuits are widely used for bias voltage
                  generation due to their high precision and great flexibility. The output resolution of a DAC (usually
                  specified in bits) represents the smallest output increment that can be produced. When bias voltages
                  are generated by finite-resolution DACs, bias quantization noise potentially degrades the inference
                  performance.


                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       4      H ARDWARE -R ESTRICTION -AWARE T RAINING (HRAT)

       In this section, we present Hardware-Restriction-Aware Training (HRAT), which takes into account
       various non-negligible restrictions of memristor devices, circuits, and systems. Figure 2(a) and
       2(b) illustrate the HRAT process for a layer without BN and with the proposed BN fusing strategy,
       respectively. In HRAT, weight parameters are quantized to mimic the process of using a limited
       number of pulse cycles to program memristor conductance; bias parameters are quantized to mimic
       bias quantization noise caused by the finite-resolution of DACs; process variation of memristor
       devices is mimicked by adding weight uncertainty noise, and the limited output swing of operational
       amplifiers and DACs is mimicked by a clamp function. Furthermore, a trainable scale factor s is
       added to each layer. In this way, the output signal magnitude of each network layer can be adjusted
       to a proper range. Key aspects of HRAT will be described in detail in the following subsections.

                                                                                                [-VC, VC]         y[-V
                                                                                                                    BNC, VC]            yBN
 VDD: supply voltage
                 VDD:for          s : a learnable
                         MNNvoltage
                       supply           for MNN scales : afactor
                                                           learnable scale factor          Clamp        AddClamp             Clamp
                                                                                                                           Add                   Clamp
 VTH: non-destructive threshold voltage
                 VTH: non-destructive     of memristor
                                        threshold   voltage of memristor                                   [-VC, VC]           [-VC[-V
                                                                                                                                    , VCC,]VC]        [-VC, VC]
 VC : maximum allowable   positive
                 VC : maximum      signal level,
                                allowable         = s *signal
                                            positive     VDD/2level, = s * VDD/2           Quant      ClampQuant         ClampReLU               ReLU
-VC : minimum allowable   negative
                -VC : minimum       signal level,
                                allowable         = s *(-VDD/2)
                                            negative    signal level, = s *(-VDD/2)                                                [0, VC]             [0, VC]
                                                                                        Fused Bias yBN w/oFusedFused
                                                                                                                 Bias Bias
                                                                                                                        yBN w/o Fused Bias
                                                                                                                               Div       Factor = sDiv     Factor = s
                                                                                                Separate           Separate
                      Output [0, VDD/2]
                                    Output [0, VDD/2]                                                   yBN                yOutput
                                                                                                                             BN        [0, VDD/2]
                                                                                                                                                Output [0, VDD/2]
                           Div   Factor = sDiv Factor = s                                     Batch Norm         Batch Norm
                                                                                                       y          Update yMA Mean          & MAMA
                                                                                                                                       Update   VarMean & MA Var
                              [0, VC]         [0, VC]
                          ReLU            ReLU                                                      Add       Bias Add        Bias
                                                                                                           y w/o Bias      y w/o Bias
                             [-VC, VC]        [-VC, VC]                                                Current unfusedCurrent
                                                                                                                        scale unfused scale
                          Clamp            Clamp                                                  Scale           Scale
                                                                                                        yBN w/o Fused Bias
                                                                                                                        yBN w/o Fused Bias
          [-VC, VC]         [-VC, VC]                                                                   MA fused scale MA fused scale
   Clamp              Add
                   Clamp               Add
                                                                                               Fused Linear    Fused Linear
                         [-VC, VC]        [-VC, VC]
    Quant            Clamp
                   Quant              Clamp                                                          Add Weight Uncertainty
                                                                                                                    Add WeightNoise
                                                                                                                                  Uncertainty Noise
                                                                                      [-VTH, VTH]   [-VTH, VTH]
     Bias              Linear
                       Bias                 Linear                                                  Quant          Quant
                                                                                                          MA fused scale MA fused scale
            [-VTH, VTH]          Add             Add                                          Clamp         Clamp
                                  [-VTH, VWeight
                                          TH]    Uncertainty Noise
                                                         Weight Uncertainty Noise                   Fused Weight Fused Weight

                   Clamp         Quant Clamp    Quant                                                 Fuse BN       MA Fuse
                                                                                                                       MeanBN
                                                                                                                            & MAMA
                                                                                                                                VarMean & MA Var

                    Input Weight Input Weight                                                  Input Weight      Input Weight
                      (a) HRAT for a network layer without BN                         (b) HRAT for a network layer with BN fusion

                                    Figure 2: Hardware-restriction-aware training (HRAT) for MNNs.


       4.1      PARAMETER - NOISE - AWARE TRAINING

       Instead of training MNNs at full precision, their offline-trained weights are typically quantized to
       finite discrete states (i.e., 5 bits Yao et al. (2020) and 4 bits Mao et al. (2022); Wan et al. (2022)).
       As described in Appendix A.1, we uniformly quantize weight parameters and symmetrically clamp
       the states to a finite number. To model the weight uncertainty and improve the noise robustness of
       MNNs, we follow Murray & Edwards (1994); Wan et al. (2022) and inject Gaussian noise to weight
       parameters during forward pass. Thus, weight quantization noise and weight uncertainty noise are
       added to weight parameters during training. Similarly, due to the limited resolution of DACs, DAC
       outputs are linearly quantized. Quantization noise is injected into the bias parameter during training.
       To solve the non-differentiation issue of quantization function, we use the Straight-Through Estima-
       tor (STE) trick to relax the quantization function of weight and bias parameters. The perception of
       weight and bias noise during training is called parameter-noise-aware training, through which the
       resulting neural networks are insensitive to MNN deployment restrictions of weight quantization,
       weight uncertainty, and bias quantization noise. While other methods may perform better in ad-
       dressing parameter noise (e.g., adversarial training Büchel et al. (2022)), simply injecting parameter
       noise is more computation efficient and sufficient for maintaining MNN accuracy.


                                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   N ON - DESTRUCTIVE THRESHOLD VOLTAGE OF MEMRISTORS

During inference, a memristor should operate at or below its non-destructive threshold voltage to
avoid conductance drift. As the threshold voltage is usually low (e.g., 0.1V Yan et al. (2018) , 0.2V
Yan et al. (2019), 0.2V Yao et al. (2020)), the magnitude of most input signals to memristor crossbars
will be chopped by the input clamp circuit in Figure 1(a)), causing significant signal distortion.
Therefore, HRAT clamps the signal magnitude across memristor crossbars to [−VT H , VT H ] during
training to correspond to the input clamp circuit in hardware MNNs.

4.3   S IGNAL MAGNITUDE SCALING

Note that all output voltages of operational amplifers and DACs in Figure 1 are restricted between
0 and VDD. By setting the signal ground level VSG = VDD/2 in the neuron summation circuit of
Figure 1(c), the equivalent signal swing range is [− VDD/2 , VDD/2 ]. Then, by introducing a
learnable scale factor s for each network layer in the proposed HRAT, the equivalent signal swing
range at these hardware nodes is clamped to [− s · VDD/2 , s · VDD/2 ]. Overall, HRAT divides
output signals of a network layer by a scale factor s and attempts to linearly compresses them within
the output swing of operational amplifiers and DACs. During inference, these scale factors can be
incorporated into the parameters of linear operation together with fused BN, so no additional signal
scaling circuits are required.

4.4   BN FUSING STRATEGY

Training an MNN with or without BN layers makes a big difference. The training process for a
network layer without BN operation is illustrated in Figure 2(a), which takes into account the above
hardware restrictions. Regarding training a network layer with BN operation, we propose a new
BN fusing strategy to align the restriction-induced distortion between offline training and hardware
inference. Referring to PyTorch (2022), this new BN fusing strategy performs one linear operation.
As illustrated in Figure 2(b), the fused weight is first obtained using the MA statistics, and then the
weight quantization noise and weight uncertainty noise are injected into the fused weight. Next, after
performing
√            the fused linear operation, the output is corrected to the unfused scale by multiplying
   σ 2 + ϵ γ . Because the corrected output is on the unfused scale, normal BN can be performed to
obtain the result yBN and update the MA statistics. Since the calculation of yBN does not consider
hardware restrictions, yBN is separated into two terms: fused bias bf used and BN result without
fused bias ‘yBN − bf used ’. Next, bias quantization noise is added into the bf used . Then, quantized
bf used , ‘yBN − bf used ’ and their sum are clamped to the range of [− s · VDD/2 , s · VDD/2 ],
respectively. After passing a ReLU activation function and dividing a scale factor s, the final output
of HRAT for a network layer is limited to [0, VDD/2 ].


5     BASELINE N ETWORK A RCHITECTURES AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We choose a four-layer fully connected NN (FC-4), LeNet-5 LeCun et al. (1998), and VGG-16
Simonyan & Zisserman (2015), as our baseline architectures. We design the miniature model FC-4
for rapid verification of the proposed HRAT algorithm. FC-4 consists of three hidden layers and
one classification layer. The three hidden layers have 512, 128, and 32 nodes respectively. LeNet-
5 and VGG-16 are implemented from the original papers, only slightly different to accommodate
different datasets. For experiments on the CIFAR datasets, the number of features in the hidden
layers of LeNet-5 is increased by a factor of 5. For fast convergence and better performance, we
also implement batch normalization (BN) layers in each baseline model. Features are normalized
via BN except for the fully connected layers in VGG-16. The default supply voltage of MNNs
is 3V. Memristor behaviors (e.g., the non-destructive threshold voltage of 0.2V and conductance
tuning range of [2µS, 20µS]) are obtained from the experimental results Yao et al. (2020). Offline
weights are initialized and limited to the range of [-1,1]. After HRAT, offline-trained weights are
transformed to the memristor conductance values for hardware deployment. Weight noise follows
a Gaussian distribution and is generated according to the weight range, for example, std=0.1 means
that the standard deviation of weight noise is equal to 10% of the entire weight range. We use 40
test runs to statistically measure the inference performance of these baseline architectures.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

6.1     FC-4 AND L E N ET-5 ON MNIST

Figure 3(a) plots the mean inference accuracy of FC-4 on MNIST for several combinations of weight
noise and weight bitwidth. An inference accuracy of 98.60% is obtained using the software bench-
mark models (i.e., floating-point or 8-bit quantized weights without MNN hardware restrictions).
Mean accuracies of 96.05% and 97.82% are achieved for HRAT without and with signal strength
scaling, respectively. The 1.77% accuracy difference reflects the importance of performing signal
magnitude scaling in HRAT. If on-chip retraining is performed after HRAT, the mean accuracy rises
from 97.82% to 98.40%, which is very close to the software benchmark result (i.e., 98.60%). Al-
though on-chip retraining has been demonstrated in small-scale MNNs Li et al. (2018); Wang et al.
(2019); Yao et al. (2020) to recover the accuracy drop caused by hardware non-idealities, such ap-
proaches require complex analog backpropagation learning circuitry Krestinskaya et al. (2018a;b),
making them unsuitable for cost-effective hardware implementation. Figure 3(b) plots the standard
deviation (std) of inference accuracy for FC-4 on MNIST. HRAT results in an average variance of in-
ference accuracy of 0.39, which drops to 0.07 after performing on-chip retraining. Figure 3(c) plots
the mean inference accuracy of LeNet-5 on MNIST for several combinations of power supply volt-
age VDD and memristor threshold voltage VT H , assuming zero weight noise and 8-bit quantized
weights. Thanks to signal magnitude scaling, HRAT is insensitive to the choice of power supply
voltage and memristor threshold voltage, and hence achieves a mean accuracy of 98.84%. Figure
3(d) shows very close inference accuracy of FC-4 and LeNet-5 models on MNIST with HRAT.


      (a) Mean inference accuracy of FC-4 on MNIST        (b) Inference variance of MNN FC-4 on MNIST


    (c) Mean inference accuracy of MNN LeNet-5 on        (d) Approximate inference accuracy of FC-4 and
    MNIST for several combinations of VDD and VT H       LeNet-5 models on MNIST with HRAT

           Figure 3: Inference performance of MNN FC-4 and LeNet-5 models on MNIST.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To validate the proposed HRAT, offline trained FC-4 and LeNet-5 models are implemented in hard-
ware circuits and simulated using the Cadence Spectre tool. Fully-connected layers are implemented
according to Figure 1(a) (Figure 6 in Appendix for details). For convolutional layers, each filter
kernel is implemented by a sub-circuit similar to a fully-connected layer. The filter sub-circuit is in-
stantiated multiple times, so all neuron convolutions of a layer are computed simultaneously. ReLU
activation and max pooling are also implemented by dedicated analog circuits. BN fused weights
and biases, along with scale parameters obtained from HRAT are transformed to memristor con-
ductance values, DAC outputs, and amplifier gains in these analog circuits. To reduce hardware
simulation time, we use a macro model of operational amplifiers to capture realistic behaviors, such
as limited output swings, finite voltage gain, limited bandwidth, etc. Then, output voltages of each
neuron obtained from hardware circuit simulations are compared with their corresponding offline
HRAT results. We find hardware simulation matches with offline HRAT. (Appendix A.4 for details)

6.2   VGG-16 ON CIFAR DATASETS

Figure 4(a) plots the mean inference accuracy of VGG-16 on CIFAR-100 for several combinations
of weight noise and weight bitwidth. The software benchmark models (i.e., floating-point weights
or 8-bit quantized weights) achieve inference accuracies of 68.59% and 66.27%, respectively. Note
that software benchmark models are not affected by hardware non-idealities. At a weight noise level
of std = 0.025, HRAT with 6-bit quantized weight leads to the highest accuracy of 62.85%. When
the weight noise level is std = 0.05, HRAT with 4-bit quantized weight leads to the highest accuracy
of 57.94%, which is only 8.33% lower than the software benchmark model (i.e., 66.27%). Note
std=0.05 means that the standard deviation of Gaussian weight noise is equal to 5% of the entire
weight range, this weight noise level is significant. These results demonstrate that HRAT is robust
to weight noise disturbance. Figure 4(a) also reveals that, for a given weight noise level, there is
an optimal weight bitwidth to balance the trade-off between noise immunity and expressiveness of
MNN. Lower bitwidth means higher quantization noise is injected into weight during training, thus
exhibiting stronger noise immunity during inference. However, lower bitwidth is not always better,
because the expressive power of the model is limited Yoon et al. (2022). This explains why the
optimal weight bitwidth in Figure 4(a) tends to be lower at stronger noise levels. Furthermore, Figure
4(a) shows that if the signal magnitude scaling is not performed in HRAT, training cannot converge
at all. Compared to Figure 3(a), where a 1.77% drop in accuracy for FC-4 trained by HRAT without
signal magnitude scaling, we can see that signal magnitude scaling is more critical and indispensable
in large-scale MNNs. As shown in Figure 4(a), if VGG-16 is retrained on-chip after HRAT, the
best accuracy rises to 65.93% and 65.88% for the weight noise levels of std=0.025 and std=0.05,
respectively. Both accuracies are close to the software benchmark result (i.e., 66.27%). Figure
4(a) also shows that the optimal weight bitwidth for on-chip retraining is 8. This is because on-chip
retraining is done individually for each deployed MNN, instead of statistically like HRAT. Therefore,
for each VGG-16 model under on-chip retraining, weight uncertainty caused by memristor variations
becomes deterministic rather than stochastic. As a result, when training a model with deterministic
weight uncertainty, the higher the weight bitwidth, the better the retraining result.
Figure 4(b) plots the variance of inference accuracy for VGG-16 on CIFAR-100. As lower bitwidth
is more robust to noise disturbance, HRAT with lower bitwidth leads to less variance in inference
accuracy. For HRAT with on-chip retraining, since retraining is performed individually with deter-
ministic weight uncertainty, higher bitwidth results in less variance in inference accuracy.
The effect of DAC resolution on HRAT is simulated and depicted in Figure 4(c) and 4(d), where the
performance of software benchmark models is also plotted for comparison. Both figures demonstrate
that the use of finite-resolution of DACs has a big impact on inference. If an ideal DAC (i.e.,
infinitely small resolution) is used to generate bias, an increase in weight noise reduces the inference
accuracy. For a fixed weight noise level, the reduction in DAC resolution significantly deteriorates
inference. Figure 4(e) shows that very close results can be obtained using 14-bit or ideal DACs (i.e.,
infinitely small resolution) for bias generation. To maintain high inference accuracy, DAC resolution
for VGG-16 on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 needs to be no lower than 9 or 12 bits, respectively.
To investigate the effect of using learnable scale factors on HRAT, Figure 4(f) plots the inference
accuracy curves of VGG-16 over 500 epochs on CIFAR-100. Compared with simulation curves
using fixed scale factors in HRAT, the learnable scale factors help VGG-16 to converge with 2.42%
and 4.71% higher accuracy for ideal DACs and 11-bit DACs, respectively.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Mean accuracy of VGG-16 on CIFAR-100           (b) Inference variance of VGG-16 on CIFAR-100


    (c) VGG-16 accuracy vs. bitwidth on CIFAR-10       (d) VGG-16 accuracy vs. bitwidth on CIFAR-100


                                                              Ideal DAC for Bias Generation   11-bit DAC for Bias Generation


        (e) Effect of DAC resolution on HRAT           (f) Effect of a learnable scale factor s on HRAT

          Figure 4: Inference performance of MNN VGG-16 models on CIFAR datasets.


7    C ONCLUSION

We propose hardware-restriction-aware training (HRAT) for memristor neural networks (MNNs)
to consider non-negligible hardware restrictions. HRAT integrates various hardware restrictions,
adopts a new BN fusing strategy, and dynamically adjusts signal magnitude to avoid distortion. The
simulation results of MNN hardware implementation match well with HRAT results, validating that
HRAT successfully mimics the realistic behavior and hardware restrictions of MNNs during offline
training. Experimental results also demonstrate that HRAT can lead to state-of-the-art MNNs with-
out performing prohibitively expensive and time-consuming on-chip retraining, enabling low-cost
high-performance MNNs for large-scale commercialization of neuromorphic computing systems.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Julian Büchel, Fynn Faber, and Dylan R Muir. Network insensitivity to parameter noise via adver-
  sarial regularization. In ICLR, 2022.
Di Gao, Grace Li Zhang, Xunzhao Yin, Bing Li, Ulf Schlichtmann, and Cheng Zhuo. Reli-
  able memristor-based neuromorphic design using variation-and defect-aware training. In 2021
  IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD), pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2021.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In ICML, 2015.
Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard,
  Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for
  efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2704–2713, 2018.
Sung Hyun Jo, Ting Chang, Idongesit Ebong, Bhavitavya B Bhadviya, Pinaki Mazumder, and Wei
  Lu. Nanoscale memristor device as synapse in neuromorphic systems. Nano letters, 10(4):1297–
  1301, 2010.
Jim Karki. Understanding operational amplifier specifications. Technical report, Texas Instruments,
  July 2021.
Olga Krestinskaya, Khaled Nabil Salama, and Alex Pappachen James. Analog backpropagation
  learning circuits for memristive crossbar neural networks. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium
  on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2018a.
Olga Krestinskaya, Khaled Nabil Salama, and Alex Pappachen James. Learning in memristive neu-
  ral network architectures using analog backpropagation circuits. IEEE Transactions on Circuits
  and Systems I: Regular Papers, 66(2):719–732, 2018b.
Olga Krestinskaya, Alex Pappachen James, and Leon Ong Chua. Neuromemristive circuits for edge
  computing: A review. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 31(1):4–23,
  2019.
Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi. Quantizing deep convolutional networks for efficient inference: A
  whitepaper. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08342, 2018.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Can Li, Daniel Belkin, Yunning Li, Peng Yan, Miao Hu, Ning Ge, Hao Jiang, Eric Montgomery,
  Peng Lin, Zhongrui Wang, et al. Efficient and self-adaptive in-situ learning in multilayer memris-
  tor neural networks. Nature communications, 9(1):1–8, 2018.
Beiye Liu, Hai Li, Yiran Chen, Xin Li, Qing Wu, and Tingwen Huang. Vortex: Variation-aware
  training for memristor x-bar. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Design Automation Conference,
  pp. 1–6, 2015.
Ruibin Mao, Bo Wen, Mingrui Jiang, Jiezhi Chen, and Can Li. Experimentally-validated crossbar
  model for defect-aware training of neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
  II: Express Briefs, 69(5):2468–2472, 2022.
Alan F Murray and Peter J Edwards. Enhanced mlp performance and fault tolerance resulting from
  synaptic weight noise during training. IEEE Transactions on neural networks, 5(5):792–802,
  1994.
Mirko Prezioso, Farnood Merrikh-Bayat, BD Hoskins, Gina C Adam, Konstantin K Likharev, and
 Dmitri B Strukov. Training and operation of an integrated neuromorphic network based on metal-
 oxide memristors. Nature, 521(7550):61–64, 2015.
PyTorch. Pytorch qat module. https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/mast
  er/torch/nn/intrinsic/qat/modules/conv_fused.py, 2022. Accessed: 2022-
  09-22.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In ICLR, 2015.

Weier Wan, Rajkumar Kubendran, Clemens Schaefer, Sukru Burc Eryilmaz, Wenqiang Zhang,
 Dabin Wu, Stephen Deiss, Priyanka Raina, He Qian, Bin Gao, et al. A compute-in-memory
 chip based on resistive random-access memory. Nature, 608(7923):504–512, 2022.

Zhongrui Wang, Can Li, Peng Lin, Mingyi Rao, Yongyang Nie, Wenhao Song, Qinru Qiu, Yunning
  Li, Peng Yan, John Paul Strachan, et al. In situ training of feed-forward and recurrent convolu-
  tional memristor networks. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(9):434–442, 2019.

Xiaobing Yan, Lei Zhang, Huawei Chen, Xiaoyan Li, Jingjuan Wang, Qi Liu, Chao Lu, Jingsheng
  Chen, Huaqiang Wu, and Peng Zhou. Graphene oxide quantum dots memristors with progres-
  sive conduction tuning for artificial synaptic learning. Advanced Functional Materials, 114(28):
  1803728, 2018.

Xiaobing Yan, Hui Li, Lei Zhang, Chao Lu, Jianhui Zhao, Zhenyu Zhou, Hong Wang, Jingjuan
  Wang, Xiaoyan Li, Yifei Pei, et al. Density effects of graphene oxide quantum dots on character-
  istics of zr0. 5hf0. 5o2 film memristors. Applied Physics Letters, 114(16):162906, 2019.

Xiaoxuan Yang, Syrine Belakaria, Biresh Kumar Joardar, Huanrui Yang, Janardhan Rao Doppa,
  Partha Pratim Pande, Krishnendu Chakrabarty, and Hai Helen Li. Multi-objective optimization of
  reram crossbars for robust dnn inferencing under stochastic noise. In 2021 IEEE/ACM Interna-
  tional Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD), pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2021.

Peng Yao, Huaqiang Wu, Bin Gao, Jianshi Tang, Qingtian Zhang, Wenqiang Zhang, J Joshua Yang,
  and He Qian. Fully hardware-implemented memristor convolutional neural network. Nature, 577
  (7792):641–646, 2020.

Jaehong Yoon, Geon Park, Wonyong Jeong, and Sung Ju Hwang. Bitwidth heterogeneous federated
  learning with progressive weight dequantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11453, 2022.

Ying Zhu, Grace Li Zhang, Tianchen Wang, Bing Li, Yiyu Shi, Tsung-Yi Ho, and Ulf Schlichtmann.
  Statistical training for neuromorphic computing using memristor-based crossbars considering pro-
  cess variations and noise. In 2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition
  (DATE), pp. 1590–1593. IEEE, 2020.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   W EIGHT QUANTIZATION

To simplify the conductance programming of memristor crossbars, weights are quantized into a
finite number of states. Low-precision weight makes the model insensitive to deployment noise.
Lower bitwidth means higher quantization noise is injected to weight during training. Because
weight quantization is deterministic, only uncertainty noise causes weight distortion after on-chip
deployment. Lower bitwidth does not always lead to better results, since it limits the representative
power of neural networks.
In this work, we uniformly quantize weights using the following quantization function:
                                                          W
                                    Q(W ; bw) = Cbw (⌊      ⌉∆)                                    (1)
                                                          ∆
where ∆ is a trainable parameter of the quantization function to denote the quantization step size, ⌊·⌉
denotes the rounding operation, bw is a given bitwidth, and Cbw (·) clamps quantized values into the
range of [−(2bw−1 − 1) · ∆, (2bw−1 − 1) · ∆]. Due to the non-differentiation of rounding operation,
weight and quantization function cannot be trained through gradient-based optimizers. To address
this issue, Eq. (1) is converted into a differentiable form:
                                                  W
                             Q(W ; bw) = Cbw ((     + δrounding ) · ∆)                             (2)
                                                  ∆

                                                  11
                 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 where the rounding noise δrounding = ⌊ W          W
                                                            ∆ ⌉ − ∆ . We assume that δrounding is an independent
                 noise, so the gradient of the non-differential δrounding is not calculated during back-propagation.
                 This method is also known as the Straight-Through Estimator (STE) trick. Thus, the gradient of W
                 and ∆ is obtained through the back-propagation algorithm. Therefore, we can easily train memristor
                 neural networks with gradient-based optimizers.

                 A.2       E XISTING BN FUSING STRATEGIES

                 A linear layer with BN is expressed as:

                                                                                  y = Wx + b                                                                         (3)

                 and
                                                                                  y − µB
                                                                          yBN = γ p 2     +β                                                                         (4)
                                                                                   σB + ϵ
                 Where x is the input, W is the weight parameter, b is the bias term, γ is the learnable scale factor
                 of BN, β is the bias term of BN, µB is mean output of the current batch, and σB2 is the variance of
                 the current batch. During inference, MA statistics µ and σ 2 are used for normalization. For full
                 precision software models, BN is fused into the linear operation via combining (3) and (4). Then,
                 the inference can be calculated with fused parameters (fused weight and fused bias) as:
                                                                         γ               γ
                                                        yBN = √              Wx + β + √        (b − µ)                                                               (5)
                                                                         2
                                                                        σ +ϵ            σ2 + ϵ
                 where the fused weight Wf used = √σγ2 +ϵ W , and the fused bias bf used = β + √σγ2 +ϵ (b − µ).
                 During training, existing BN fusing strategies are illustrated in Figure 5. Figure 5(a) shows that
                 instead of fusing BN during training, BN is fused during deployment according to Eq. (5). Wan
                 et al. (2022) train their MNN in this way. Figure 5(b) 5(c) 5(d) illustrate the training schemes for
                 quantization-aware training (QAT). They assume that the quantization effect of fused bias can be
                 ignored, so only consider the distortion caused by the fused weight quantization. During inference,
                 only fused linear operation needs to be performed using fused weight and bias obtained from the
                 MA statistics.                                                             Output
                                                                                                 y                                         BN

                                                                                                                                     Add          Fused Bias
                                                                                                 Output                                          Current fused scale
                                                                                                OutputyBN Output
                                                                                                     yBN            yBN                   yBN w/o Fused Bias
                                                                                                   Add          Fused Bias                                                               Output
                                                                                   Output        Add            Add Bias Fused Bias Current fused scale
                                                                                                              Fused
                                                                                         yBN                 Currentfused
                                                                                                            Current    fusedscale
                                                                                                                              scale                                                            yBN
                                                                                                                          Current fused  scale
                                                                                                                                     Scale
                                                                                                     y      w/oFused
                                                                                                       yBNw/o    FusedBias
                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                         Bias
                                                                                                                        w/o   Fused Bias                                              Batch  Norm      Update MA
                                                                                     Add              BN
                                                                                                       Currentfused  BN
                                                                                                                 fused  scale              yBNOutput
                                                                                                                                               w/o Fused Bias
                                                    Output
                                                    Output          Output                           Current          scale
                                                                                                                    Current  fused scale Output yBN Output                                     y     Mean & MA Var
                                                           y BN
                                                           yBN                                    Scale                                   MA   fused
                                                                                                                                                  y BN   scale    y
                                                      yAdd
                                                                          yBN          Current fused
                                                                                                 Scale scale Scale                         Batch   Norm Update
                                                                                                                                                                    BN
                                                                                                                                                                Update MAMA
                                                        BN w/o Fused Bias                                    w/oFused
                                                                                                        yBNw/o    FusedBias
                                                                                                                          Bias           Batch  Norm                         Update MA Add            Bias
                                                     Add              Add                 Fused  Bias
                                                                                                      yBN            yBN w/o Fused   Bias Linear y Batch
                                                                                                                                   Fused
                                                                                                                                                          Mean
                                                                                                                                                                Norm
                                                                                                                                                             Mean&   & MA
                                                                                                                                                                     MA   VarVar& MA Var
                                                       Current    fused    scale                       MAfused
                                                                                                            fusedscale
                                                                                                                   scale                          y               y       Mean                  y w/o Fused Bias
                                                        Currentfused
                                                                   fused  scale                      MA             MA fused scale
                              yyBN w/o  Fused Bias      Current          scale
                                                                       Current fused scale                                                     Add            Bias
                                BN w/o Fused
                                           yBNBias
                                               w/o Fused Bias                                   FusedLinear
                                                                                Fused Linear Fused      Linear                               Add           Bias
                                                                                                                                                              Add          Bias               Current unfused scale
                          Output
                              Current  fused scale          FusedBias
                                                            Fused
                                             scale fused scale       Bias Fused                              Fused Linear                 Quant        yyw/o
                              Current
                                 yBN fusedCurrent                                 Bias                                                                    w/oFused
                                                                                                                                                                Bias    BiasFused Bias
                                                                                                                                                                    y w/o                 Scale
        Output                                   Fused Linear
                                                         LinearFused Linear                            Quant
                                                                                                                                               MA     fusedunfused
                                                                                                                                                     Current
                                                                                                                                                  Current      scale
                                                                                                                                                                unfused    scale
                                                                                                                                                                        scale
         Output    Output                        Fused                                               Quant          Quant                                         Current    unfused scale
              yyBN     Batch Norm                                                       Quant                                        FusedScale
                                                                                                                                              Weight
                                                                                                                                               Scale                                          yBN w/o Fused Bias
                BN      yBN                                                                                 MA   fused  scale
                                                                                                           MA fused scaleMA fused scale                      Scale
      Batch
      BatchNorm
            Norm Batch Norm y                            QuantCurrent
                                                         Quant               fused  scale          Fused   Weight                                 y  y    w/o
                                                                                                                                                        w/o     Fused
                                                                                                                                                              Fused      Bias
                                                                                                                                                                      Bias
                                                                                                                                                                                              MA fused scale
                                                                        Quant                                                                          BN         y     w/o  Fused  Bias
                                                                                   Fused WeightFused WeightFused Weight
                                                                                                                                                    BN             BN
                                                                                                                                         Fuse BN MA fused scale
             yy Bias    y Add         Current fused
                                      Current  fused scale fused scale
                                                     scale
                                                   Current                                                                                        MA fused scale MA fused scale Fused Linear
                                                    FusedWeight
                                                    Fused     WeightFused Weight                     Fuse
                                                                                                    Fuse    BN
                                                                                                           BN      Fuse BN                  Fused
                                                                                                                                          Fused      Linear
                                                                                                                                                  Linear
Bias
 Bias     Add
          Add
            Bias    Add                                                                Fuse BN                                         Update     MA Fused Linear
                                                        FuseBN
                                                        Fuse   BN                                   UpdateMA
                                                                                                   Update     MAUpdate MA           Mean & MA Var                                             Quant
                                                                       Fuse BN
                          Linear                                                                                                                    Quant
                                                                                                                                                 Quant           Quant                            MA fused scale
                                                            Update MA                             Mean&&MA
                                                                                                Mean        MAMean
                                                                                                                 Var & MA Var
                                                                                                               Var
        Linear
         Linear    Linear          Update MA Update MA                              Mean & Var                                        Mean & VarMAMA           fused
                                                                                                                                                            fused      scalefused scale Fused weight
                                                                                                                                                                   scale
                                                                                                                                                                      MA
                                                        Mean
                                                     Mean
                                                     Mean     &
                                                              &   & MA Var
                                                                 Var
                                                                Var
                                Mean & MA Mean
                                            Var & MA Var
                                            Var                      Mean   &  Var                  Mean
                                                                                                  Mean    & & Var
                                                                                                            Var  Mean & Var                   Fused
                                                                                                                                            Fused       Weight
                                                                                                                                                     Weight  Fused Weight
                                                                                             y                                                  y
                              Quant                            yy             y                            yy            y                                                                               MA Mean
            Quant
             Quant                                                                      Linear                                            Linear                MAMA    MeanMA Mean
                                                                                                                                                                     Mean                    Fuse BN
                       Quant                              Linear
                                                         Linear                                        Linear
                                                                                                     Linear         Linear                         Fuse
                                                                                                                                                Fuse   BN BN    Fuse BN                                  & MA Var
                                                                        Linear                                                                                    & MA Var& MA Var
                                                                                                                                                                & MA    Var

     Input       Input Input
      Input Weight
            Weight      WeightWeight                Input
                                                    Input Weight
                                                          Weight &&Bias
                                                              InputBias   Input
                                                                     Weight & BiasWeight & Bias
                                                                                      Input
                                                                                       Input Weight
                                                                                              Weight&&Bias
                                                                                                 Input Bias        Input Weight
                                                                                                        Weight & Bias    Input   &Weight
                                                                                                                                   Bias
                                                                                                                           InputWeight
                                                                                                                                    Input Weight                              Input Weight

                  (a) W/o fusing BN                    (b) Jacob et al. (2018)                 (c) Krishnamoorthi (2018)                        (d) PyTorch

                                                     Figure 5: Existing BN fusing strategies in literature.



                                                                                           12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3     F ORMULATIONS OF HRAT

A.3.1    T RAINING WITHOUT BN
As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), training a fully-connected layer without BN is expressed as:
                       ReLU(CVc (CVc ((Q(W ; bw) + Wnoise )CVT H (x)) + Q(b)))
                 y=                                                                                (6)
                                                 s
where CVc (·) clamps input to the scaled signal range of [−Vc , Vc ], Vc = s · VDD/2 , Wnoise is
generated from a Gaussian distribution to model memristor variations, s is a learnable scale factor.
Q(b) quantizes b according to the bitwidth of DAC and the scaled signal range of [−Vc , Vc ]. In fact,
we use uniform noise instead of quantization noise to introduce randomness.
After training, weight is divided by s to obtain scaled weight. Since a memristor usually has a certain
conductance range to tune (e.g., [2µS, 20µS] Yao et al. (2020)), scaled weight is transformed to a
memristor conductance by multiplying a converting factor sc as:
                                                        Q(W ; bw)
                                      Wdeploy = sc ·                                               (7)
                                                           s
Bias is divided by s to fuse the scale factor.
                                                        Q(b)
                                            bdeploy =                                              (8)
                                                         s

Then, we can program Wdeploy to memristor crossbars and program bdeploy to DACs. Since weight
is transformed to the memristor conductance range, an additional signal amplification factor 1/sc
should be taken into account. Therefore, the inference is expressed as:
          y = ReLU(C VDD/2 (C VDD/2 ( 1/sc · (Wdeploy + Wnoise )CVT H (x)) + bdeploy ))            (9)

A.3.2    T RAINING WITH THE PROPOSED BN FUSING STRATEGY
Figure 2(b) shows a fully-connected layer trained with the proposed BN fusing strategy. Deployment
noise is applied on fused weight, through introducing a factor √σγ2 +ϵ , we fuse weight as:
                                                      γ
                                      Wf used = √           ·W                                    (10)
                                                     σ2 + ϵ
In order to apply a normal BN after fused linear operation, we correct the output to original scale
by dividing √σγ2 +ϵ , and then the bias term is added to the output of original scale. Before applying
BN, we have:
                         y = Q(Wf used ; bw) + Wnoise )CVT H (x) + Q(b)                           (11)

The result yBN is obtained by applying a normal BN according to Eq. (4). The above steps only
address fused weight, other hardware restrictions are still not integrated. In order to quantize fused
bias and clamp the output range, we separate yBN to fused bias bf used and ȳBN .
                                                      γ
                                   bf used = β + √          (b − µ)                               (12)
                                                     σ2 + ϵ
                                        ȳBN = yBN − bf used                                      (13)
Then, other hardware restrictions are applied based on the illustration in Figure 2(b). After training,
the BN and s are fused into previous linear operation. So we have
                                                   Q( √σγ2 +ϵ W ; bw)
                                  Wdeploy = sc ·                                                  (14)
                                                            s

                                               Q(bf used )
                                         bdeploy =                                                (15)
                                                    s
Finally, we can perform hardware deployment, similar to the steps in Section A.3.1.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4   C IRCUIT SIMULATION RESULTS

Figure 6 shows the hardware operation of a fully-connected layer. The input signal is clamped to
avoid excessive voltage across memristors. Linear operation is executed via a memristor crossbar,
where weights are programmed into memristor conductance values. The output of linear operation,
along with bias voltages from DACs, are passed to a neuron summation circuit and activation circuit
for processing. Table 1 summarizes the difference in results between offline HRAT and hardware
circuit simulation for all nodes across all layers of LeNet-5. The second column lists the number of
outputs at each layer. We use the MNIST dataset with an input dimension of 28 × 28 × 1 for this
experiment. Hence, the output dimension of the first convolutional layer is 24 × 24 × 6. The last
three columns summarize the maximum, mean, and standard deviation of the error values for each
network layer. It demonstrates that circuit simulation results closely match the offline HRAT results.

                                                                  Output
                                                                     [VDD/2, VDD]
                                                         ReLU Activation Circuit
                                                                       [0, VDD]
                                    Bias voltages
                                     from DACs                 Neuron summation Circuit
                                                    [0, VDD]

                                      Linear operation via a memristor crossbar,
                                         where weight are programmed into
                                      memristor conductance with uncertainties
                                                               [VSG-VTH, VSG+VTH]
                                                    Input Clamp Circuit

                                                          Input


           Figure 6: Schematic of a fully-connected layer for memristor neural network.


Table 1: All-layer output comparison of LeNet-5 between offline HRAT and hardware simulation.
          network layer      # of outputs     Maximum Error                   Mean error      Error variance std
          conv. layer 1         3456           1.40 × 10−3                   1.24 × 10−4        1.85 × 10−4
          conv. layer 2         1024           3.56 × 10−3                   3.97 × 10−4        5.82 × 10−4
          fc layer 1             120           2.29 × 10−3                   3.33 × 10−4        5.15 × 10−4
          fc layer 2              84           4.10 × 10−3                   7.83 × 10−4        1.07 × 10−3
          fc layer 3              10           8.00 × 10−2                   1.59 × 10−2        2.73 × 10−2



A.5   S IMULATION RESULTS OF VGG-16 ON CIFAR DATASETS

Table 2 lists the mean inference accuracy of VGG-16 on CIFAR datasets, when four weight noise
levels (std=0, std=0.025, std=0.5, and std=0.075) are present. VGG-16 is either trained by HRAT,
or by HRAT followed by on-chip retraining. The optimal weight bitwidth is selected to report
the highest inference accuracy for each case. The inference accuracy of HRAT slowly drops as
the weight noise level increases. At a strong weight noise level (std=0.05), HRAT achieves a high
accuracy of 87.24% for CIFAR-10 dataset. If on-chip retraining is applied after HRAT, the inference
accuracy is close to the baseline (i.e., weight noise std=0) results.


Table 2: Performance comparison among various weight noise levels for VGG-16 on CIFAR
datasets, assuming very high-resolution DACs are used for bias generation.
                                             CIFAR-10                                        CIFAR-100
        Weight Noise (std)     HRAT         HRAT+retrain              Diff          HRAT    HRAT+retrain     Diff
         0.0 (baseline)        91.48            91.48                 0.0           66.27       66.27        0.0
              0.025            90.33            91.30                 0.97          62.85       65.93        3.08
              0.05             87.24            90.72                 3.48          57.94       65.88        7.94
              0.075            84.70            90.70                 6.00          55.64       66.10       10.46



                                                               14
