Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NDERSTANDING W HY G ENERALIZED R EWEIGHTING
D OES N OT I MPROVE OVER ERM
 Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, Pradeep Ravikumar
 Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15213
 {rzhai,cdan,zkolter,pradeepr}@cs.cmu.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is known to be non-robust in practice to dis-
         tributional shift where the training and the test distributions are different. A suite
         of approaches, such as importance weighting, and variants of distributionally ro-
         bust optimization (DRO), have been proposed to solve this problem. But a line
         of recent work has empirically shown that these approaches do not significantly
         improve over ERM in real applications with distribution shift. The goal of this
         work is to obtain a comprehensive theoretical understanding of this intriguing
         phenomenon. We first posit the class of Generalized Reweighting (GRW) algo-
         rithms, as a broad category of approaches that iteratively update model parameters
         based on iterative reweighting of the training samples. We show that when over-
         parameterized models are trained under GRW, the resulting models are close to
         that obtained by ERM. We also show that adding small regularization which does
         not greatly affect the empirical training accuracy does not help. Together, our re-
         sults show that a broad category of what we term GRW approaches are not able
         to achieve distributionally robust generalization. Our work thus has the following
         sobering takeaway: to make progress towards distributionally robust generaliza-
         tion, we either have to develop non-GRW approaches, or perhaps devise novel
         classification/regression loss functions that are adapted to GRW approaches.

1   I NTRODUCTION
It has now been well established that empirical risk minimization (ERM) can empirically achieve
high test performance on a variety of tasks, particularly with modern overparameterized models
where the number of parameters is much larger than the number of training samples. This strong
performance of ERM however has been shown to degrade under distributional shift, where the train-
ing and test distributions are different (Hovy & Søgaard, 2015; Blodgett et al., 2016; Tatman, 2017).
There are two broad categories of distribution shift: domain generalization, defined as the scenario
where the test distribution contains samples from new domains that did not appear during training;
and subpopulation shift, defined as the scenario where the training set contains several subgroups
and the testing distribution weighs these subgroups differently, like in fair machine learning.
People have proposed various approaches to learn models robust to distributional shift. The most
classical one is importance weighting (IW) (Shimodaira, 2000; Fang et al., 2020), which reweights
training samples; for subpopulation shift these weights are typically set so that each subpopulation
has the same overall weight in the training objective. The approach most widely used today is
Distributional Robust Optimization (DRO) (Duchi & Namkoong, 2018; Hashimoto et al., 2018),
which assumes that the test distribution belongs to a certain uncertainty set of distributions that are
close to the training distribution, and train on the worst distribution in that set. Many variants of
DRO have been proposed and are used in practice (Sagawa et al., 2020a; Zhai et al., 2021a;b).
While these approaches have been developed for the express purpose of improving ERM for distri-
bution shift, a line of recent work has empirically shown the negative result that when used to train
overparameterized models, these methods do not improve over ERM. For IW, Byrd & Lipton (2019)
observed that its effect under stochastic gradient descent (SGD) diminishes over training epochs, and
finally does not improve over ERM. For variants of DRO, Sagawa et al. (2020a) found that these
methods overfit very easily, i.e. their test performances will drop to the same low level as ERM after
sufficiently many epochs if no regularization is applied. Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021); Koh et al.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2021) compared these methods with ERM on a number of real-world applications, and found that
in most cases none of these methods improves over ERM.
This line of empirical results has also been bolstered by some recent theoretical results. Sagawa
et al. (2020b) constructed a synthetic dataset where a linear model trained with IW is provably not
robust to subpopulation shift. Xu et al. (2021) further proved that under gradient descent (GD) with
a sufficiently small learning rate, a linear classifier trained with either IW or ERM converges to the
same max-margin classifier, and thus upon convergence, are no different. These previous theoretical
results are limited to linear models and specific approaches such as IW where sample weights are
fixed during training. They are not applicable to more complex models, and more general approaches
where the sample weights could iteratively change, including most DRO variants.
Towards placing the empirical results on a stronger theoretical footing, we define the class of gen-
eralized reweighting (GRW), which dynamically assigns weights to the training samples, and itera-
tively minimizes the weighted average of the sample losses. By allowing the weights to vary with
iterations, we cover not just static importance weighting, but also DRO approaches outlined earlier;
though of course, the GRW class is much broader than just these instances.
Main contributions. We prove that GRW and ERM have (almost) equivalent implicit biases, in
the sense that the points they converge to are very close to each other, under a much more general
setting than those used in previous work. Thus, GRW cannot improve over ERM because it does
not yield a significantly different model. We are the first to extend this line of theoretical results (i)
to wide neural networks, (ii) to reweighting methods with dynamic weights, (iii) to regression tasks,
and (iv) to methods with L2 regularization. We note that these extensions are non-trivial technically
as they require the result that wide neural networks can be approximated by their linearized counter-
parts to hold uniformly throughout the iterative process of GRW algorithms. Moreover, we fix the
proof in a previous paper (Lee et al., 2019) (see Appendix E) which is also a great contribution.
Overall, the important takeaway is that distributionally robust generalization (DRG) cannot be di-
rectly achieved by the broad class of GRW algorithms (which includes popular approaches such as
importance weighting and most DRO variants). Progress towards this important goal thus requires
either going beyond GRW algorithms, or devising novel loss functions that are adapted to GRW
approaches. In Section 6 we will discuss some promising future directions and the case with non-
overparameterized models and early stopping. Finally, we want to emphasize that while the models
we use in our results (linear models and wide neural networks) are different from practical models,
they are general models most widely used in existing theory papers, and our results based on these
models provide explanations to the baffling observations made in previous empirical work, as well
as valuable insights into how to improve distributionally robust generalization.

2       P RELIMINARIES
Let the input space be X ⊆ Rd and the output space be Y ⊆ R.1 We assume that X is a subset of the
unit L2 ball of Rd , so that any x ∈ X satisfies kxk2 ≤ 1. We have a training set {zi = (xi , yi )}ni=1
i.i.d. sampled from an underlying distribution P over X × Y. Denote X = (x1 , · · · , xn ) ∈ Rd×n ,
and Y = (y1 , · · · , yn ) ∈ Rn . For any function g : X 7→ Rm , we overload notation and use
g(X) = (g(x1 ), · · · , g(xn )) ∈ Rm×n (except when m = 1, g(X) is defined as a column vector).
Let the loss function be ` : Y × Y → [0, 1]. ERM trains a model by minimizing its expected risk
                                                                             Pn
R(f ; P ) = Ez∼P [`(f (x), y)] via minimizing the empirical risk R̂(f ) = n1 i=1 `(f (xi ), yi ).
In distributional shift, the model is evaluated not on the training distribution P , but a different
test distribution Ptest , so that we care about the expected risk R(f ; Ptest ). A large family of methods
designed for such distributional shift is distributionally robust optimization (DRO), which minimizes
the expected risk over the worst-case distribution Q   P 2 in a ball w.r.t. divergence D around the
training distribution P . Specifically, DRO minimizes the expected DRO risk defined as:
                          RD,ρ (f ; P ) = sup {EQ [`(f (x), y)] : D(Q k P ) ≤ ρ}                       (1)
                                       Q P

for ρ > 0. Examples include CVaR, χ2 -DRO (Hashimoto et al., 2018), and DORO (Zhai et al.,
2021a), among others.
    1
    Our results can be easily extended to the multi-class scenario (see Appendix B).
    2
    For distributions P and Q, Q is absolute continuous to P , or Q   P , means that for any event A,
P (A) = 0 implies Q(A) = 0.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A common category of distribution shift is known as subpopulation shift. Let the data domain
contain K groups D1 , · · · , DK . The training distribution P is the distribution over all groups, and
the test distribution Ptest is the distribution over one of the groups. Let Pk (z) = P (z | z ∈ Dk )
be the conditional distribution over group k, then Ptest can be any one of P1 , · · · , Pk . The goal is
to train a model f that performs well over every group. There are two common ways to achieve
this goal: one is minimizing the balanced empirical risk which is an unweighted average of the
empirical risk over each group, and the other is minimizing the worst-group risk defined as
             Rmax (f ; P ) =      max R(f ; Pk ) =              max Ez∼P [`(f (x), y)|z ∈ Dk ]      (2)
                                k=1,··· ,K                    k=1,··· ,K

3   G ENERALIZED R EWEIGHTING (GRW)
Various methods have been proposed towards learning models that are robust to distributional shift.
In contrast to analyzing each of these individually, we instead consider a large class of what we call
Generalized Reweighting (GRW) algorithms that includes the ones mentioned earlier, but potentially
many others more. Loosely, GRW algorithms iteratively assign each sample a weight during training
(that could vary with the iteration) and iteratively minimize the weighted average risk. Specifically,
                                        (t)
at iteration t, GRW assigns a weight qi to sample zi , and minimizes the weighted empirical risk:
                                                     n
                                                        (t)
                                                     X
                                     R̂q(t) (f ) =     qi `(f (xi ), yi )                           (3)
                                                     i=1

                (t)       (t)          (t)            (t)
where q (t) = (q1 , · · · , qn ) and q1 + · · · + qn = 1.
Static GRW assigns to each zi = (xi , yi ) a fixed weight qi that does not change during training, i.e.
 (t)
qi ≡ qi . A classical method is importance weighting (IW) (Shimodaira, 2000), where if zi ∈ Dk
and the size of Dk is nk , then qi = (Knk )−1 . Under IW, (3) becomes the balanced empirical risk
in which each group has the same weight. Note that ERM is also a special case of static GRW.
On the other hand, in dynamic GRW, q (t) changes with t. For instance, any approach that iteratively
upweights samples with high losses in order to help the model learn “hard” samples, such as DRO,
is an instance of GRW. When estimating the population DRO risk RD,ρ (f ; P ) in Eqn. (1), if P
is set to the empirical distribution over the training samples, then Q   P implies that Q is also
a distribution over the training samples. Thus, DRO methods belong to the broad class of GRW
algorithms. There are two common ways to implement DRO. One uses Danskin’s theorem and
chooses Q as the maximizer of EQ [`(f (x), y)] in each epoch. The other one formulates DRO as a
bi-level optimization problem, where the lower level updates the model to minimize the expected
risk over Q, and the upper level updates Q to maximize it. Both can be seen as instances of GRW. As
one popular instance of the latter, Group DRO was proposed by Sagawa et al. (2020a) to minimize
(2). Denote the empirical risk over group k by R̂k (f ), and the model at time t by f (t) . Group DRO
                  (t)   (t)                             (t)
iteratively sets qi = gk /nk for all zi ∈ Dk where gk is the group weight that is updated as

                          (t)    (t−1)
                        gk ∝ gk        exp ν R̂k (f (t−1) ) (∀k = 1, · · · , K)                    (4)
                                                          (t)              (t)
for some ν > 0, and then normalized so that q1 + · · · + qn = 1. Sagawa et al. (2020a) then
showed (in their Proposition 2) that for convex settings, the Group DRO risk of iterates converges to
the global minimum with the rate O(t−1/2 ) if ν is sufficiently small.
4   T HEORETICAL R ESULTS FOR R EGRESSION
In this section, we will study GRW for regression tasks that use the squared loss
                                                    1
                                                      (ŷ − y)2 .
                                             `(ŷ, y) =                                              (5)
                                                    2
We will prove that for both linear models and sufficiently wide fully-connected neural networks, the
implicit bias of GRW is equivalent to ERM, which means that starting from the same initial point,
GRW and ERM will converge to the same point when trained for an infinitely long time. Thus,
GRW cannot improve over ERM as it produces the exact same model as ERM. We will further show
that while regularization can affect this implicit bias, it must be large enough to significantly lower
the training performance, or the final model will still be similar to the unregularized ERM model.

                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                                                                                                                      0.8


                                                  Norm of ERM Model
Norm of Difference
                0.06            |θiw − θerm|2                                                             0.75                      ERM
                                                                  0.62


                                                                                                                                           Group Weight
                                                                                                                                    IW


                                                                                              Training Loss
                                |θgdro − θerm|2                                                                                                       0.6
                0.04                                                                                      0.50                      GDRO
                0.02                                              0.60                                    0.25                                        0.4

                0.00                                                                                      0.00                                        0.2
                        0    2000    4000                                0   2000    4000                        0         2000    4000                     0   2000    4000
                              Epochs                                          Epochs                                        Epochs                               Epochs

                     (a) Weight Difference        (b) Norm of ERM Model                                          (c) Training Loss                        (d) Group Weights
Figure 1: Experimental results of ERM, importance weighting (IW) and Group DRO (GDRO) with
the squared loss on six MNIST images with a linear model. All norms are L2 norms.
4.1 L INEAR M ODELS
We first demonstrate our result on simple linear models to provide our readers with a key intuition
which we will later apply to neural networks. This key intuition draws from results of Gunasekar
et al. (2018). Let the linear model be denoted by f (x) = hθ, xi, where θ ∈ Rd . We consider the
overparameterized setting where d > n. The weight update rule of GRW under GD is the following:
                                               n
                                                   (t)
                                              X
                               (t+1)   (t)
                             θ       =θ −η        qi ∇θ `(f (t) (xi ), yi )                     (6)
                                                                                            i=1
where η > 0 is the learning rate. For a linear model with the squared loss, the update rule is
                                                n
                                                   (t)
                                               X
                            θ(t+1) = θ(t) − η     qi xi (f (t) (xi ) − yi )                                                                                                    (7)
                                                                                            i=1
For this training scheme, we can prove that if the training error converges to zero, then the model
                                                                            (t)
converges to an interpolator θ∗ (s.t. ∀i, hθ∗ , xi i = yi ) independent of qi (proofs in Appendix D):
Theorem 1. If x1 , · · · , xn are linearly independent, then under the squared loss, for any GRW
such that the empirical training risk R̂(f (t) ) → 0 as t → ∞, it holds that θ(t) converges to an
                                                                                        (t)
interpolator θ∗ that only depends on θ(0) and x1 , · · · , xn , but does not depend on qi .

The proof is based on the following key intuition regarding the update rule (7): θ(t+1) − θ(t) is
a linear combination of x1 , · · · , xn for all t, so θ(t) − θ(0) always lies in the linear subspace
span{x1 , · · · , xn }, which is an n-dimensional linear subspace if x1 , · · · , xn are linearly indepen-
dent. By Cramer’s rule, there is exactly one θ̃ in this subspace such that we get interpolation of all
the data hθ̃ + θ(0) , xi i = yi for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. In other words, the parameter θ∗ = θ̃ + θ(0)
in this subspace that interpolates all the data is unique. Thus the proof would follow if we were to
show that θ(t) − θ(0) , which lies in the subspace, also converges to interpolating the data. Moreover,
this proof works for any first-order optimization method such that the training risk converges to 0.
We have essentially proved the following sobering result: any GRW algorithm that achieves zero
training error exactly produces the ERM model, so it does not improve over ERM. While the various
distributional shift methods discussed in the introduction have been shown to satisfy the precondi-
tion of convergence to zero training error with overparameterized models and linearly independent
inputs (Sagawa et al., 2020a), we provide the following theorem that shows this for the broad class
of GRW methods. Specifically, we show this result for any GRW method that satisfies the following
assumption with a sufficiently small learning rate:
                                                                                                                     (t)
Assumption 1. There are constants q1 , · · · , qn s.t. ∀i, qi → qi as t → ∞. And mini qi = q ∗ > 0.
Theorem 2. If x1 , · · · , xn are linearly independent, then there exists η0 > 0 such that for any
GRW satisfying Assumption 1 with the squared loss, and any η ≤ η0 , the empirical training risk
R̂(f (t) ) → 0 as t → ∞.
Finally, we use a simple experiment to demonstrate the correctness of this result. The experiment is
conducted on a training set of six MNIST images, five of which are digit 0 and one is digit 1. We use
a 784-dimensional linear model and run ERM, importance weighting and group DRO. The results
are presented in Figure 1, and they show that the training loss of each method converges to 0, and
the gap between the model weights of importance weighting, Group DRO and ERM converges to
0, meaning that all three model weights converge to the same point, whose L2 norm is about 0.63.
Figure 1d also shows that the group weights in Group DRO empirically satisfy Assumption 1.
4.2 W IDE N EURAL N ETWORKS (W IDE NN S )
Now we study sufficiently wide fully-connected neural networks. We extend the analysis in Lee
et al. (2019) in the neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Jacot et al., 2018). In particular we study


                                                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the following network:
                      Wl
               hl+1 = √ xl + βbl                and       xl+1 = σ(hl+1 )          (l = 0, · · · , L)             (8)
                       dl
where σ is a non-linear activation function, W l ∈ Rdl+1 ×dl and W L ∈ R1×dL . Here d0 = d. The
parameter vector θ consists of W 0 , · · · , W L and b0 , · · · , bL (θ is the concatenation of all flattened
weights and biases). The final output is f (x) = hL+1 . And let the neural network be initialized as
            ( l(0)                                                           ( L(0)
              Wi,j ∼ N (0, 1)                                                  Wi,j = 0
               l(0)
                                    (l  =   0, · · · , L − 1)      and          L(0)
                                                                                                           (9)
              bj ∼ N (0, 1)                                                    bj    ∼ N (0, 1)
We also need the following assumption on the wide neural network:
Assumption 2. σ is differentiable everywhere. Both σ and its first-order derivative σ̇ are Lipschitz.3
Difference from Jacot et al. (2018). Our initialization (9) differs from the original one in Jacot
                                                                                L(0)
et al. (2018) in the last (output) layer, where we use the zero initialization Wi,j = 0 instead of the
                              L(0)
Gaussian initialization Wi,j ∼ N (0, 1). This modification permits us to accurately approximate
the NN with its linearized counterpart (11), as we notice that the proofs in Lee et al. (2019) (partic-
ularly the proofs of their Theorem 2.1 and their Lemma 1 in Appendix G) are flawed. In Appendix
E we will explain what went wrong in their proofs and how we fix it with this modification.
Denote the neural network at time t by f (t) (x) = f (x; θ(t) ) which is parameterized by θ(t) ∈ Rp
where p is the number of parameters. We use the shorthand ∇θ f (0) (x) := ∇θ f (x; θ) θ=θ0 . The
neural tangent kernel (NTK) of this model is Θ(0) (x, x0 ) = ∇θ f (0) (x)> ∇θ f (0) (x0 ), and the Gram
matrix is Θ(0) = Θ(0) (X, X) ∈ Rn×n . For this wide NN, we still have the following NTK theorem:
Lemma 3. If σ is Lipschitz and dl → ∞ for l = 1, · · · , L sequentially, then Θ(0) (x, x0 ) converges
in probability to a non-degenerate4 deterministic limiting kernel Θ(x, x0 ).
The kernel Gram matrix Θ = Θ(X, X) ∈ Rn×n is a positive semi-definite symmetric matrix.
Denote its largest and smallest eigenvalues by λmax and λmin . Note that Θ is non-degenerate, so we
can assume that λmin > 0 (which is almost surely true when dL   n). Then we have:
Theorem 4. Let f (t) be a wide fully-connected neural network that satisfies Assumption 2 and is
                                                                              (t)
trained by any GRW satisfying Assumption 1 with the squared loss. Let fERM be the same model
trained by ERM from the same initial point. If d1 = · · · = dL = d,  ˜ ∇θ f (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn )
                                                                            (0)
                                 min
are linearly independent, and λ      > 0, then there exists a constant η1 > 0 such that: if η ≤ η1 5 ,
then for any δ > 0, there exists D̃ > 0 such that as long as d˜ ≥ D̃, with probability at least (1 − δ)
over random initialization we have: for any test point x ∈ Rd such that kxk2 ≤ 1, as d˜ → ∞,
                                                       (t)
                              lim sup f (t) (x) − fERM (x) = O(d˜−1/4 ) → 0                                      (10)
                                t→∞

Essentially this theorem implies that on any test point x in the unit ball, the GRW model and the
ERM model produce almost the same output, so they have almost the same performance. Note that
for simplicity, we only prove for d1 = · · · = dL = d˜ → ∞, but the result can be very easily
extended to the case where dl /d1 → αl for l = 2, · · · , L for some constants α2 , · · · , αL , and
d1 → ∞. The key to proving this theorem is to consider the linearized neural network of f (t) (x):
                                (t)
                              flin (x) = f (0) (x) + hθ(t) − θ(0) , ∇θ f (0) (x)i                                (11)
                                          (0)                (0)                  (0)
which is a linear model w.r.t. ∇θ f (x). If ∇θ f (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (xn ) are linearly indepen-
dent (which is almost surely true when the model is overparameterized so that θ has a very high
dimension), then our key intuition tells us that the linearized NN will converge to the unique inter-
polator. Then we show that the wide NN can be approximated by its linearized counterpart uniformly
throughout training, which is considerably more subtle in our case due to the GRW dynamics. Here
we prove the upper bound O(d˜−1/4 ), but in fact the upper bound can be O(d˜−1/2+  ) for any   > 0:
   3
     f is Lipschitz if there exists a constant L > 0 such that for any x1 , x2 , |f (x1 ) − f (x2 )| ≤ L kx1 − x2 k2 .
   4
     Non-degenerate means that Θ(x, x0 ) depends on x and x0 and is not a constant.
   5
     For ease of understanding, later we will write this condition as “with a sufficiently small learning rate”.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 5 (Approximation Theorem). For a wide fully-connected neural network f (t) satisfying
                                                                                                (t)
Assumption 2 and is trained by any GRW satisfying Assumption 1 with the squared loss, let flin be
                                                                (t)
its linearized neural network trained by the same GRW (i.e. qi are the same for both networks
for any i and t). Under the conditions of Theorem 4, with a sufficiently small learning rate, for any
δ > 0, there exist constants D̃ > 0 and C > 0 such that as long as d˜ ≥ D̃, with probability at least
(1 − δ) over random initialization we have: for any test point x ∈ Rd such that kxk2 ≤ 1,
                                             (t)
                                   sup flin (x) − f (t) (x) ≤ C d˜−1/4                                  (12)
                                    t≥0


This lemma essentially says that throughout the GRW training process, on any test point x in the
unit ball, the linear NN and the wide NN produce almost the same output. So far, we have shown
that in a regression task, for both linear and wide NNs, GRW does not improve over ERM.

4.3   W IDE N EURAL N ETWORKS , WITH L2 R EGULARIZATION
Previous work such as Sagawa et al. (2020a) proposed to improve GRW by adding L2 penalty to the
objective function. In this section, we thus study adding L2 regularization to GRW algorithms:
                                             n                                  2
                                            X    (t)                 µ
                           R̂µq(t) (f ) =       qi `(f (xi ), yi ) +   θ − θ(0)                         (13)
                                            i=1
                                                                     2          2

At first sight, adding regularization seems to be a natural approach and should make a difference.
Indeed, from the outset, we can easily show that with L2 regularization, the GRW model and the
ERM model are different unlike the case without regularization. As an concrete example, when f is
a linear model, ` is convex and smooth, then R̂µq(t) (f ) with static GRW is a convex smooth objective
function, so under GD with a sufficiently small learning rate, the model will converge to the global
minimizer (see Appendix D.1). Moreover, the global optimum θ∗ satisfies ∇θ R̂µq(t) (f (x; θ∗ )) = 0,
solving which yields θ∗ = θ(0) + (XQX > + µI)−1 XQ(Y − f (0) (X)), which depends on Q =
diag(q1 , · · · , qn ), so adding L2 regularization at least seems to yield different results from ERM
(albeit whether it improves over ERM might depend on q1 , · · · , qn ).
However, the following result shows that this regularization must be large enough to significantly
lower the training performance, or the final model would still be close to the unregularized ERM
model. We still denote the largest and smallest eigenvalues of the kernel Gram matrix Θ by λmax
and λmin . We use the subscript “reg” to refer to a regularized model (trained by minimizing (13)).
Theorem 6. Suppose there exists M0 > 0 s.t. ∇θ f (0) (x) 2 ≤ M0 for all kxk2 ≤ 1. If λmin > 0
and µ > 0, then for a wide NN satisfying Assumption 2, and any GRW minimizing the squared loss
                                                                     ˜ ∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn )
with a sufficiently small learning rate η, if d1 = d2 = · · · = dL = d,
                                                                 (t)
are linearly independent, and the empirical training risk of freg satisfies
                                                          (t)
                                              lim sup R̂(freg )<                                        (14)
                                                   t→∞

for some   > 0, then with a sufficiently small learning rate, as d˜ → ∞, with probability close to 1
over random initialization, for any x such that kxk2 ≤ 1 we have
                                          (t)                     √        √
                               (t)
                    lim sup freg   (x) − fERM (x) = O(d˜−1/4 +  ) → O(  )                       (15)
                       t→∞
       (t)                                    (t)
where freg is trained by regularized GRW and fERM by unregularized ERM from same initial points.

This theorem essentially says that if the regularization is too small and the training error is close to
zero, then the regularized GRW model still produces an output very close to that of the ERM model
on any test point x in the unit ball. Thus, a small regularization makes little difference.
The proof again starts from analyzing linearized NNs, and showing that regularization does not help
there (Appendix D.4.2). Then, we prove a new approximation theorem for L2 regularized GRW
connecting wide NNs to linearized NNs uniformly throughout training (Appendix D.4.1). With
regularization, we no longer need Assumption 1 to prove the new approximation theorem which
was used to prove the convergence of GRW, because with regularization GRW naturally converges.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Norm of Difference


                                                                                             Norm of Difference
                0.06            |θiw − θerm|2                 0.4                    IW                      0.06             |θiw − θerm|2                 0.4                  IW
                                                                                     GDRO                                                                                        GDRO


                                                  Training Loss


                                                                                                                                                Training Loss
                                |θgdro − θerm|2                                                                               |θgdro − θerm|2
                0.04                                                                 ERM                     0.04                                                                ERM
                                                              0.2                                                                                           0.2
                0.02
                                                                                                             0.02
                0.00                                          0.0 0                                                                                         0.0 0
                        0    2000    4000                                 2000    4000                               0     2000    4000                                 2000    4000
                              Epochs                                       Epochs                                           Epochs                                       Epochs

                     (a) Weight Difference                          (b) Training Loss                             (c) Weight Difference                           (d) Training Loss
Figure 2: Experimental results of ERM, importance weighting (IW) and Group DRO (GDRO) with
L2 regularization with the squared loss. Left two: µ = 0.1; Right two: µ = 10.

To empirically demonstrate this result, we run the same experiment as in Section 4.1 but with L2
regularization. The results are presented in Figure 2. We can see that when the regularization is
small, the training losses still converge to 0, and the three model weights still converge to the same
point. On the contrary, with a large regularization, the training loss does not converge to 0, and the
three model weights converge to different points. This shows that the regularization must be large
enough to lower the training performance to make a significant difference to the implicit bias.

5                     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS FOR C LASSIFICATION
Now we consider classification where Y = {+1, −1}. The big difference is that classification losses
don’t have finite minimizers. A classification loss converging to zero means that the model weight
“explodes” to infinity instead of converging to a finite point. We focus on the canonical logistic loss:
                                    `(ŷ, y) = log(1 + exp(−ŷy))                                   (16)

5.1                     L INEAR M ODELS

We first consider training the linear model f (x) = hθ, xi with GRW under gradient descent with the
logistic loss. As noted earlier, in this setting, Byrd & Lipton (2019) made the empirical observation
that importance weighting does not improve over ERM. Then, Xu et al. (2021) proved that for
importance weighting algorithms, as t → ∞, kθ(t) k2 → ∞ and θ(t) /kθ(t) k2 converges to a unit
vector that does not depend on the sample weights, so it does not improve over ERM. To extend this
theoretical result to the broad class of GRW algorithms, we will prove two results. First, in Theorem
7 we will show that for the logistic loss and any GRW algorithm satisfying the weaker assumption:
                                                                               (t)
Assumption 3. For all i, lim inf t→∞ qi                                              > 0,
if the training error converges to 0, and the direction of the model weight converges to a fixed unit
vector, then this unit vector must be the max-margin classifier defined as

                               θ̂MM = arg max        min yi · hθ, xi i                           (17)
                                                                             θ:kθk2 =1      i=1,··· ,n

Second, Theorem 8 shows that for any GRW satisfying Assumption 1, the training error converges
to 0 and the direction of the model weight converges, so it does not improve over ERM.
Theorem 7. If x1 , · · · , xn are linearly independent, then for the logistic loss, we have: for any
GRW satisfying Assumption 3, if as t → ∞ the empirical training risk R̂(f (t) ) converges to 0 and
θ(t) /kθ(t) k2 → u for some unit vector u, then u = θ̂MM .
This result is an extension of Soudry et al. (2018), and says that all GRW methods (including ERM)
                                                                                 (t)
make the model converge to the same point θ̂MM that does not depend on qi . In other words, the
samples weights do not affect the implicit bias. Thus, for any GRW method that only satisfies the
weak Assumption 3, as long as the training error converges to 0 and the model weight direction
converges, GRW does not improve over ERM. We next show that any GRW satisfying Assumption
1 does have its model weight direction converge, and its training error converge to 0.
Theorem 8. For any loss ` that is convex, L-smooth in ŷ and strictly monotonically
                                                                                Pn          decreasing to
zero as y ŷ → +∞, and GRW satisfying Assumption 1, denote F (θ) = i=1 qi `(hθ, xi i, yi ). If
x1 , · · · , xn are linearly independent, then with a sufficiently small learning rate η, we have:
 (i)                    F (θ(t) ) → 0 as t → ∞.                                                    (ii)                  θ(t) 2 → ∞ as t → ∞.

 (iii) Let θR = arg minθ {F (θ) : kθk2 ≤ R}. θR is unique for any R such that minkθk2 ≤R F (θ) <
                                                                                                                                θ (t)
                        mini qi `(0, yi ). And if limR→∞ θRR exists, then limt→∞                                                           also exists and they are equal.
                                                                                                                             kθ(t) k2

                                                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This result is an extension of Theorem 1 of Ji et al. (2020). For the logistic loss, it is easy to show
that it satisfies the conditions of the above theorem and limR→∞ θRR = θ̂MM . Thus, Theorems 8
and 7 together imply that all GRW satisfying Assumption 1 (including ERM) have the same implicit
bias (see Appendix D.5.3). We also have empirical verification for these results (see Appendix C).

Remark. It is impossible to extend these results to wide NNs like Theorem 4 because for a neural
network, if kθ(t) k2 goes to infinity, then k∇θ f k2 will also go to infinity. However, for a linear model,
the gradient is a constant. Consequently, the gap between the neural networks and its linearized
counterpart will “explode” under gradient descent, so there can be no approximation theorem like
Lemma 5 that can connect wide NNs to their linearized counterparts. Thus, we consider regularized
GRW, for which θ(t) converges to a finite point and there is an approximation theorem.

5.2   W IDE N EURAL N ETWORKS , WITH L2 R EGULARIZATION

Consider minimizing the regularized weighted empirical risk (13) with ` being the logistic loss. As
in the regression case, with L2 regularization, GRW methods have different implicit biases than
ERM for the same reasons as in Section 4.3. And similarly, we can show that in order for GRW
methods to be sufficiently different from ERM, the regularization needs to be large enough to sig-
nificantly lower the training performance. Specifically, in the following theorem we show that if the
regularization is too small to lower the training performance, then a wide neural network trained
with regularized GRW and the logistic loss will still be very close to the max-margin linearized
neural network:

                           (0)                                                      (0)
   fMM (x) = hθ̂MM , ∇θ f (x)i where θ̂MM = arg max                min yi · hθ, ∇θ f (xi )i     (18)
                                                        kθk2 =1    i=1,··· ,n

                                       (t)
Note that fMM does not depend on qi . Moreover, using the result in the previous section we can
show that a linearized neural network trained with unregularized ERM will converge to fMM :
Theorem 9. Suppose there exists M0 > 0 such that ∇θ f (0) (x) 2 ≤ M0 for all test point x. For
a wide NN satisfying Assumption 2, and for any GRW satisfying Assumption 1 with the logistic loss,
if d1 = d2 = · · · = dL = d˜ and ∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn ) are linearly independent and the
learning rate is sufficiently small, then for any δ > 0 there exists a constant C > 0 such that: with
probability at least (1 − δ) over random initialization, as d˜ → ∞ we have: for any   ∈ (0, 41 ), if
                                                          (t)
the empirical training error satisfies lim supt→∞ R̂(freg ) <  , then for any test point x such that
                                     (t)
|fMM (x)| > C · (− log 2 )−1/2 , freg (x) has the same sign as fMM (x) when t is sufficiently large.

This result says that at any test point x on which the max-margin linear classifier classifies with a
margin of Ω((− log 2 )−1/2 ), the neural network has the same prediction. And as   decreases, the
confidence threshold also becomes lower. Similar to Theorem 6, this theorem provides the scaling
of the gap between the regularized GRW model and the unregularized ERM model w.r.t.  .
This result justifies the empirical observation in Sagawa et al. (2020a) that with large regularization,
some GRW algorithms can maintain a high worst-group test performance, with the cost of suffering
a significant drop in training accuracy. On the other hand, if the regularization is small and the
model can achieve nearly perfect training accuracy, then its worst-group test performance will still
significantly drop.

6     D ISCUSSION

6.1   D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST G ENERALIZATION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS

A large body of prior work focused on distributionally robust optimization, but we show that these
methods have (almost) equivalent implicit biases as ERM. In other words, distributionally robust
optimization (DRO) does not necessarily achieve better distributionally robust generalization
(DRG). Our results pinpoint a critical bottleneck in the current distribution shift research, and we
argue that a deeper understanding in DRG is crucial for developing better distributionally robust
training algorithms. Here we discuss three promising future directions to improving DRG.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The first approach is data augmentation and pretraining on large datasets. Our theoretical findings
suggest that the implicit bias of GRW is determined by the training samples and the initial point, but
not the sample weights. Thus, to improve DRG, we can either obtain more training samples, or start
from a better initial point, as proposed in two recent papers (Wiles et al., 2022; Sagawa et al., 2022).
The second approach (for classification) is to go beyond the class of (iterative) sample reweighting
based GRW algorithms, for instance via logit adjustment (Menon et al., 2021), which makes a
classifier have larger margins on smaller groups to improve its generalization on smaller groups.
                                                                    −1/4
An early approach by Cao et al. (2019) proposed to add an O(nk ) additive adjustment term to
the logits output by the classifier. Following this spirit, Menon et al. (2021) proposed the LA-loss
which also adds an additive adjustment term to the logits. Ye et al. (2020) proposed the CDT-loss
which adds a multiplicative adjustment term to the logits by dividing the logits of different classes
with different temperatures. Kini et al. (2021) proposed the VS-loss which includes both additive
and multiplicative adjustment terms, and they showed that only the multiplicative adjustment term
affects the implicit bias, while the additive term only affects optimization, a fact that can be easily
derived from our Theorem 8. Finally, Li et al. (2021a) proposed AutoBalance which optimizes the
adjustment terms with a bi-level optimization framework.
The third approach is to stay within the class of GRW algorithms, but to change the classifica-
tion/regression loss function to be suited to GRW. A recent paper (Wang et al., 2022) showed that
for linear classifiers, one can make the implicit bias of GRW dependent on the sample weights by
replacing the exponentially-tailed logistic loss with the following polynomially-tailed loss:
                                            
                                                      `left (ŷy) , if ŷy < β
                             `α,β (ŷ, y) =           1                                       (19)
                                                               α
                                                                   , if ŷy ≥ β
                                              [ŷy − (β − 1)]
And this result can be extended to GRW satisfying Assumption 1 using our Theorem 8. The reason
why loss (19) works is that it changes limR→∞ θRR , and the new limit depends on the sample weights.

6.2     L IMITATIONS

Like most theory papers, our work makes some strong assumptions. The two main assumptions are:

    (i) The model is a linear model or a sufficiently wide fully-connected neural network.
 (ii) The model is trained for sufficiently long time, i.e. without early stopping.

Regarding (i), Chizat et al. (2019) argued that NTK neural networks fall in the “lazy training”
regime and results might not be transferable to general neural networks. However, this class of
neural networks has been widely studied in recent years and has provided considerable insights into
the behavior of general neural networks, which is hard to analyze otherwise. Regarding (ii), in some
easy tasks, when early stopping is applied, existing algorithms for distributional shift can do better
than ERM (Sagawa et al., 2020a). However, as demonstrated in Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021); Koh
et al. (2021), in real applications these methods still cannot significantly improve over ERM even
with early stopping, so early stopping is not the ultimate universal solution. Thus, though inevitably
our results rely on some strong assumptions, we believe that they provide important insights into the
problems of existing methods and directions for future work, which are significant contributions to
the study of distributional shift problems.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we posit a broad class of what we call Generalized Reweighting (GRW) algorithms
that include popular approaches such as importance weighting, and Distributionally Robust Opti-
mization (DRO) variants, that were designed towards the task of learning models that are robust to
distributional shift. We show that when used to train overparameterized linear models or wide NN
models, even this very broad class of GRW algorithms does not improve over ERM, because they
have the same implicit biases. We also showed that regularization does not help if it is not large
enough to significantly lower the average training performance. Our results thus suggest to make
progress towards learning models that are robust to distributional shift, we have to either go beyond
this broad class of GRW algorithms, or design new losses specifically targeted to this class.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the support of NSF via OAC-1934584,                     IIS-1909816,    DARPA via
HR00112020006, and ARL.

R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 242–252. PMLR, 2019.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Su Lin Blodgett, Lisa Green, and Brendan O’Connor. Demographic dialectal variation in social
  media: A case study of African-American English. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1119–1130, Austin, Texas, November
  2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1120.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning?
  In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  872–881. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
Kaidi Cao, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, Nikos Arechiga, and Tengyu Ma. Learning imbalanced
  datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32:1567–1578, 2019.
Lénaı̈c Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming.
   In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu Zhai. Gradient descent finds global
  minima of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1675–
  1685. PMLR, 2019.
John Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distribution-
  ally robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08750, 2018.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking importance weighting
  for deep learning under distribution shift. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Bal-
  can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
  11996–12007. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2020/file/8b9e7ab295e87570551db122a04c6f7c-Paper.pdf.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. The journal of machine learning research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Suriya Gunasekar, Jason Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Characterizing implicit bias
  in terms of optimization geometry. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1832–1841. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In D. Lee,
 M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, volume 29, pp. 3315–3323. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness with-
  out demographics in repeated loss minimization. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.),
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1929–1938, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR.
Dirk Hovy and Anders Søgaard. Tagging performance correlates with author age. In Proceedings
  of the 53rd annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th interna-
  tional joint conference on natural language processing (volume 2: Short papers), pp. 483–488,
  2015.
Weihua Hu, Gang Niu, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. Does distributionally robust supervised
 learning give robust classifiers? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2029–
 2037. PMLR, 2018.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
  Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Ziwei Ji, Miroslav Dudı́k, Robert E. Schapire, and Matus Telgarsky. Gradient descent follows the
  regularization path for general losses. In Jacob Abernethy and Shivani Agarwal (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of Thirty Third Conference on Learning Theory, volume 125 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2109–2136. PMLR, 09–12 Jul 2020.
Byungju Kim and Junmo Kim. Adjusting decision boundary for class imbalanced learning. IEEE
  Access, 8:81674–81685, 2020.
Ganesh Ramachandra Kini, Orestis Paraskevas, Samet Oymak, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Label-
  imbalanced and group-sensitive classification under overparameterization. In Thirty-Fifth Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsub-
  ramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, Tony Lee, Etienne
  David, Ian Stavness, Wei Guo, Berton Earnshaw, Imran Haque, Sara M Beery, Jure Leskovec,
  Anshul Kundaje, Emma Pierson, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. Wilds: A bench-
  mark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. In Advances
 in neural information processing systems, pp. 4066–4076, 2017.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32:8572–8583, 2019.
Haoliang Li, Sinno Jialin Pan, Shiqi Wang, and Alex C Kot. Domain generalization with adver-
  sarial feature learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 5400–5409, 2018.
Mingchen Li, Xuechen Zhang, Christos Thrampoulidis, Jiasi Chen, and Samet Oymak. Autobal-
 ance: Optimized loss functions for imbalanced data. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems, 2021a.
Tianhao Li, Limin Wang, and Gangshan Wu. Self supervision to distillation for long-tailed visual
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  630–639, 2021b.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR,
  2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hong Liu, Jeff Z. HaoChen, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Self-supervised learning is more
  robust to dataset imbalance. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4AZz9osqrar.
Mingsheng Long, Han Zhu, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Unsupervised domain adaptation
 with residual transfer networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Aditya Krishna Menon, Sadeep Jayasumana, Ankit Singh Rawat, Himanshu Jain, Andreas Veit, and
  Sanjiv Kumar. Long-tail learning via logit adjustment. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Saeid Motiian, Marco Piccirilli, Donald A Adjeroh, and Gianfranco Doretto. Unified deep super-
  vised domain adaptation and generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 5715–5725, 2017.
Yonatan Oren, Shiori Sagawa, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust lan-
  guage modeling. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 4227–4237, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1432.
John Rawls. Justice as fairness: A restatement. Harvard University Press, 2001.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. The risks of invariant risk mini-
  mization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why over-
  parameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020b.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tony Lee, Irena Gao, Sang Michael Xie, Kendrick Shen, Ananya
  Kumar, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Henrik Marklund, Sara Beery, Etienne David, Ian
  Stavness, Wei Guo, Jure Leskovec, Kate Saenko, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
  Finn, and Percy Liang. Extending the WILDS benchmark for unsupervised adaptation. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The im-
  plicit bias of gradient descent on separable data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19
  (1):2822–2878, 2018.
Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep domain adaptation,
  2016.
Rachael Tatman. Gender and dialect bias in youtube’s automatic captions. In Proceedings of the
  First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pp. 53–59, 2017.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Simultaneous deep transfer across
  domains and tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  4068–4076, 2015.
Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1011.3027, 2010.
Ke Alexander Wang, Niladri Shekhar Chatterji, Saminul Haque, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Is im-
  portance weighting incompatible with interpolating classifiers? In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Peng Wang, Kai Han, Xiu-Shen Wei, Lei Zhang, and Lei Wang. Contrastive learning based hybrid
  networks for long-tailed image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 943–952, 2021.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yu Xie and Charles F Manski. The logit model and response-based samples. Sociological Methods
  & Research, 17(3):283–302, 1989.
Da Xu, Yuting Ye, and Chuanwei Ruan. Understanding the role of importance weighting for deep
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Han-Jia Ye, Hong-You Chen, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Identifying and compensating
  for feature deviation in imbalanced deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01385, 2020.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fair-
 ness beyond disparate treatment & disparate impact: Learning classification without disparate
 mistreatment. In Proceedings of the 26th international conference on world wide web, pp. 1171–
 1180, 2017.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 325–333, 2013.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Doro: Distributional and outlier ro-
  bust optimization. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 12345–12355. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021a.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Arun Suggala, J Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar. Boosted
  CVar classification. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021b.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     R ELATED WORK

A.1   S UBPOPULATION SHIFT

In this work, we mainly focus on the subpopulation shift problem, which has two main applications:
group fairness and long-tailed learning (learning with class imbalance). In both applications, the
dataset can be divided into several subgroups, and this work considers minimizing the worst-group
risk, defined as the maximum risk over any group.

Group Fairness. Group fairness refers to the scenario where the dataset contains several “groups”
(such as demographic groups), and a model is considered fair if its per-group performances meet
certain criteria (a “fairness” notion). Group fairness in machine learning was first studied in Hardt
et al. (2016) and Zafar et al. (2017), where they required the model to perform equally well over all
groups. Many previous papers proposed a number of fairness notions, such as equal opportunity,
statistical parity, etc. Among them, Hashimoto et al. (2018) studied another type of group fairness
called Rawlsian max-min fairness Rawls (2001), which does not require equal performance but
rather requires high performance on the worst-off group. The subpopulation shift problem we study
in this paper is naturally connected to the Rawlsian max-min fairness. A large body of recent work
have studied how to improve this worst-group performance Duchi & Namkoong (2018); Oren et al.
(2019); Liu et al. (2021); Zhai et al. (2021a). Recent work however observe that these approaches,
when used with modern overparameterized models, easily overfit Sagawa et al. (2020a;b). Apart
from group fairness, there are also other notions of fairness, such as individual fairness Dwork et al.
(2012); Zemel et al. (2013) and counterfactual fairness Kusner et al. (2017), which we do not study
in this work.

Long-tailed Learning. Long-tailed learning refers to the scenario where different classes have
different sizes, and usually there are some “minority classes” with extremely few samples that are
much more difficult to learn than the other classes. Using GRW such as importance weighting for
long-tailed learning is a very old idea which dates back to Xie & Manski (1989). However, recently
Byrd & Lipton (2019) found that the effect of importance weighting for long-tailed learning dimin-
ishes as training proceeds, which leads to a line of recent work on how to improve the generalization
in long-tailed learning (Cao et al., 2019; Menon et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2020; Kim & Kim, 2020; Kini
et al., 2021). Most of these papers share a common idea: Forcing the model to have larger margins
on smaller groups, so that its generalization on smaller groups can be better. Self-supervised learn-
ing is also used in long-tailed learning. For instance, Liu et al. (2022) found that self-supervised
learning can achieve good performances in long-tailed learning, Wang et al. (2021) used contrastive
learning for long-tailed learning, and Li et al. (2021b) used self-distillation.

A.2   D OMAIN GENERALIZATION

Domain generalization is the second common type of distribution shift. In domain generalization
and the related domain adaptation, a model is tested on a different domain than what it is trained
on. The most common idea in domain generalization is invariant learning, which learns a feature
extractor that is invariant across domains, usually by matching the feature distribution of different
domains. Since we have no access to the target domain, in invariant learning we assume that we
have access to multiple domains in the training set, and we learn a feature extractor with a small
variance across these domains. Examples include CORAL (Sun & Saenko, 2016), DANN (Ganin
et al., 2016), MMD (Li et al., 2018) and IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019). However, Gulrajani & Lopez-
Paz (2021); Koh et al. (2021) empirically showed that most of these methods cannot do better than
standard ERM, and Rosenfeld et al. (2021) theoretically proved that IRM cannot do better than ERM
unless the number of training domains is greater than the number of independent features.
One problem of invariant learning methods is that they do not necessarily align the classes. For a
source domain P and a target domain Q, even if we have successfully learned a feature extractor
Φ such that Φ(P ) ≈ Φ(Q), there is no guarantee that Φ can map the samples in P and Q from
the same class to the same location in the feature space. In the worst case, Φ can map the positive
samples in P and the negative samples in Q to the same location and vice versa, in which case
100% accuracy over P means 0% accuracy over Q. The goal of class alignment is to make sure
that samples from the same class are mapped together, and far away from the other classes. For


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


example, Tzeng et al. (2015) used soft labels to align the classes, Long et al. (2016) minimized the
class-based cross entropy on the target domain while keeping the source and target classifiers close
with a residual block, and Motiian et al. (2017) adopted a similarity penalty to keep samples from
different classes away from each other.

A.3    I MPLICIT BIAS UNDER THE OVERPARAMETERIZED SETTING

For overparameterized models, there could be many model parameters which all minimize the train-
ing loss. In such cases, it is of interest to study the implicit bias of specific optimization algorithms
such as gradient descent i.e. to what minimizer the model parameters will converge to Du et al.
(2019); Allen-Zhu et al. (2019). Our results use the NTK formulation of wide neural networks Jacot
et al. (2018), and specifically we use linearized neural networks to approximate such wide neural
networks following Lee et al. (2019). There is some criticism of this line of work, e.g. Chizat
et al. (2019) argued that infinitely wide neural networks fall in the “lazy training” regime and results
might not be transferable to general neural networks. Nonetheless such wide neural networks are
being widely studied in recent years, since they provide considerable insights into the behavior of
more general neural networks, which are typically intractable to analyze otherwise.

A.4    C OMPARISON WITH H U ET AL . (2018)

A prior work Hu et al. (2018) also proved that GRW is equivalent to ERM under certain conditions.
However, we would like to point out that this work is substantially different from Hu et al. (2018).
Hu et al. (2018) proved that in classification that uses the zero-one loss, GRW methods such as DRSL
are equivalent to ERM, in the sense that the minimizer of the DRSL risk is also the minimizer of the
average risk. However, this does not mean that DRSL and ERM will always converge to the same
point, as there could be multiple minimizers. Their result relies on the zero-one loss, which leads to
a monotonic linear relationship between the DRSL risk and the average risk. Moreover, their result
is only about the relationship between two minimizers, and they did not prove that DRSL and ERM
can actually converge to these global minima.
On the other hand, in our results, we first show that without regularization, GRW and ERM will
converge to the exact same point, so that they have equivalent implicit biases, which is a much
stronger result. Then we show that even with regularization, if the regularization is not large enough,
GRW will still converge to a point that is very close to the point ERM converges to. Our results do
not depend on the loss function, and work for both the squared loss for regression and the logistic
loss for classification (and can be extended to other losses). Instead, our results depend on the
optimization method (must be first-order or gradient-based) as well as the model architecture (linear
or wide NN), since we need to explicitly prove that both GRW and ERM can reach the global minima
if trained under a small learning rate for sufficiently long. In a word, Hu et al. (2018) proves the
equivalence between GRW and ERM under the zero-one loss with a monotonic relationship between
the two risk functions, while our results focus on the optimization and training dynamics, and prove
that GRW and ERM have almost equivalent implicit biases.


B     E XTENSION TO M ULTI - DIMENSIONAL R EGRESSION / M ULTI - CLASS
      C LASSIFICATION

In our results, we assume that f : Rd → R for simplicity, but our results can be very easily extended
to the case where f : Rd → Rk . For most of our results, the proof consists of two major com-
ponents: (i) The linearized neural network will converge to some point (interpolator, max-margin
classifier, etc.); (ii) The wide fully-connected neural network can be approximated by its linearized
counterpart. For both components, the extension is very simple and straightforward. For (i), the
proof only relies on the smoothness of the objective function and the upper quadratic bound it en-
tails, and the function is still smooth when its output becomes multi-dimensional; For (ii), we can
prove that supt kf (x) − flin (x)k2 = O(d˜−1/4 ) in exactly the same way. Thus, all of our results
hold for multi-dimensional regression and multi-class classification.
Particularly, for the multi-class cross-entropy loss, using Theorem 8 we can show that under any
GRW satisfying Assumption 1, the direction of the weight of a linear classifier will converge to the


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                     0.12


                                                                                                                                                                      Group Weight
                                                              Norm of ERM Model
     Norm of Difference
                                          |θ̃iw − θ̃erm|2                                                                                                  ERM
                                                                                                                                  0.004                    IW                    0.5


                                                                                                                      Training Loss
                     0.10                 |θ̃gdro − θ̃erm|2                   2.0
                                                                                                                                                           GDRO
                     0.08                                                                                                         0.002
                                                                              1.5                                                                                                0.4
                     0.06                                                                                                                                                              0   250 500 750 1000
                                                                                                                                  0.000                                                     ×10000 epochs
                             0   250 500 750 1000                                        0   250 500 750      1000                           0       500       1000
                                  ×10000 epochs                                               ×10000 epochs                                      ×10000 epochs
                                                                                                                                                                      (d)  Group                    Weights
                          (a) Weight Difference                  (b) Norm of ERM Model                                                    (c) Training Loss           (GDRO)

                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6


                                                                                                                                                                      Group Weight
                                                                 Norm of ERM Model
Norm of Difference


                0.275                                                             15                                                  0.10                 ERM
                                                                                                                                                           IW                    0.5


                                                                                                                          Training Loss
                0.250            |θ̃iw − θ̃erm|2                                  10                                                                       GDRO
                                 |θ̃gdro − θ̃erm|2                                                                                    0.05                                       0.4
                0.225                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                       0   250 500 750 1000
                                                                                                                                                                                            ×10000 epochs
                             0   250 500 750 1000                                        0   250 500 750      1000                           0       500       1000
                                  ×10000 epochs                                               ×10000 epochs                                      ×10000 epochs
                                                                                                                                                                      (h)  Group                    Weights
                          (e) Weight Difference                    (f) Norm of ERM Model                                                  (g) Training Loss           (GDRO)

Figure 3: Experimental results of ERM, importance weighting (IW) and Group DRO (GDRO)
with the logistic loss and the polynomially-tailed loss. First row: Logistic loss; Second row:
Polynomially-tailed loss. All norms are L2 norms. θ̃ is a unit vector which is the direction of
θ.


following max-margin classifier:

              θ̂MM = arg min      min f (xi )yi − max
                                                  0
                                                      f (xi )y0 : kθk2 = 1                                                                                                                               (20)
                                                                                  θ           i=1,··· ,n                                  y 6=yi

which is still independent of qi .

C                           M ORE E XPERIMENTS
We run ERM, importance weighting and Group DRO on the training set with 6 MNIST images
which we used in Section 4.1 with the logistic loss and the polynomially-tailed loss (Eqn. (19), with
α = 1, β = 0 and `left being the logistic loss shifted to make the overall loss function continuous) on
this dataset for 10 million epochs (note that we run for much more epochs because the convergence
is very slow). The results are shown in Figure 3. From the plots we can see that:

                             • For either loss function, the training loss of each method converges to 0.
                             • In contrast to the theory that the norm of the ERM model will go to infinity and all models
                               will converge to the max-margin classifier, the weight of the ERM model gets stuck at
                               some point, and the norms of the gaps between the normalized model weights also get
                               stuck. The reason is that the training loss has got so small that it becomes zero in the
                               floating number representation, so the gradient also becomes zero and the training halts
                               due to limited computational precision.
                             • However, we can still observe a fundamental difference between the logistic loss and the
                               polynomially-tailed loss. For the logistic loss, the norm of the gap between importance
                               weighting (or Group DRO) and ERM will converge to around 0.06 when the training stops,
                               while for the polynomially-tailed loss, the norm will be larger than 0.22 and will keep
                               growing, which shows that for the polynomially-tailed loss the normalized model weights
                               do not converge to the same point.
                             • For either loss, the group weights of Group DRO still empirically satisfy Assumption 1.


D                           P ROOFS
In this paper, for any matrix A, we will use kAk2 to denote its spectral norm and kAkF to denote
its Frobenius norm.


                                                                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.1     BACKGROUND ON S MOOTHNESS

A first-order differentiable function f over D is called L-smooth for L > 0 if
                                                                  L        2
                    f (y) ≤ f (x) + h∇f (x), y − xi +               ky − xk2            ∀x, y ∈ D                 (21)
                                                                  2
which is also called the upper quadratic bound. If f is second-order differentiable and D is a convex
set, then f is L-smooth is equivalent to
                                v > ∇2 f (x)v ≤ L               ∀kvk2 = 1, ∀x ∈ D                                 (22)

A classical result in convex optimization is the following:
Theorem 10. If f (x) is convex and L-smooth with a unique finite minimizer x∗ , and is minimized
by gradient descent xt+1 = xt − η∇f (xt ) starting from x0 where the learning rate η ≤ L1 , then
we have
                                                    1           2
                               f (xT ) ≤ f (x∗ ) +    kx0 − x∗ k2                           (23)
                                                   ηT
which also implies that xT converges to x∗ as T → ∞.

D.2     P ROOFS FOR S UBSECTION 4.1

D.2.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Using the key intuition, the weight update rule (7) implies that θ(t+1) −θ(t) ∈ span{x1 , · · · , xn } for
all t, which further implies that θ(t) − θ(0) ∈ span{x1 , · · · , xn } for all t. By Cramer’s rule, in this
n-dimensional subspace there exists one and only one θ∗ such that θ∗ − θ(0) ∈ span{x1 , · · · , xn }
and hθ∗ , xi i for all i. Then we have

 X > (θ(t) − θ∗ )        = (X > θ(t) − Y ) − (X > θ∗ − Y )                ≤ X > θ(t) − Y       →0  + X > θ∗ − Y    2
                     2                                                2                        2
                                                                                            (24)
                    2
because X > θ − Y 2 = 2nR̂(f (x; θ)). On the other hand, let smin be the smallest singular value
of X. Since X is full-rank, smin > 0, and X > (θ(t) − θ∗ ) 2 ≥ smin θ(t) − θ∗ 2 . This shows
that θ(t) − θ∗ 2 → 0. Thus, θ(t) converges to this unique θ∗ .

D.2.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
To help our readers understand the proof more easily, we will first prove the result for static GRW
        (t)                                                                                  (t)
where qi = qi for all t, and then we will prove the result for dynamic GRW that satisfy qi → qi
as t → ∞.

Static GRW.     We first prove the result for all static GRW such that mini qi = q ∗ > 0.
                                                                    Pn          2
We will use smoothness introduce in Appendix D.1. Denote A = i=1 kxi k2 . The empirical risk
of the linear model f (x) = hθ, xi is
                                                     n
                                                     X
                                        F (θ) =            qi (x>
                                                                i θ − yi )
                                                                          2
                                                                                                                  (25)
                                                     i=1

whose Hessian is
                                                             n
                                                             X
                                         ∇2θ F (θ) = 2             qi xi x>
                                                                          i                                       (26)
                                                             i=1


So for any unit vector v ∈ Rd , we have (since qi ∈ [0, 1])
                                               n
                                               X                       n
                                                                       X            2
                          v > ∇2θ F (θ)v = 2         qi (x>   2
                                                          i v) ≤ 2            qi kxi k2 ≤ 2A                      (27)
                                               i=1                     i=1


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


which implies that F (θ) is 2A-smooth. Thus, we have the following upper quadratic bound: for any
θ1 , θ2 ∈ Rd ,
                                                                               2
                      F (θ2 ) ≤ F (θ1 ) + h∇θ F (θ1 ), θ2 − θ1 i + A kθ2 − θ1 k2             (28)
                                                                 √           2
Denote g(θ(t) ) = (X > θ(t) − Y ) ∈ Rn . We can see that           Qg(θ(t) ) 2 = F (θ(t) ), where where
√            √          √
  Q = diag( q1 , · · · , qn ). Thus, ∇F (θ(t) ) = 2XQg(θ(t) ). The update rule of a static GRW
with gradient descent and the squared loss is:
                                   Xn
                 θ(t+1) = θ(t) − η     qi xi (f (t) (xi ) − yi ) = θ(t) − ηXQg(θ(t) )              (29)
                                         i=1


Substituting θ1 and θ2 in (28) with θ(t) and θ(t+1) yields
                                                                                                     2
           F (θ(t+1) ) ≤ F (θ(t) ) − 2ηg(θ(t) )> Q> X > XQg(θ(t) ) + A ηXQg(θ(t) )                       (30)
                                                                                                     2

Since x1 , · · · , xn are linearly independent, X > X is a positive definite matrix. p
                                                                                     Denote the smallest
                                                               √
eigenvalue of X > X by λmin > 0. And Qg(θ(t) ) 2 ≥ q ∗ g(θ(t) ) 2 = q ∗ F (θ(t) ), so we
have g(θ(t) )> Q> X > XQg(θ(t) ) ≥ q ∗ λmin F (θ(t) ). Thus,

                                                                                     p 2 p           2
            F (θ(t+1) ) ≤ F (θ(t) ) − 2ηq ∗ λmin F (θ(t) ) + Aη 2 X                   Q    Qg(θ(t) )
                                                                                           2         2
                                (t)            ∗ min           (t)            2
                                                                                    p 2
                       ≤ F (θ         ) − 2ηq λ         F (θ         ) + Aη        X Q F (θ(t) )         (31)
                                                                                          F
                                (t)            ∗ min           (t)            2      2
                       ≤ F (θ         ) − 2ηq λ         F (θ         ) + Aη       kXkF F (θ(t) )
                       = (1 − 2ηq ∗ λmin + A2 η 2 )F (θ(t) )
            ∗   min
Let η0 = q A  λ
                2 . For any η ≤ η0 , we have F (θ(t+1) ) ≤ (1 − ηq ∗ λmin )F (θ(t) ) for all t, which
implies that limt→∞ F (θ(t) ) = 0. This implies that the empirical training risk must converge to 0.

Dynamic GRW. Now we prove the result for all dynamic GRW satisfying Assumption 1. By
Assumption 1, for any   > 0, there exists t  such that for all t ≥ t  and all i,
                                                (t)
                                               qi     ∈ (qi −  , qi +  )                                 (32)
                                                                                    (t)
This is because for all i, there exists ti such that for all t ≥ ti , qi ∈ (qi −  , qi +  ). Then, we can
define t  = max{t1 , · · · , tn }. Denote the largest and smallest eigenvalues of X > X by λmax and
                                                                                ∗    ∗ min 2
λmin , and because X is full-rank, we have λmin > 0. Define   = min{ q3 , (q12λλmax )2 }, and then t
is also fixed.
We still denote Q = diag(q1 , · · · , qn ). When t ≥ t  , the update rule of a dynamic GRW with
gradient descent and the squared loss is:
                                                       > (t)
                                θ(t+1) = θ(t) − ηXQ(t)
                                                     (X θ    −Y)                                         (33)
       (t)                                                                           (t)
where Q  = Q(t) , and we use the subscript   to indicate that                       Q  − Q
                                                                              <  . Then, note that we
                                                                            2
                                     √
                            q
                (t)   (t)        (t)                                                   p
can rewrite Q  as Q  =          Q3  · Q as long as   ≤ q ∗ /3. This is because qi +   ≤ (qi + 3 )qi
             p
and qi −   ≥ (qi − 3 )qi for all   ≤ qi /3, and qi ≥ q ∗ . Thus, we have
                                 q                                     q
                                      (t)                                 (t)
                                          p                                   p
              θ(t+1) = θ(t) − ηX Q3  Qg(θ(t) ) where Q(t)            =   Q3  · Q                         (34)

Again, substituting θ1 and θ2 in (28) with θ(t) and θ(t+1) yields
                                                 q                  q       2
                                                     (t)              (t)
      (t+1)                     (t) > >     >
                                                         p                p
 F (θ       ) ≤ F (θ ) − 2ηg(θ ) Q X X Q3  Qg(θ ) + A ηX Q3  Qg(θ(t) )
                    (t)                                         (t)

                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                         (35)


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, note that                                             q
                                                                   (t)
                                    (t) >      >
                                                   p   >
                                                                            p
                              g(θ
                               ) Q X X          Q    Qg(θ(t) )    Q3  −
                                     q
                             p > >                            2
                                        (t)
                                            p     p
                           ≤  Q X X    Q3  − Q      Qg(θ(t) )
                                                                                 2                      2                   (36)
                                                                    2
                                             q
                                                (t)
                             p         >
                                                    p    p
                           ≤   Q    X X 2      Q3  − Q    Qg(θ(t) )
                                  2                    2            2
                                √
                           ≤λmax 3 F (θ(t) )
where the last step comes from the following fact: for all   < qi /3,
                     p           √       √            √       p        √
                       qi + 3  − qi ≤ 3  and             qi − qi − 3  ≤ 3                                                   (37)

And as proved before, we also have
                                g(θ(t) )> Q> X > XQg(θ(t) ) ≥ q ∗ λmin F (θ(t) )                                            (38)
             ∗   min 2
Since   ≤ (q12λλmax )2 , we have
                         q
                             (t)
                                 p                 √              1
 g(θ(t) )> Q> X > X Q3  Qg(θ(t) ) ≥ q ∗ λmin − λmax 3  F (θ(t) ) ≥ q ∗ λmin F (θ(t) ) (39)
                                                                  2

Thus,
                                                                                         q          2                   2
                                                                                              (t)
                  (t+1)              (t)           ∗ min          (t)            2
                                                                                                        p
           F (θ           ) ≤ F (θ         ) − ηq λ        F (θ         ) + Aη       X       Q3             Qg(θ(t) )
                                                                                                    2                   2
                                                                                                                            (40)
                           ≤ (1 − ηq ∗ λmin + A2 η 2 (1 + 3 ))F (θ(t) )
                           ≤ (1 − ηq ∗ λmin + 2A2 η 2 )F (θ(t) )
                                    ∗    min
for all   ≤ 1/3. Let η0 = q 4A λ
                                 2 . For any η ≤ η0 , we have F (θ
                                                                   (t+1)
                                                                         ) ≤ (1 − ηq ∗ λmin /2)F (θ(t) )
for all t ≥ t  , which implies that limt→∞ F (θ(t) ) = 0. Thus, the empirical training risk converges
to 0.

D.3     P ROOFS FOR S UBSECTION 4.2

D.3.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3
Note that the first l layers (except the output layer) of the original NTK formulation and our new
formulation are the same, so we still have the following proposition:
Proposition 11 (Proposition 1 in Jacot et al. (2018)). If σ is Lipschitz and dl → ∞ for l = 1, · · · , L
sequentially, then for all l = 1, · · · , L, the distribution of a single element of hl converges in
probability to a zero-mean Gaussian process of covariance Σl that is defined recursively by:
                                                       1 > 0
                                        Σ1 (x, x0 ) =    x x + β2
                                                      d0                                                                    (41)
                                        Σl (x, x0 ) = Ef [σ(f (x))σ(f (x0 ))] + β 2
where f is sampled from a zero-mean Gaussian process of covariance Σ(l−1) .

Now we show that for an infinitely wide neural network with L ≥ 1 hidden layers, Θ(0) converges
in probability to the following non-degenerated deterministic limiting kernel
                                           Θ = Ef ∼ΣL [σ(f (x))σ(f (x0 ))] + β 2                                            (42)

                                                   L
Consider the output layer hL+1 = W
                                 √ σ(hL ) + βbL . We can see that for any parameter θi before
                                                   d˜
the output layer,
                                                         W L>
                                 ∇θi hL+1 = diag(σ̇(hL )) √ ∇θi hL = 0                                                      (43)
                                                           dL

                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


And for W L and bL , we have
                                      1
                         ∇W L hL+1 = √ σ(hL )                              and         ∇bL hL+1 = β                  (44)
                                      dL

Then we can achieve (42) by the law of large numbers.

D.3.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 5

We will use the following short-hand in the proof:
                                    (t)      (t)
                                 g(θ ) = f (X) − Y
                                
                                  J(θ(t) ) = ∇θ f (X; θ(t) ) ∈ Rp×n                                                  (45)
                                
                                    Θ(t) = J(θ(t) )> J(θ(t) )
                                


                                                                                       (t)
For any   > 0, there exists t  such that for all t ≥ q
                                                     t  and all i, qi ∈ (qi −  , qi +  ). Like what we
                                              (t)         (t) √
have done in (34), we can rewrite Q(t) = Q  = Q3  · Q, where Q = diag(q1 , · · · , qn ).
The update rule of a GRW with gradient descent and the squared loss for the wide neural network
is:
                            θ(t+1) = θ(t) − ηJ(θ(t) )Q(t) g(θ(t) )                          (46)
and for t ≥ t  , it can be rewritten as
                                                                          q     hp         i
                                   (t+1)            (t)            (t)      (t)
                               θ               =θ         − ηJ(θ         ) Q3     Qg(θ(t) )                          (47)

First, we will prove the following theorem:
Theorem 12. There exist constants M > 0 and  0 > 0 such that for all   ∈ (0,  0 ], η ≤ η ∗ and
any δ > 0, there exist R0 > 0, D̃ > 0 and B > 1 such that for any d˜ ≥ D̃, the following (i) and
(ii) hold with probability at least (1 − δ) over random initialization when applying gradient descent
with learning rate η:

 (i) For all t ≤ t  , there is

                               g(θ(t) )            ≤ B t R0                                                          (48)
                                               2
                              t                                               t
                              X                                               X               M B t  R0
                                           θ(j) − θ(j−1)          ≤ ηM R0           B j−1 <                          (49)
                              j=1
                                                              2
                                                                              j=1
                                                                                               B−1


 (ii) For all t ≥ t  , we have
                                                                     t−t
                                                      ηq ∗ λmin

                 p           (t)
                     Qg(θ          )       ≤       1−                        B t  R0                                 (50)
                                       2                   3
                 t                                                                     t                      j−t
                                                            √                                    ηq ∗ λmin
                 X                                                                     X
                             (j)           (j−1)                              t
                         θ         −θ                   ≤ η 1 + 3 M B R0                      1−
               j=t  +1
                                                    2
                                                                                    j=t  +1
                                                                                                      3
                                                           √                                                         (51)
                                                          3 1 + 3 M B t  R0
                                                        <
                                                              q ∗ λmin

Proof.    The proof is based on the following lemma:
Lemma 13 (Local Lipschitzness of the Jacobian). Under Assumption 2, there is a constant M > 0
such that for any C0 > 0 and any δ > 0, there exists a D̃ such that: If d˜ ≥ D̃, then with probability


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


at least (1 − δ) over random initialization, for any x such that kxk2 ≤ 1,
             
                                                 M
             
                ∇θ f (x; θ) − ∇θ f (x; θ̃) ≤ p  4
                                                      θ − θ̃
                                                   d˜
             
             
             
                                          2                 2
             
                              k∇θ f (x; θ)k2 ≤ M
             
             
                                                               ,    ∀θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 )                                                       (52)
                                                 M
                             J(θ) − J(θ̃) ≤ p         θ − θ̃
             
             
                                                4
                                                   d˜
             
                                          F                 2
             
             
             
                                   kJ(θ)kF ≤ M
             

where B(θ(0) , R) = {θ : θ − θ(0) 2 < R}.

The proof of this lemma can be found in Appendix D.3.3. Note that for any x, f (0) (x) = βbL
where bL is sampled from the standard Gaussian distribution. Thus, for any δ > 0, there exists a
constant R0 such that with probability at least (1 − δ/3) over random initialization,

                                                   g(θ(0) )            < R0                                                                      (53)
                                                                   2


And by Proposition 3, there exists D2 ≥ 0 such that for any d˜ ≥ D2 , with probability at least
(1 − δ/3),
                                                   q ∗ λmin
                                    Θ − Θ(0)    ≤                                          (54)
                                             F         3
                                                              ∗    min 2                                                                    t
Let M be the constant in Lemma 13. Let  0 = (q108M
                                               λ    )               ∗ 2
                                                   4 . Let B = 1 + η M , and C0 =
                                                                                  M B R0
                                                                                   B−1 +
 √
3 1+3 M B t  R0
     q ∗ λmin   . By Lemma 13, there exists D1 > 0 such that with probability at least (1 − δ/3),
          ˜
for any d ≥ D1 , (52) is true for all θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 ).
By union bound, with probability at least (1 − δ), (52), (53) and (54) are all true. Now we assume
that all of them are true, and prove (48) and (49) by induction. (48) is true for t = 0 due to (53), and
(49) is always true for t = 0. Suppose (48) and (49) are true for t, then for t + 1 we have

          θ(t+1) − θ(t)       ≤ η J(θ(t) )Q(t)                g(θ(t) )             ≤ η J(θ(t) )Q(t)                          g(θ(t) )
                          2                             2                     2                                      F                  2
                                                                                                                                                 (55)
                              ≤ η J(θ(t) )             g(θ(t) )            ≤ M ηB t R0
                                               F                       2


So (49) is also true for t + 1. And we also have

                     g(θ(t+1) )       = g(θ(t+1) ) − g(θ(t) ) + g(θ(t) )
                                  2                                                                  2
                                               (t) >          (t+1)              (t)                 (t)
                                      = J(θ̃           ) (θ                −θ          ) + g(θ             )
                                                                                                               2
                                                       (t) >           (t)         (t)         (t)
                                      = −ηJ(θ̃              ) J(θ            )Q g(θ                  ) + g(θ(t) )
                                                                                                                         2
                                                            (t) >            (t)         (t)                   (t)
                                      ≤ I − ηJ(θ̃ ) J(θ )Q               g(θ )                                                                   (56)
                                                                     2            2

                                      ≤ 1 + ηJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) )Q(t)       g(θ(t) )
                                                                       2            2

                                                  (t)           (t)           (t)
                                      ≤ 1 + η J(θ̃ )       J(θ )           g(θ )
                                                                       F                       F                     2
                                                   ∗     2             (t)                     t+1
                                      ≤ (1 + η M ) g(θ                       )         ≤B             R0
                                                                                   2

                                                                       √
Therefore, (48) and (49) are true for all t ≤ t  , which implies that    Qg(θ(t  ) ) 2 ≤ g(θ(t  ) ) 2 ≤
B t  R0 , so (50) is true for t = t  . And (51) is obviously true for t = t  . Now, let us prove (ii) by
induction. Note that when t ≥ t  , we have the alternative update rule (47). If (50) and (51) are true
for t, then for t + 1, there is


                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 q                                                     q
                                   (t)                                                   (t)
                                                       p                                                        p
 θ(t+1) − θ(t)       ≤ η J(θ(t) ) Q3                       Qg(θ(t) )       ≤ η J(θ(t) ) Q3                          Qg(θ(t) )
                 2                             2                       2                                    F                   2
                                                                                               t−t
                        √                                               √           ηq ∗ λmin

                                                       p
                     ≤ η 1 + 3  J(θ(t) )                 Qg(θ(t) ) ≤ M η 1 + 3  1 −                 B t  R 0
                                                   F              2                      3
                                                                                                  (57)
So (51) is true for t + 1. And we also have
           p                    p                  p            p
              Qg(θ(t+1) ) =        Qg(θ(t+1) ) − Qg(θ(t) ) + Qg(θ(t) )
                            2                                            2
                                p        (t) > (t+1)     (t)
                                                               p     (t)
                              =    QJ(θ̃ ) (θ         − θ ) + Qg(θ )
                                                                         2
                                    p        (t) >
                                                                    p
                              = −η QJ(θ̃ ) J(θ )Q g(θ ) + Qg(θ(t) )
                                                     (t)   (t)  (t)

                                                            q
                                                                                2                                               (58)
                                                               (t)
                                      p                             p
                              ≤ I − η QJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) Q3         Qg(θ(t) )
                                                                                        2                       2
                                                      q                                                     ∗ min
                                                                                                                     t
                                      p     (t) > (t)   (t)                                         ηq λ
                               ≤ I − η QJ(θ̃ ) J(θ ) Q3                                          1−                      R0
                                                                                        2              3

where θ̃(t) is some linear interpolation between θ(t) and θ(t+1) . Now we prove that
                                                                      ηq ∗ λmin
                                                    q
                                                         (t)
                                p
                         I − η QJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) Q3         ≤1−                                                              (59)
                                                             2             3

For any unit vector v ∈ Rn , we have
                                   p  p              p  p
                         v > (I − η QΘ Q)v = 1 − ηv > QΘ Qv                                                                     (60)
 √          √                                         √  √
    Qv 2 ∈ [ q ∗ , 1], so for any η ≤ η ∗ , v > (I − η QΘ Q)v ∈ [0, 1 − ηλmin q ∗ ], which implies
          √     √
that I − η QΘ Q 2 ≤ 1 − ηλmin q ∗ . Thus,

            p                 p
     I −η QJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) Q
                                    2
       p     p               p             p       p                                            p
≤ I − η QΘ Q + η               Q(Θ − Θ(0) ) Q + η    Q(J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) − J(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) )) Q
                    2                        2                                                     2
       min ∗
                   p            (0)
                                     p       p      (0) >  (0)         (t) >     (t)
                                                                                       p
≤1 − ηλ q + η         Q(Θ − Θ ) Q + η          Q(J(θ ) J(θ ) − J(θ̃ ) J(θ )) Q
                                                       F                                                                               F
         min ∗                 (0)                     (0) >        (0)              (t) >        (t)
≤1 − ηλ         q +η Θ−Θ                 + η J(θ            ) J(θ         ) − J(θ̃     ) J(θ            )
                                     F                                                                      F
                 ηq ∗ λmin   ηM 2   (t)                                    ηq ∗ λmin
≤1 − ηλmin q ∗ +           + p      θ   − θ (0)
                                                  + θ̃ (t)
                                                           − θ (0)
                                                                       ≤1−
                      3       4
                                d˜              2                  2            2
                                                                                                                                (61)
                                              4
                                 12M 2 C0
for all d˜ ≥ max D1 , D2 ,        q ∗ λmin          , which implies that
                                                    q
                                                      (t)
                               p
                        I −η    QJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) Q3
                                                                           2
                            ηq ∗ λmin
                                                                     q
                                                                           (t)
                                           p                                    p
                    ≤1 −              + η QJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) )          Q3  − Q                        (62)
                                 2                                                       2
                            ηq ∗ λmin         √             ηq ∗ λmin
                    ≤1 −              + ηM 2 3  ≤ 1 −                       (due to (37))
                                 2                               3
for all   ≤  0 . Thus, (50) is also true for
                                            t + 1. In conclusion,    (50) and (51) are true with probability
                                                            2
                                                                  4
at least (1 − δ) for all d˜ ≥ D̃ = max D1 , D2 , 12M          C0
                                                       q ∗ λmin       .


                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Returning back to the proof of Lemma 5.                  Choose and fix an   such that   <
                 ∗ min
                             2
                q λ
min{ 0 , 13 3λmax +q ∗ λmin    }, where  0 is defined by Theorem 12. Then, t  is also fixed. There
exists D̃ ≥ 0 such that for any d˜ ≥ D̃, with probability at least (1 − δ), Theorem 12 and Lemma 13
are true and
                                                         q ∗ λmin
                                         Θ − Θ(0)     ≤                                        (63)
                                                    F        3
which immediately implies that
                                                                                                 q ∗ λmin
                              Θ(0)         ≤ kΘk2 + Θ − Θ(0)                      ≤ λmax +                            (64)
                                       2                                      F                      3
                                                                t
                                                                              √             t
We still denote B = 1 + η ∗ M 2 and C0 = MB−1
                                           B R0
                                                   + 3 1+3 M     B R0
                                                           q ∗ λmin   . Theorem 12 ensures that for
        (t)     (0)
all t, θ ∈ B(θ , C0 ). Then we have
                  p        p               p       p                p             p
            I − η QΘ(0) Q ≤ I − η QΘ Q + η                           Q(Θ − Θ(0) ) Q
                                 2                       2                            2
                                                        ∗ min               ∗ min             (65)
                                                     ηq  λ              2ηq  λ
                                   ≤ 1 − ηλmin q ∗ +             =1−
                                                         3                  3
so it follows that
                   q                                                                                 q
                     (t)                                                                               (t)
           p                                         p               p                  p                  p
     I − η QΘ(0) Q3                    ≤ I −η            QΘ(0)        Q           + η       QΘ(0)     Q3  − Q
                                   2                                          2                                   2   (66)
                                           2ηq λ       ∗ min
                                                                          max       q ∗ λmin √
                                       ≤1−                       + η(λ            +         ) 3
                                              3                                         3
                                               2
                               q ∗ λmin
Thus, for all   < 31       3λmax +q ∗ λmin         , there is

                                                                                        ηq ∗ λmin
                                                    q
                                                      (t)
                                            p   (0)
                                       I − η QΘ      Q3                       ≤1−                                     (67)
                                                                          2                  3

The update rule of the GRW for the linearized neural network is:
                                           (t+1)       (t)
                                       θlin        = θlin − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) glin (θ(t) )                                (68)
where we use the subscript “lin” to denote the linearized neural network, and with a slight abuse of
                                (t)
notion denote glin (θ(t) ) = g(θlin ).
First, let us consider the training data X. Denote ∆t = glin (θ(t) ) − g(θ(t) ). We have
                    (
                       glin (θ(t+1) ) − glin (θ(t) ) = −ηJ(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) glin (θ(t) )
                                                                                                                      (69)
                               g(θ(t+1) ) − g(θ(t) ) = −ηJ(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) )Q(t) g(θ(t) )

where θ̃(t) is some linear interpolation between θ(t) and θ(t+1) . Thus,
                                  h                                     i
                  ∆t+1 − ∆t =η J(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) Q(t) g(θ(t) )
                                                                                                                      (70)
                                           − ηJ(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) ∆t

By Lemma 13, we have

               J(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )
                                                        F
                                      >
             ≤ J(θ̃(t) ) − J(θ(0) ) J(θ(t) ) + J(θ(0) )> J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )                                          (71)
                                                                 F                                          F

             ≤2M 2 C0 d˜−1/4

                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


which implies that for all t < t  ,
             h                        i                                       h                                        i
k∆t+1 k2 ≤ I − ηJ(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) ∆t                                  + η J(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) Q(t) g(θ(t) )
                                                                       2                                                                                    2
                                 (0) >         (0)     (t)                            (t) >      (t)             (0) >      (0)                   (t)
          ≤ I − ηJ(θ               ) J(θ             )Q          k∆t k2 + η J(θ̃         ) J(θ         ) − J(θ     ) J(θ          )         g(θ         )
                                                             F                                                                         F                    2
          ≤ (1 + ηM 2 ) k∆t k2 + 2ηM 2 C0 B t R0 d˜−1/4
          ≤ B k∆t k + 2ηM 2 C0 B t R0 d˜−1/4
                         2
                                                                                                                                          (72)
Therefore, we have
                         B −(t+1) k∆t+1 k2 ≤ B −t k∆t k2 + 2ηM 2 C0 B −1 R0 d˜−1/4                                                        (73)
Since ∆0 = 0, it follows that for all t ≤ t  ,
                                               k∆t k2 ≤ 2tηM 2 C0 B t−1 R0 d˜−1/4                                                         (74)
and particularly we have
                                                     ≤ k∆t  k2 ≤ 2t  ηM 2 C0 B t  −1 R0 d˜−1/4
                                  p
                                      Q∆t                                                                                                 (75)
                                                 2

For t ≥ t  , we have the alternative update rule (47). Thus,
                             p h                                      iq     hp           i
                                                                         (t)
  p              p                     (t) >    (t)       (0) >  (0)
     Q∆t+1 − Q∆t =η Q J(θ̃ ) J(θ ) − J(θ ) J(θ )                        Q3      Qg(θ(t) )
                                                      q       hp    i                                                                     (76)
                                                          (t)
                                p        (0) >    (0)
                            − η QJ(θ ) J(θ ) Q3                 Q∆t

             √                               √
                                 q                   q
                                   (t)                    (t)
Let A = I − η QJ(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) Q3  = I − η QΘ(0) Q3  . Then, we have
                        p h                                     iq      p
                                                                   (t)
 p            p
    Q∆t+1 = A Q∆t +η Q J(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )   Q3     Qg(θ(t) ) (77)
                   ∗   min
Let γ = 1 − ηq λ3       < 1. Combining with Theorem 12 and (67), the above leads to
                                         p h                                          iq
                                                                                          (t)
 p                         p                                                                                                               p
  Q∆t+1            ≤ kAk2    Q∆t + η        Q J(θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )   Q3                                                 Qg(θ(t) )
               2                                2                                                                                     2                         2
                             p                            (t) >            (t)       (0) >     (0)
                                                                                                          √              t−t      t
                   ≤γ            Q∆t          + η J(θ̃) J(θ ) − J(θ ) J(θ )                                   1 + 3 γ           B R0
                                          2                                   F
                                                      √
                                                                        ˜
                             p                     2           t−t  t    −1/4
                   ≤γ            Q∆t          + 2ηM C0 1 + 3 γ     B R0 d
                                          2
                                                                                                                                          (78)
This implies that
                                                                                 √
                                                                       + 2ηM 2 C0 1 + 3 γ −1−t  B t  R0 d˜−1/4
                p                                     p
      γ −(t+1)    Q∆t+1                   ≤ γ −t          Q∆t                                                                             (79)
                                      2                            2

Combining with (75), it implies that for all t ≥ t  ,
                                                      √
              Q∆t ≤ 2γ t−t  ηM 2 C0 B t  R0 t  B −1 + 1 + 3 γ −1 (t − t  ) d˜−1/4
           p
                                                                                                                                          (80)
                             2

                                                                                                                  (t)
Next, we consider an arbitrary test point x such that kxk2 ≤ 1. Denote δt = flin (x) − f (t) (x).
Then we have
                ( (t+1)           (t)
                  flin (x) − flin (x) = −η∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) glin (θ(t) )
                                                                                             (81)
                  f (t+1) (x) − f (t) (x) = −η∇θ f (x; θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) )Q(t) g(θ(t) )
which yields
                        h                                                      i
            δt+1 − δt =η ∇θ f (x; θ̃(t) )> J(θ(t) ) − ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) Q(t) g(θ(t) )
                                                                                                                                          (82)
                                 − η∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) ∆t

                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For t ≤ t  , we have

                  t−1 h
                  X                                                             i
     kδt k2 ≤η            ∇θ f (x; θ̃(s) )> J(θ(s) ) − ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) Q(s)                      g(θ(s) )
                                                                                                       2                   2
                  s=0
                    t−1
                    X
               +η              ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(s)            k∆s k2
                                                                    2
                    s=0
                  t−1
                  X
             ≤η         ∇θ f (x; θ̃(s) )> J(θ(s) ) − ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )                     g(θ(s) )                        (83)
                                                                                           F                  2
                  s=0
                    t−1
                    X
               +η              ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )       J(θ(0) )       k∆s k2
                                                 2              F
                    s=0
                                     t−1
                                     X                       t−1
                                                             X
             ≤2ηM 2 C0 d˜−1/4              B s R0 + ηM 2         (2sηM 2 C0 B s−1 R0 d˜−1/4 )
                                     s=0                     s=0



So we can see that there exists a constant C1 such that kδt  k2 ≤ C1 d˜−1/4 . Then, for t > t  , we have

                        t−1 h                                                                       iq
                                                                                                       (s)
                        X                                                                                                  p
kδt k2 − kδt  k2 ≤η               ∇θ f (x; θ̃(s) )> J(θ(s) ) − ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )              Q3                       Qg(θ(s) )
                                                                                                                  2                        2
                        s=t
                           t−1                               q
                                                               (s)
                           X                                                      p
                    +η              ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )> J(θ(0) ) Q3                      Q∆s
                                                                              2                2
                           s=t
                                          t−1
                                  √       X
                  ≤2ηM 2 C0 d˜−1/4 1 + 3      γ s−t  B t  R0
                                                      s=t
                                             t−1
                          √                  X                                        √
                    + ηM 2 1 + 3                     2γ s−t  ηM 2 C0 B t  R0 t  B −1 + 1 + 3 γ −1 (s − t  ) d˜−1/4

                                            s=t
                                                                                                                                   (84)
             P∞     t
Note that t=0 tγ is finite as long as γ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, there is a constant C such that for any
t, kδt k2 ≤ C d˜−1/4 with probability at least (1 − δ) for any d˜ ≥ D̃.


D.3.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 13

We will use the following theorem regarding the eigenvalues of random Gaussian matrices:
Theorem 14 (Corollary 5.35 in Vershynin (2010)). If A ∈ Rp×q is a random matrix whose entries
are independent standard normal random variables, then for every t ≥ 0, with probability at least
1 − 2 exp(−t2 /2),
                          √         √                                             √        √
                               p−       q − t ≤ λmin (A) ≤ λmax (A) ≤                 p+       q+t                                 (85)


By this theorem, and also note that W L is a vector, we can see that for any δ, there exist D̃ > 0 and
M1 > 0 such that if d˜ ≥ D̃, then with probability at least (1 − δ), for all θ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 ), we have
                        p                                                                                         p
                                                                                                                  4
               W l 2 ≤ 3 d˜              (∀0 ≤ l ≤ L − 1)               and           W L 2 ≤ C0 ≤ 3                  d˜           (86)

as well as
                                                        p
                                         βbl 2 ≤ M1      d˜         (∀l = 0, · · · , L)                                            (87)


                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now we assume that (86) and (87) are true. Then, for any x such that kxk2 ≤ 1,



              1               1                           3      p
      h1 2 = √ W 0 x + βb0 ≤ √    W 0 2 kxk2 + βb0 2 ≤ ( √ + M1 ) d˜
              d0          2    d0                         d0
                1                   1                                                                      (88)
      hl+1 2 = p W l xl + βbl ≤ p W l 2 xl 2 + βbl 2       (∀l ≥ 1)
                 d˜             2    d˜
                                                  p
      xl = σ(hl ) − σ(0l ) + σ(0l ) ≤ L0 hl + σ(0) d˜
          2                                      2
                                                      (∀l ≥ 1)
                                                            2


                                             l
                                                            · , σ(0)) ∈ Rdl . By induction, there
                                        p σ(0 ) = (σ(0), · ·p
where L0 is the Lipschitz constant of σ and
exists an M2 > 0 such that xl ≤ M2 d˜ and hl ≤ M2 d˜ for all l = 1, · · · , L.
                                   2                        2
                                                                                                      l>
          l
Denote α = ∇hl f (x) = ∇hl h        L+1
                                            . For all l = 1, · · · , L, we have αl = diag(σ̇(hl )) W
                                                                                                   √ αl+1
                                                                                                      d˜
where σ̇(x) ≤ L0 for all x ∈ R since σ is L0 -Lipschitz, αL+1 = 1 and                                αL 2 =
                   L>
 diag(σ̇(hL )) W√          ≤ √  4
                                 3
                                     L0 . Then, we can easily prove by induction that there exists an
                    d˜  2          d˜
                                          p
                                          4
M3 > 1 such that αl 2 ≤ M3 / d˜ for all l = 1, · · · , L (note that this is not true for L + 1
because αL+1 = 1).
                                                                                           p4
For l = 0, ∇W 0 f (x) = √1d x0 α1> , so k∇W l f (x)k2 ≤ √1d x0 2 α1 2 ≤ √1d M3 / d.           ˜ And
                                0                               0                    0
                                           1                            1
for any l = 1, · · · , L, ∇W l f (x) = √ x α , so k∇W l f (x)k2 ≤ √ x 2 α
                                             l  l+1                          l      l+1
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           ≤ M2 M3 .
                                            d˜                                 d˜
(Note that if M3 > 1, then α      L+1
                                        2
                                          ≤ M3 ; and since d˜ ≥ 1, there is αl 2 ≤ M3 for l ≤ L.)
Moreover, for l = 0, · · · , L, ∇bl f (x) = βαl+1 , so k∇bl f (x)k2√≤ βM3 . Thus, if (86) and (87) are
true, then there exists an M4 > 0, such that k∇θ f (x)k2 ≤ M4 / n. And since kxi k2 ≤ 1 for all i,
so kJ(θ)kF ≤ M4 .
Next, we consider the difference in ∇θ f (x) between θ and θ̃. Let f˜, W̃ , b̃, x̃, h̃, α̃ be the function
and the values corresponding to θ̃. There is



                       1
    h1 − h̃1       = √ (W 0 − W̃ 0 )x + β(b0 − b̃0 )
               2       d0                            2

                     1     0     0                         1
                   ≤√     W − W̃      kxk2 + β b − b̃0 ≤ √ + β
                                                 0
                                                                 θ − θ̃
                      d0            2                  2   d0           2

                            1                 1
    hl+1 − h̃l+1       = p W l (xl − x̃l ) + p (W l − W̃ l )x̃l + β(bl − b̃l )
                     2       d˜                d˜                              2
                                                                                                           (89)
                          1                       1
                       ≤ p W l 2 xl − x̃l 2 + p W l − W̃ l           x̃l 2 + β bl − b̃l
                           d˜                      d˜              2                    2

                         ≤ 3 xl − x̃l 2 + (M2 + β) θ − θ̃              (∀l ≥ 1)
                                                                2

     xl − x̃l 2 = σ(hl ) − σ(h̃l )          ≤ L0 hl − h̃l           (∀l ≥ 1)
                                        2                   2


By induction, there exists an M5 > 0 such that xl − x̃l 2 ≤ M5 θ − θ̃                   for all l.
                                                                                    2


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For αl , we have αL+1 = α̃L+1 = 1, and for all l ≥ 1,
                                   W l>                    W̃ l>
         αl − α̃l 2 = diag(σ̇(hl )) p αl+1 − diag(σ̇(h̃l )) p α̃l+1
                                      d˜                       d˜   2

                                          W l>                               (W l − W̃ l )> l+1
                           ≤ diag(σ̇(hl )) p (αl+1 − α̃l+1 ) + diag(σ̇(hl ))      p        α̃
                                             d˜             2                       d˜          2

                                                                                               W̃ l>
                                                                   + diag((σ̇(hl ) − σ̇(h̃l ))) p α̃l+1
                                                                                                   d˜   2

                           ≤ 3L0      α l+1
                                            − α̃ l+1
                                                     2
                                                       + M3 L0 d˜−1/2
                                                                      + 3M3 M5 L1 d˜−1/4
                                                                                             θ − θ̃
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                        (90)

where L1 is the Lipschitz constant of σ̇. Particularly, for l = L, though α̃L+1 = 1, since W̃ L             ≤
                                                                                                        2
3d˜1/4 , (90) is still true. By induction, there exists an M6 > 0 such that αl − α̃l 2 ≤ M
                                                                                         √
                                                                                         4
                                                                                           6
                                                                                             θ − θ̃
                                                                                                  d˜        2
for all l ≥ 1 (note that this is also true for l = L + 1).
Thus, if (86) and (87) are true, then for all θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 ), any x such that kxk2 ≤ 1, we have
                                                                     1
                                    ∇W 0 f (x) − ∇W̃ 0 f˜(x)       =√     xα1> − xα̃1> 2
                                                                 2    d0
                                                                     1
                                                                   ≤√     α1 − α̃1 2                    (91)
                                                                      d0
                                                                     1 M6
                                                                   ≤√ p       θ − θ̃
                                                                      d0 4 d˜        2


and for l = 1, · · · , L, we have


                                                   1
             ∇W l f (x) − ∇W̃ l f˜(x)           = p xl αl+1> − x̃l α̃l+1> 2
                                            2       d˜
                                                   1
                                                          xl 2 αl+1 − α̃l+1 2 + xl − x̃l 2 α̃l+1 2

                                                ≤p                                                      (92)
                                                    d˜
                                                                    !
                                                    M 2 M6    M5 M3
                                                ≤     p4
                                                            + p         θ − θ̃
                                                         d˜      d˜            2


Moreover, for any l = 0, · · · , L, there is
                                                                                 βM6
                               ∇bl f (x) − ∇b̃l f˜(x)       = β αl+1 − α̃l+1 2 ≤ p4
                                                                                       θ − θ̃           (93)
                                                        2                           d˜        2



Overall, we can see that there exists a constant M7 > 0 such that ∇θ f (x) − ∇θ̃ f˜(x)                      ≤
                                                                                                       2
    M√
√
     7
         4
                  θ − θ̃       , so that J(θ) − J(θ̃)        ≤ M
                                                               √
                                                               4
                                                                 7
                                                                   θ − θ̃       .
    n·       d˜            2                            F        d˜         2


D.3.4             P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
First of all, for a linearized neural network (11), if we view {∇θ f (0) (xi )}ni=1 as the inputs and
{yi − f (0) (xi ) + hθ(0) , ∇θ f (0) (xi )i}ni=1 as the targets, then the model becomes a linear model. So
by Theorem 2 we have the following corollary:
Corollary 15. If ∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn ) are linearly independent, then there exists η0 >
0 such that for any GRW satisfying Assumption 1, and any η ≤ η0 , θ(t) converges to the same
interpolator θ∗ that does not depend on qi .


                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let η1 = min{η0 , η ∗ }, where η0 is defined in Corollary 15 and η ∗ is defined in Lemma 5. Let
  (t)          (t)                                                           (t)
flin (x) and flinERM (x) be the linearized neural networks of f (t) (x) and fERM (x), respectively. By
Lemma 5, for any δ > 0, there exists D̃ > 0 and a constant C such that
                              
                                        (t)       (t)         ˜−1/4
                               sup flin (x) − f (x) ≤ C d
                              
                              
                                 t≥0
                                                                                                  (94)
                                       (t)          (t)
                                sup flinERM (x) − fERM (x) ≤ C d˜
                               
                                                                 −1/4
                                 t≥0


By Corollary 15, we have
                                           (t)        (t)
                                    lim flin (x) − flinERM (x) = 0                                (95)
                                   t→∞

Summing the above yields
                                                    (t)
                               lim sup f (t) (x) − fERM (x) ≤ 2C d˜−1/4                           (96)
                                t→∞

which is the result we want.

D.4     P ROOFS FOR S UBSECTION 4.3

D.4.1    A N EW A PPROXIMATION T HEOREM
Lemma 16 (Approximation Theorem for Regularized GRW). For a wide fully-connected neural
network f , denote J(θ) = ∇θ f (X; θ) ∈ Rp×n and g(θ) = ∇ŷ `(f (X; θ), Y ) ∈ Rn . Given that
the loss function ` satisfies: ∇θ g(θ) = J(θ)U (θ) for any θ, and U (θ) is a positive semi-definite
diagonal matrix whose elements are uniformly bounded, we have: for any GRW that minimizes the
regularized weighted empirical risk (13) with a sufficiently small learning rate η, there is: for a
                   ˜ with high probability over random initialization, on any test point x such that
sufficiently large d,
kxk2 ≤ 1,
                                       (t)
                                sup f      (x) − f (t) (x) ≤ C d˜−1/4
                                       linreg      reg                                          (97)
                                 t≥0
             (t)        (t)
where both flinreg and freg are trained by the same regularized GRW and start from the same initial
point.

First of all, with some simple linear algebra analysis, we can prove the following proposition:
Proposition 17. For any positive definite symmetric matrix H ∈ Rn×n , denote its largest and
smallest eigenvalues by λmax and λmin . Then, for any positive semi-definite diagonal matrix Q =
diag(q1 , · · · , qn ), HQ has n eigenvalues that all lie in [mini qi · λmin , maxi qi · λmax ].

Proof. H is a positive definite symmetric matrix, so there exists A ∈ Rn×n such that H = A> A,
and A is full-rank. First, any eigenvalue of AQA> is also an eigenvalue of A> AQ, because for
any eigenvalue λ of AQA> we have some v 6= 0 such that AQA> v = λv. Multiplying both sides
by A> on the left yields A> AQ(A> v) = λ(A> v) which implies that λ is also an eigenvalue of
A> AQ because A> v 6= 0 as λv 6= 0.
Second, by condition we know that the eigenvalues of A> A are all in [λmin , λmax ] where λmin > 0,
which
 √     implies for any unit vector v, v > A> Av ∈ [λmin , λmax ], which is equivalent to kAvk2 ∈
         √
[ λmin , λmax ]. Thus, we have v > A> QAv ∈ [λmin mini qi , λmax maxi qi ], which implies that
the eigenvalues of A> QA are all in [λmin mini qi , λmax maxi qi ].
Thus, the eigenvalues of HQ = A> AQ are all in [λmin mini qi , λmax maxi qi ].

Proof of Lemma 16 By the condition ` satisfies, without loss of generality, assume that the ele-
ments of U (θ) are in [0, 1] for all θ. Then, let η ≤ (µ + λmin + λmax )−1 . (If the elements of U (θ)
are bounded by [0, C], then we can let η ≤ (µ + Cλmin + Cλmax )−1 and prove the result in the
same way.)


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With L2 penalty, the update rule of the GRW for the neural network is:
                             θ(t+1) = θ(t) − ηJ(θ(t) )Q(t) g(θ(t) ) − ηµ(θ(t) − θ(0) )                                    (98)

And the update rule for the linearized neural network is:
                              (t+1)        (t)                      (t)                 (t)
                             θlin     = θlin − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) g(θlin ) − ηµ(θlin − θ(0) )                                  (99)

By Proposition 11, f (x; θ) converges in probability to a zero-mean Gaussian process. Thus, for any
δ > 0, there exists a constant R0 > 0 such that with probability at least (1 − δ/3), g(θ(0) ) 2 < R0 .
Let M be as defined in Lemma 13. Denote A = ηM R0 , and let C0 = 4A                        6
                                                                           ηµ in Lemma 13 . By Lemma
13, there exists D1 such that for all d˜ ≥ D1 , with probability at least (1 − δ/3), (52) is true.
Similar to the proof of Proposition 17, we can show that for arbitrary θ̃, all non-zero eigenval-
ues of J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃)J(θ(0) )> are eigenvalues of J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃). This is because for
any λ 6= 0, if J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃)J(θ(0) )> v = λv, then J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃)(J(θ(0) )> v) =
λ(J(θ(0) )> v), and J(θ(0) )> v 6= 0 since λv 6= 0, so λ is also an eigenvalue of
J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃). On the other hand, by Proposition 3, J(θ(0) )> J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃) con-
verges in probability to ΘQ(t) U (θ̃) whose eigenvalues are all in [0, λmax ] by Proposition 17. So
there exists D2 such that for all d˜ ≥ D2 , with probability at least (1 − δ/3), the eigenvalues of
J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃)J(θ(0) )> are all in [0, λmax + λmin ] for all t.
By union bound, with probability at least (1 − δ), all three above are true, which we will assume in
the rest of this proof.
First, we need to prove that there exists D0 such that for all d˜ ≥ D0 , supt≥0 θ(t) − θ(0) 2 is
bounded with high probability. Denote at = θ(t) − θ(0) . By (98) we have
                       at+1 =(1 − ηµ)at − η[J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )]Q(t) g(θ(t) )
                                                                                                                         (100)
                                − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) [g(θ(t) ) − g(θ(0) )] − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) g(θ(0) )
which implies
                  kat+1 k2 ≤ (1 − ηµ)I − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ̃(t) )>                     kat k2
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                         (101)
                             + η J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )          g(θ(t) )          + η J(θ(0) )              g(θ(0) )
                                                        F                   2                        F               2
            (t)                                             (t)           (0)
where θ̃          is some linear interpolation between θ          and θ         . Our choice of η ensures that ηµ < 1.
Now we prove by induction that kat k2 < C0 . It is true for t = 0, so we need to prove that if
kat k2 < C0 , then kat+1 k2 < C0 .
For the first term on the right-hand side of (101), we have
                                                                                        η
 (1 − ηµ)I − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ̃(t) )>             ≤(1 − ηµ) I −                   J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ(0) )>
                                                        2                            1 − ηµ                                  2

                                                              + η J(θ(0) )                  J(θ̃(t) ) − J(θ(0) )
                                                                                    F                                F
                                                                                                                         (102)
                              min         max −1
Since η/(1 − ηµ) ≤ (λ                +λ    ) by our choice of η, we have
                                          η
                                    I−        J(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ(0) )> ≤ 1                                       (103)
                                       1 − ηµ                                 2


On the other hand, we can use (52) since kat k2 < C0 , so J(θ(0) ) F J(θ̃(t) ) − J(θ(0) )                                    ≤
                                                                                                                         F
    2
M
√
4
        C0 . Therefore, there exists D3 such that for all d˜ ≥ D3 ,
    d˜
                                                                                                         ηµ
                             (1 − ηµ)I − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ̃(t) )>                 ≤1−                          (104)
                                                                                        2                 2
   6
     Note that Lemma 13 only depends on the network structure and does not depend on the update rule, so we
can use this lemma here.


                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the second term, we have

                g(θ(t) )       ≤ g(θ(t) ) − g(θ(0) )              + g(θ(0) )
                           2                                  2                     2
                                                                                                                               (105)
                               ≤ J(θ̃(t) )           U (θ̃(t) )        θ(t) − θ(0)          + R 0 ≤ M C0 + R 0
                                              2                   2                     2


And for the third term, we have

                                   η J(θ(0) )              g(θ(0) )             ≤ ηM R0 = A                                    (106)
                                                      F                     2


Thus, we have
                                          ηµ            ηM (M C0 + R0 )
                           kat+1 k2 ≤ 1 −      kat k2 +      p          +A                                                     (107)
                                           2                 4
                                                               d˜

So there exists D4 such that for all d˜ ≥ D4 , kat+1 k2 ≤ 1 − ηµ

                                                               2 kat k2 + 2A. This shows that if
kat k2 < C0 is true, then kat+1 k2 < C0 will also be true.
In conclusion, for all d˜ ≥ D0 = max{D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 }, θ(t) − θ(0) 2 < C0 is true for all t. This
also implies that for C1 = M C0 + R0 , we have g(θ(t) ) 2 ≤ C1 for all t by (105). Similarly, we
                   (t)
can prove that kθlin − θ(0) k2 < C0 for all t.
                     (t)
Second, let ∆t = θlin − θ(t) . Then we have
                                                                                                (t)
                  ∆t+1 − ∆t = η(J(θ(t) )Q(t) g(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )Q(t) g(θlin ) − µ∆t )                                          (108)
which implies
            h                                           i
   ∆t+1 = (1 − ηµ)I − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ̃(t) )> ∆t + η(J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) ))Q(t) g(θ(t) )
                                                                                              (109)
                                                           (t)
where θ̃(t) is some linear interpolation between θ(t) and θlin . By (104), with probability at least
(1 − δ) for all d˜ ≥ D0 , we have

k∆t+1 k2 ≤ (1 − ηµ)I − ηJ(θ(0) )Q(t) U (θ̃(t) )J(θ̃(t) )> k∆t k2 + η J(θ(t) ) − J(θ(0) )     g(θ(t) )
                                                         2                               F            2
               ηµ              M
         ≤ 1−       k∆t k2 + η p   C0 C1
                2              4
                                 d˜
                                                                                           (110)
Again, as ∆0 = 0, we can prove by induction that for all t,
                                                             2M C0 C1 ˜−1/4
                                              k∆t k2 <               d                                                         (111)
                                                                µ

For any test point x such that kxk2 ≤ 1, we have
      (t)          (t)                                                (t)
     freg (x) − flinreg (x) = f (x; θ(t) ) − flin (x; θlin )
                                                                                                               (t)
                                ≤ f (x; θ(t) ) − flin (x; θ(t) ) + flin (x; θ(t) ) − flin (x; θlin )
                                                                                                                               (112)
                                                                                                                     (t)
                                ≤ f (x; θ(t) ) − flin (x; θ(t) ) + ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )                        θ(t) − θlin
                                                                                                      2                    2
                                             (t)                      (t)
                                ≤ f (x; θ          ) − flin (x; θ           ) + M k∆t k2

For the first term, note that
                      (
                            f (x; θ(t) ) − f (x; θ(0) ) = ∇θ f (x; θ̃(t) )(θ(t) − θ(0) )
                                                                                                                               (113)
                           flin (x; θ(t) ) − flin (x; θ(0) ) = ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )(θ(t) − θ(0) )

                                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where θ̃(t) is some linear interpolation between θ(t) and θ(0) . Since f (x; θ(0) ) = flin (x; θ(0) ),
                                                                                                 M 2
   f (x; θ(t) ) − flin (x; θ(t) ) ≤ ∇θ f (x; θ̃(t) ) − ∇θ f (x; θ(0) )       θ(t) − θ(0)       ≤ p
                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                     C0 (114)
                                                                         2                 2       d˜
Thus, we have shown that for all d˜ ≥ D0 , with probability at least (1 − δ) for all t and all x,
                                                    2M 2 C0 C1 ˜−1/4

                             (t)
                 (t)
               freg  (x) − flinreg (x) ≤ M C02 +                   d     = O(d˜−1/4 )             (115)
                                                         µ
which is the result we need.

D.4.2    R ESULT FOR L INEARIZED N EURAL N ETWORKS
Lemma 18. Suppose there exists M0 > 0 such that ∇θ f (0) (x) 2 ≤ M0 for all test point x. If the
gradients ∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn ) are linearly independent, and the empirical training risk of
  (t)
flinreg satisfies
                                                          (t)
                                          lim sup R̂(flinreg ) <  ,                                      (116)
                                            t→∞

for some   > 0, then for x such that kxk2 ≤ 1 we have
                                          (t)           (t)           √
                                lim sup flinreg (x) − flinERM (x) = O(  ).                               (117)
                                 t→∞


First, we can see that under the new weight update rule, θ(t) − θ(0)                           ∈
span{∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn )} is still true for all t.  Let θ∗ be the P
                                                                                     interpolator
                                                                                   1    n
in span(∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn )), then the empirical risk of θ is 2n     i=1 hθ −
                                                          2
θ∗ , ∇θ f (0) (xi )i2 =    1
                          2n   ∇θ f (0) (X)> (θ − θ∗ ) 2 .      Thus, there exists T > 0 such that for
any t ≥ T ,
                                                                   2
                                     ∇θ f (0) (X)> (θ(t) − θ∗ )        ≤ 2n                              (118)
                                                                   2

Let the smallest singular value of √1n ∇θ f (0) (X) be smin , and we have smin > 0. Note that the
column space of ∇θ f (0) (X) is exactly span(∇θ f (0) (x1 ), · · · , ∇θ f (0) (xn )). Define H ∈ Rp×n
such that its columns form an orthonormal basis of this subspace, then there exists G ∈ Rn×n such
that ∇θ f (0) (X) = HG, and the smallest singular value of √1n G is also smin . Since θ(t) − θ(0)
                                                                                               √
is also in this subspace, there exists v ∈ Rn √such that θ(t) − θ∗ = Hv. Then we have 2n  ≥
  G> H > Hv 2 = G> v 2 . Thus, kvk2 ≤ smin      2
                                                   , which implies
                                                         √
                                           (t)   ∗          2
                                          θ −θ         ≤ min                                     (119)
                                                     2   s

We have already proved in previous results that if we minimize the unregularized risk with ERM,
then θ always converges to the interpolator θ∗ . So for any t ≥ T and any test point x such that
kxk2 ≤ 1, we have
                                                                               √
                   (t)           (t)                                         M0 2
                |flinreg (x) − flinERM (x)| = |hθ(t) − θ∗ , ∇θ f (0) (x)i| ≤               (120)
                                                                              smin

which implies (117).

D.4.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
                 (t)
Given that R̂(flinreg ) <   for sufficiently large t, Lemma 16 implies that
                                    (t)                           √
                                                  (t)
                               R̂(flinreg ) − R̂(freg ) = O(d˜−1/4   + d˜−1/2 )                          (121)


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


So for a fixed  , there exists D > 0 such that for all d ≥ D, for sufficiently large t,
                                            (t)                (t)
                                        R̂(freg ) <   ⇒ R̂(flinreg ) < 2                                 (122)

By Lemma 5 and Lemma 16, we have
                      
                               (t)         (t)
                       sup flinERM (x) − fERM (x) = O(d˜−1/4 )
                      
                                 t≥0
                                                                                                         (123)
                                       (t)
                                sup flinreg (x) − freg (x) = O(d˜
                                                    (t)           −1/4
                               
                                                                      )
                                  t≥0

Combining Lemma 18 with (123) derives
                                                (t)                            √
                                     (t)
                            lim sup freg (x) − fERM (x) = O(d˜−1/4 +                )                    (124)
                              t→∞


Letting d˜ → ∞ leads to the result we need.

Remark. One might wonder whether k∇θ f (0) (x)k2 will diverge as d˜ → ∞. In fact, in Lemma
13, we have proved that there exists a constant M such that with high probability, for any d˜ there is
k∇θ f (0) (x)k2 ≤ M for any x such that kxk2 ≤ 1. Therefore, it is fine to suppose that there exists
such an M0 .

D.5     P ROOFS FOR S UBSECTION 5.1

D.5.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7
First we need to show that θ̂MM is unique. Suppose both θ1 and θ2 maximize mini=1,··· ,n yi ·
hθ, xi i and θ1 6= θ2 , kθ1 k2 = kθ2 k2 = 1. Then consider θ0 = θ/kθk2 where θ = (θ1 + θ2 )/2.
Obviously, kθk2 < 1, and for any i, yi · hθ, xi i = (yi · hθ1 , xi i + yi · hθ2 , xi i)/2, so yi · hθ0 , xi i >
min{yi · hθ1 , xi i, yi · hθ2 , xi i}, which implies that mini=1,··· ,n yi · hθ0 , xi i > min{mini=1,··· ,n yi ·
hθ1 , xi i, mini=1,··· ,n yi · hθ2 , xi i}, contradiction!
Now we start proving the result. Without loss of generality, let (x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xm , ym ) be the sam-
ples with the smallest margin to u, i.e.
                                    arg min yi · hu, xi i = {1, · · · , m}                               (125)
                                     1≤i≤n

And denote y1 · hu, x1 i = · · · = ym · hu, xm i = γu . Since the training error converges to 0,
γu > 0. Note that for the logistic loss, if yi · hθ, xi i < yj · hθ, xj i, then for any M > 0, there exists
an RM > 0 such that for all R ≥ RM ,
                                       ∇θ `(hRθ, xi i, yi )
                                                              >M                                     (126)
                                       ∇θ `(hRθ, xj i, yj )
which can be shown with some simple calculation. And because the training error converges to
0, we must have θ(t) → ∞. Then, by Assumption 3 this means that when t gets sufficiently
large, the impact of (xj , yj ) to θ(t) where j > m is an infinitesimal compared to (xi , yi ) where
                                                               (t)
i ≤ m (because there exists a positive constant δ such that qi > δ for all sufficiently large t by
Assumption 3). Thus, we must have u ∈ span{x1 , · · · , xm }.
Let u = α1 y1 x1 + · · · + αm ym xm . Now we show that αi ≥ 0 for all i = 1, · · · , m. This is
because when t is sufficiently large such that the impact of (xj , yj ) to θ(t) where j > m becomes
infinitesimal, we have
                                                    (t)
                                               q exp(yi · hθ(t) , xi i)
                              θ(t+1) − θ(t) ≈ η i                         yi xi                          (127)
                                               1 + exp(yi · hθ(t) , xi i)
and since kθ(t) k → ∞ as t → ∞, we have
                                     T  (t)
                                     X q exp(yi · hθ(t) , xi i)
                                              i
                        αi ∝ lim                                      := lim αi (T )                     (128)
                              T →∞
                                     t=T
                                         1 + exp(yi · hθ(t) , xi i)         T →∞
                                          0


                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where T0 is sufficiently large. Here the notion αi ∝ limT →∞ αi (T ) means that limT →∞ ααji (T   )
                                                                                               (T ) =
αi
αj for any pair of i, j and αj 6= 0. Note that each term in the sum is non-negative. This implies that
all α1 , · · · , αm have the same sign (or equal to 0). On the other hand,
                                m
                                X                m
                                                 X
                                       αi γu =         αi yi · hu, xi i = hu, ui > 0                        (129)
                                i=1              i=1


Thus, αi ≥ 0 for all i and at least one of them is positive. Now suppose u 6= θ̂MM , which means that
γu is smaller than the margin of θ̂MM . Then, for all i = 1, · · · , m, there is yi ·hu, xi i < yi ·hθ̂MM , xi i.
This implies that
                                m
                                X                             m
                                                              X
                    hu, ui =           αi yi · hu, xi i <           αi yi · hθ̂MM , xi i = hθ̂MM , ui       (130)
                                 i=1                          i=1

which is a contradiction. Thus, we must have u = θ̂MM .

D.5.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 8
Denote the largest and smallest eigenvalues of X > X by λmax and λmin , and by condition we have
                           ∗     ∗ min 2
λmin > 0. Let   = min{ q3 , (q    λ     )
                              192λmax 2 }. Then similar to the proof in Appendix D.2.2, there exists t
                                      (t)
such that for all t ≥ t  and all
                             q i, qi ∈ (qi −  , qi +  ). Denote Q = diag(q1 , · · · , qn ), then for all
                    (t)   √         (t)                                                (t)
t ≥ t  , Q(t) := Q  = Q Q3  , where we use the subscript   to indicate that Q  − Q <  .
                                                                                                            2

First, we prove that F (θ) is L-smooth as long as kxi k2 ≤ 1 for all i. The gradient of F is
                                                    n
                                                    X
                                       ∇F (θ) =           qi ∇ŷ `(hθ, xi i, yi )xi                         (131)
                                                    i=1


Since `(ŷ, y) is L-smooth in ŷ, we have for any θ1 , θ2 and any i,
                    `(hθ2 , xi i, yi ) − `(hθ1 , xi i, yi )
                                                                             L
                 ≤ ∇ŷ `(hθ1 , xi i, yi ) · (hθ2 , xi i − hθ1 , xi i) +        (hθ2 , xi i − hθ1 , xi i)2
                                                                             2
                                                             L                                              (132)
                 = h∇ŷ `(hθ1 , xi i, yi ) · xi , θ2 − θ1 i +  (hθ2 − θ1 , xi i)2
                                                             2
                                                             L             2
                 ≤ h∇ŷ `(hθ1 , xi i, yi ) · xi , θ2 − θ1 i + kθ2 − θ1 k2
                                                             2
Thus, we have
                              n
                              X
        F (θ2 ) − F (θ1 ) =         qi [`(hθ2 , xi i, yi ) − `(hθ1 , xi i, yi )]
                              i=1
                               n                                                         n
                              X                                               LX                 2          (133)
                          ≤     qi h∇ŷ `(hθ1 , xi i, yi ) · xi , θ2 − θ1 i +       qi kθ2 − θ1 k2
                            i=1
                                                                              2 i=1
                                                          L           2
                          =h∇F (θ1 ), θ2 − θ1 i +           kθ2 − θ1 k2
                                                          2
which implies that F (θ) is L-smooth.
Denote g̃(θ) = ∇ŷ `(f (X; θ), Y ) ∈ Rn , then ∇F (θ(t) ) = XQg̃(θ(t) ), and the update rule is
                                         θ(t+1) = θ(t) − ηXQ(t) g̃(θ(t) )                                   (134)
So by the upper quadratic bound, we have
                                                                                   η2 L                 2
        F (θ(t+1) ) ≤ F (θ(t) ) − ηhXQg̃(θ(t) ), XQ(t) g̃(θ(t) )i +                     XQ(t) g̃(θ(t) )     (135)
                                                                                    2                   2


                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  ∗   min
                q λ
Let η1 = 2L(1+3 )λ    max . Similar to what we did in Appendix D.2.2 (Eqn. (40)), we can prove that

for all η ≤ η1 , (135) implies that for all t ≥ t  , there is
                                                                                 2 p
                              ηq ∗ λmin p                2    η2 L                                 2
                                                                        q
        (t+1)          (t)                           (t)                     (t)
   F (θ       ) ≤ F (θ ) −                   Qg̃(θ ) +                X Q3            Qg̃(θ(t) )
                                   2                     2     2                 2                 2
                                 ∗ min p                 2     2                                     2
                              ηq λ                            η L        2
                                                                                      p
                ≤ F (θ(t) ) −                Qg̃(θ(t) ) +           kXk2 (1 + 3 )        Qg̃(θ(t) )
                                   2                     2     2                                     2  (136)
                       (t)    ηq ∗ λmin p            (t)
                                                         2
                ≤ F (θ ) −                   Qg̃(θ )
                                   4                     2
                                 ∗2 min               2
                              ηq    λ
                ≤ F (θ(t) ) −              g̃(θ(t) )
                                   4                  2
This shows that F (θ(t) ) is monotonically non-increasing. Since F (θ) ≥ 0, F (θ(t) ) must converge
as t → ∞, and we need to prove that it converges to 0. Suppose that F (θ(t) ) does not converge to 0,
then there exists a constant C > 0 such that F (θ(t) ) ≥ 2C for all t. On the other hand, it is easy to
see that there exists θ∗ such that `(hθ∗ , xi i, yi ) < C for all i. (136) also implies that g̃(θ(t) ) 2 → 0
as t → ∞ because we must have F (θ(t) ) − F (θ(t+1) ) → 0.
Note that from (134) we have
                      2                      2                                                                2
     θ(t+1) − θ∗          = θ(t) − θ∗            + 2ηhXQ(t) g̃(θ(t) ), θ∗ − θ(t) i + η 2 XQ(t) g̃(θ(t) )           (137)
                      2                      2                                                                2
Denote
                                                      n
                                                         (t)
                                                      X
                                             Ft (θ) =   qi `(hθ, xi i, yi )                                        (138)
                                           i=1
                                            (t)
Then Ft is convex because ` is convex and qi are non-negative, and ∇Ft (θ(t) ) = XQ(t) g̃(θ(t) ).
By the lower linear bound Ft (y) ≥ Ft (x) + h∇Ft (x), y − xi, we have for all t,
                                                                      2              4C    C
  hXQ(t) g̃(θ(t) ), θ∗ − θ(t) i ≤ Ft (θ∗ ) − Ft (θ(t) ) ≤ Ft (θ∗ ) − F (θ(t) ) ≤ C −    =−   (139)
                                                                      3               3    3
           (t)                          n    (t)
because qi ≥ qi −   ≥ 32 qi and i=1 qi = 1. Since g̃(θ(t) ) 2 → 0, there exists T > 0 such
                                      P
that for all t ≥ T and all η ≤ η0 ,
                                                 2                  2   ηC
                                  θ(t+1) − θ∗ ≤ θ(t) − θ∗ −                                  (140)
                                                 2                  2    3
                                     2
which means that θ(t) − θ∗ 2 → −∞ because ηC      3 is a positive constant. This is a contradiction!
          (t)
Thus, F (θ ) must converge to 0, which is result (i).
(i) immediately implies (ii) because ` is strictly decreasing to 0 by condition.
Now let’s prove (iii). First of all, the uniqueness of θR can be easily proved from the convexity of
F (θ). The condition implies that yi hθR , xi i > 0, i.e. θR must classify all training samples correctly.
                                                    0                                                      00
If there are two different minimizers θR and θR         in whose norm is at most R, then consider θR          =
1          0                                                 00                                  00
2 (θ R + θ R ).  By  the convexity of F , we  know    that θ R  must also be a minimizer, and kθ R  k 2  <    R.
                   00         00                00                                                      00
Thus, F ( kθR                             R
             00 k θR ) < F (θR ) and k kθ 00 k θR k2 = R, which contradicts with the fact that θR is a
                 2                            2
             R                            R
minimizer.
To prove the rest of (iii), the key is to consider (135). On one hand, similar to (36) we can prove that
for all t ≥ t  , there is
                                                                   √     p                2
                  hXQ(t) g̃(θ(t) ), X(Q(t) − Q)g̃(θ(t) )i ≤ λmax 3         Q(t) g̃(θ(t) )         (141)
                                                                                                         2

                                 ∗       ∗   min 2
Since we choose   = min{ q3 , (q λ   )
                              192λmax 2 }, this inequality implies that
                  2                               2                           2                      p               2
    ∇Ft (θ(t) )       = XQ(t) g̃(θ(t) )               ≥ λmin Q(t) g̃(θ(t) )       ≥ λmin (q ∗ −  )    Q(t) g̃(θ(t) )
                  2                               2                           2                                     2
                        λmin q ∗ p (t) (t) 2
                      ≥           Q g̃(θ ) ≥ 4 hXQ(t) g̃(θ(t) ), X(Q(t) − Q)g̃(θ(t) )i
                          2                2
                                                                                                                   (142)


                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                1
On the other hand, if η ≤ η2 = 2L , we will have
                               η2 L                2  η             2
                                    XQ(t) g̃(θ(t) ) ≤   ∇Ft (θ(t) )                                     (143)
                                2                  2  4             2

Combining all the above with (135) yields
                                                                    η             2
                               F (θ(t+1) ) − F (θ(t) ) ≤ −            ∇Ft (θ(t) )                       (144)
                                                                    2             2


Denote u = limR→∞ kθθRRk2 . Similar to Lemma 9 in Ji et al. (2020), we can prove that: for any
α > 0, there exists a constant ρ(α) > 0 such that for any θ subject to kθk2 ≥ ρ(α), there is
                                       Ft ((1 + α)kθk2 u) ≤ Ft (θ)                                      (145)
for any t. Let tα ≥ t  satisfy that for all t ≥ tα , kθ(t) k2 ≥ max{ρ(α), 1}. By the convexity of Ft ,
for all t ≥ tα ,
            h∇Ft (θ(t) ), θ(t) − (1 + α)kθ(t) k2 ui ≥ Ft (θ(t) ) − Ft ((1 + α)kθ(t) k2 u) ≥ 0           (146)

Thus, we have
   hθ(t+1) − θ(t) , ui = h−η∇Ft (θ(t) ), ui
                                                         1
                       ≥ h−η∇Ft (θ(t) ), θ(t) i
                                                  (1 + α)kθ(t) k2
                                                        1                                               (147)
                       = hθ(t+1) − θ(t) , θ(t) i
                                                 (1 + α)kθ(t) k2

                           1 (t+1) 2 1 (t) 2 1 (t+1)                     2         1
                       =      θ          −        θ      −     θ  − θ(t)
                           2          2      2         2   2             2   (1 + α)kθ(t) k2

                                                                2            2
By 21 (kθ(t+1) k2 −kθ(t) k2 )2 ≥ 0, we have ( 12 θ(t+1) 2 − 12 θ(t) 2 )/kθ(t) k2 ≥ θ(t+1) 2 − θ(t) 2 .
Moreover, by (144) we have
                  2                 2                   2
    θ(t+1) − θ(t) 2   θ(t+1) − θ(t) 2   η 2 ∇Ft (θ(t) ) 2
                                                                     (t)          (t+1)

                    ≤                 =                   ≤ η   F (θ     ) − F (θ       )               (148)
   2(1 + α)kθ(t) k2         2                 2

Summing up (147) from t = tα to t − 1, we have
                       θ(t) 2 − θ(tα ) 2                              θ(t) 2 − θ(tα ) 2
hθ(t) −θ(tα ) , ui ≥                     +η F (θ(t) ) − F (θ(tα ) ) ≥                   −ηF (θ(tα ) )
                            1+α                                            1+α
                                                                                            (149)
which implies that
           *             +
                θ(t)                                        kθ(tα ) k2

                              1      1         (tα )                           (tα )
                      , u  ≥     +          hθ       , ui −            − ηF (θ       )                  (150)
               θ(t) 2        1+α   θ(t) 2                    1+α

Since limt→∞ kθ(t) k2 = ∞, we have
                                               *                +
                                                    θ(t)                  1
                                     lim inf               ,u        ≥                                  (151)
                                      t→∞           θ(t) 2               1+α

                                                     θ (t)
Since α is arbitrary, we must have limt→∞                     = u as long as η ≤ min{η1 , η2 }.
                                                   kθ(t) k2

D.5.3    C OROLLARY OF T HEOREM 8
We can show that for the logistic loss, it satisfies all conditions of Theorem 8 and limR→∞ θRR =
                                                                             2             y2
θ̂MM . First of all, for the logistic loss we have ∇2ŷ `(ŷ, y) = eyŷ +ey−yŷ +2 ≤ maxi 4i , so ` is smooth.


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, we prove that limR→∞ θRR exists and is equal to θ̂MM . For the logistic loss, it is easy to show
that for any θ̂0 6= θ̂MM , there exists an R(θ̂0 ) > 0 and an δ(θ̂0 ) > 0 such that F (R · θ) > F (R · θ̂MM )
for all R ≥ R(θ̂0 ) and θ ∈ B(θ̂0 , δ(θ̂0 )).
Let S = {θ : kθk2 = 1}. For any   > 0, S − B(θ̂MM ,  ) is a compact set. And for any θ ∈
S − B(θ̂MM ,  ), there exist R(θ) and δ(θ) as defined above. Thus, there must exist θ1 , · · · , θm ∈
S −B(θ̂MM ,  ) such that S −B(θ̂MM ,  ) ⊆ ∪m
                                           i=1 B(θi , δ(θi )). Let R( ) = max{R(θ1 ), · · · , R(θm )},
then for all R ≥ R( ) and all θ ∈ S − B(θ̂MM ,  ), F (R · θ) > F (R · θ̂MM ), which means that
θR                                                       θR
 R ∈ B(θ̂MM ,  ) for all R ≥ R( ). Therefore, limR→∞ R exists and is equal to θ̂MM .
Therefore, by Theorem 8, any GRW satisfying Assumption 1 makes a linear model converge to the
max-margin classifier under the logistic loss.

D.6    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 9
                                                                       (t)
We first consider the regularized linearized neural network flinreg . Since by Proposition 11 f (0) (x) is
sampled from a zero-mean Gaussian process, there exists a constant M > 0 such that |f (0) (xi )| <
M for all i with high probability. Define
                                    Xn
                          F (θ) =       qi `(hθ, ∇θ f (0) (xi )i + f (0) (xi ), yi )                (152)
                                          i=1

Denote θ̃R = arg minθ {F (R · θ) : kθk2 ≤ 1}. when the linearized neural network is trained
by a GRW satisfying Assumption 1 with regularization, since this is convex optimization and the
objective function is smooth, we can prove that with a sufficiently small learning rate, as t → ∞,
θ(t) → R · θ˜R + θ(0) where R = limt→∞ kθ(t) − θ(0) k2 (which is the minimizer). And define
                                        γ=      min yi · hθ̂MM , ∇θ f (0) (xi )i                       (153)
                                             i=1,··· ,n

First, we derive the lower bound of R. By Theorem 16, with a sufficiently large d,              ˜ with high
                (t)                      (t)
probability R̂(freg ) <   implies R̂(flinreg ) < 2 . By the convexity of `, we have
          n                                                            n
                                                                                                          !!
       1X                                                          1  X
 2  >        `(hRθ̃R , xi i + f (0) (xi ), yi ) ≥ log 1 + exp −            (hRθ̃R , xi i + f (0) (xi ))yi
       n i=1                                                       n i=1
                              n
                                                      !!
                           1X
    ≥ log 1 + exp −              Rhθ̃R , xi iyi − M
                           n i=1
                                                                                                        (154)
which implies that R = Ω(− log 2 ) for all   ∈ (0, 14 ).
                                                                                q                          0
                                                                                          2
Denote δ = kθ̂MM − θ̃R k2 . Let θ0 = θ̂MM2+θ̃R , then we can see that kθ0 k2 = 1 − δ4 . Let θ̃0 = kθθ0 k2 .
By the definition of θ̂MM , there exists j such that yj · hθ̃0 , ∇θ f (0) (xj )i ≤ γ, which implies
                                  *                                        +
                                    θ̂MM + θ̃R     1
                             yj ·              q          , ∇θ f (0) (xj ) ≤ γ                         (155)
                                        2         1−  δ2
                                                                4

Thus, we have
                                                r
                               (0)                     δ2
            yj · hθ̃R , ∇θ f         (xj )i ≤ 2  1 − γ − yj · hθ̂MM , ∇θ f (0) (xj )i
                                                       4      !
                                                r
                                                         δ2
                                           ≤ 2 1−           −1 γ
                                                          4
                                                                                                       (156)
                                                       δ2                   √

                                                                                      x
                                           ≤ 2(1 − ) − 1 γ          (since 1 − x ≤ 1 − )
                                                        8                             2
                                                     2
                                                   δ
                                           = (1 − )γ
                                                   4

                                                           36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


On the other hand, we have
                     qj log(1 + exp(−yj · hR · θ̃R , ∇θ f (0) (xj )i − M )) ≤ F (R · θ̃R )
                                                                                                  (157)
                    ≤F (R · θ̂MM ) ≤ log(1 + exp(−Rγ + M ))
which implies that
                                   δ2

              q ∗ log 1 + exp −(1 − )Rγ − M    ≤ log(1 + exp(−Rγ + M ))                           (158)
                                   4
and this leads to
                                         q∗
                              δ2                           δ2

                                                 ∗
1+exp(−Rγ +M ) ≥ 1 + exp −(1 − )Rγ − M      ≥ 1+q exp −(1 − )Rγ − M
                              4                            4
                                                                 (159)
which is equivalent to
                                                      δ2
                              − Rγ + M ≥ −(1 −           )Rγ − M + log(q ∗ )                      (160)
                                                      4

Thus, we have
                                  δ = O(R−1/2 ) = O((− log 2 )−1/2 )                              (161)

So for any test point x, since k∇θ f (0) (x)k2 ≤ M0 , we have

                         |hθ̂MM − θ̃R , ∇θ f (0) (x)i| ≤ δM0 = O((− log 2 )−1/2 )                 (162)

Combined with Theorem 16, we have: with high probability,
                                            (t)
                    lim sup |R · fMM (x) − freg (x)| = O(R · (− log 2 )−1/2 + d˜−1/4 )            (163)
                     t→∞


So there exists a constant C > 0 such that: As d˜ → ∞, with high probability, for all   ∈ (0, 41 ), if
                                       (t)
|fMM (x)| > C · (− log 2 )−1/2 , then freg (x) will have the same sign as fMM (x) for a sufficiently
large t. Note that this C only depends on n, q ∗ , γ, M and M0 , so it is a constant independent of
 .

Remark. Note that Theorem 9 requires Assumption 1 while Theorem 6 does not due to the fun-
damental difference between the classification and regression. In regression the model converges to
a finite point. However, in classification, the training loss converging to zero implies that either (i)
The direction of the weight is close to the max-margin classifier or (ii) The norm of the weight is
very large. Assumption 1 is used to eliminate the possibility of (ii). If the regularization parameter
µ is sufficiently large, then a small empirical risk could imply a small weight norm. However, in our
theorem we do not assume anything on µ, so Assumption 1 is necessary.

E     A N OTE ON THE P ROOFS IN L EE ET AL . (2019)
We have mentioned that the proofs in Lee et al. (2019), particularly the proofs of their Theorem 2.1
and Lemma 1 in their Appendix G, are flawed. In order to fix their proof, we change the network
initialization to (9). In this section, we will demonstrate what goes wrong in the proofs in Lee et al.
(2019), and how we manage to fix the proof. For clarity, we are referring to the following version of
the paper: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1902.06720v4.pdf.
To avoid confusion, in this section we will still use the notations used in our paper.

E.1   T HEIR P ROBLEMS

Lee et al. (2019) claimed in their Theorem 2.1 that under the conditions of our Lemma 5, for any
δ > 0, there exist D̃ > 0 and a constant C such that for any d˜ ≥ D̃, with probability at least (1 − δ),


                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the gap between the output of a sufficiently wide fully-connected neural network and the output of
its linearized neural network at any test point x can be uniformly bounded by
                                           (t)
                         sup f (t) (x) − flin (x) ≤ C d˜−1/2        (claimed)                     (164)
                          t≥0

where they used the original NTK formulation and initialization in Jacot et al. (2018):
      
      hl+1 = √  Wl l                       ( l(0)
                      x + βbl                 Wi,j ∼ N (0, 1)
      
                   dl              and                                 (∀l = 0, · · · , L)        (165)
                                                l(0)
       l+1
      
        x     = σ(h )l+1                      b i    ∼ N (0, 1)

where x0 = x and f (x) = hL+1 . However, in their proof in their Appendix G, they did not directly
prove their result for the NTK formulation, but instead they proved another result for the following
formulation which they called the standard formulation:
                                            W l(0) ∼ N (0, 1 )
       (                                    
         hl+1 = W l xl + βbl                     i,j
                                   and                        dl       (∀l = 0, · · · , L)      (166)
         xl+1 = σ(hl+1 )                     l(0)
                                              bi ∼ N (0, 1)

See their Appendix F for the definition of their standard formulation. In the original formulation,
they also included two constants σw and σb for standard deviations, and for simplicity we omit
these constants here. Note that the outputs of the NTK formulation and the standard formulation at
initialization are actually the same. The only difference is that the norm of the weight W l and the
gradient of the model output with respect to W l are different for all l.
In their Appendix G, they claimed that if a network with the standard formulation is trained by
minimizing the squared loss with gradient descent and learning rate η 0 = η/d,      ˜ where η is our
learning rate in Lemma 5 and also their learning rate in their Theorem 2.1, then (164) is true for this
network, so it is also true for a network with the NTK formulation because the two formulations
have the same network output. And then they claimed in their equation (S37) that applying learning
rate η 0 to the standard formulation is equivalent to applying the following learning rates
                                 l       dl                         1
                               ηW   =        η      and     ηbl =       η                        (167)
                                       dmax                       dmax
to W l and bl of the NTK formulation, where dmax = max{d0 , · · · , dL }.
To avoid confusion, in the following discussions we will still use the NTK formulation and initial-
ization if not stated otherwise.

Problem 1. Claim (167) is true, but it leads to two problems. The first problem is that ηbl =
O(d−1max ) since η = O(1), while their Theorem 2.1 needs the learning rate to be O(1). Nevertheless,
                                                                                                  √
this problem can be simply fixed by modifying their standard formulation as hl+1 = W l xl +β dl bl
         l(0)
where bi       ∼ N (0, d−1
                         l ). The real problem that is non-trivial to fix is that by (167), there is
  0      d
ηW   = dmax0
              η. However, note that d0 is a constant since it is the dimension of the input space, while
dmax goes to infinity. Consequently, in (167) they were essentially using a very small learning rate
for the first layer W 0 but a normal learning rate for the rest of the layers, which definitely does not
match with their claim in their Theorem 2.1.

Problem 2. Another big problem is that the proof of their Lemma 1 in their Appendix G is erro-
neous, and consequently their Theorem 2.1 is unsound as it heavily depends on their Lemma 1. In
their Lemma 1, they claimed that for some constant M > 0, for any two models with the parameters
θ and θ̃ such that θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 ) for some constant C0 , there is
                                                  M
                            J(θ) − J(θ̃) ≤ p θ − θ̃                   (claimed)            (168)
                                             F      d˜         2

                                                                     p
Note that the original claim in their paper was J(θ) − J(θ̃) ≤ M d˜ θ − θ̃ . This is because
                                                               F                  2
they were proving this result for their standard formulation. Compared to the standard formulation,


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                             p                                            p
in the NTK formulation θ is d˜ times larger, while the Jacobian J(θ) is d˜ times smaller. This
is also why here we have θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 ) instead of θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 d˜−1/2 ) for the NTK
formulation. Therefore, equivalently they were claiming (168) for the NTK formulation.
However, their proof of (168) in incorrect. Specifically, the right-hand side of their inequality (S86)
is incorrect. Using the notations in our Appendix D.3.3, their (S86) essentially claimed that
                                             M
                              αl − α̃l 2 ≤ p θ − θ̃              (claimed)                        (169)
                                              d˜          2

for any θ, θ̃ ∈ B(θ(0) , C0 ), where αl = ∇hp   lh
                                                  L+1
                                                       and α̃l is the same gradient for the second
model. Note that their (S86) does not have thep d˜ in the denominator which appears in (169). This
is because for their standard formulation, θ is d˜ times smaller than the original NTK formulation,
while αl 2 has the same order in the two formulations because all hl are the same.
However, it is actually impossible to prove (169). Consider the following counterexample: Since θ
and θ̃ are arbitrarily chosen, we can choose them such that they only differ in bl1 for some 1 ≤ l < L.
Then, θ − θ̃ = bl1 − b̃l1 . We can see that hl+1 and h̃l+1 only differ in the first element, and
               2
hl+1
 1   − h̃l+1
         1   = β(bl1 − b̃l1 ) . Moreover, we have W l+1 = W̃ l+1 , so there is

                                         W l+1>                        W̃ l+1>
            αl+1 − α̃l+1 =diag(σ̇(hl+1 )) p αl+2 − diag(σ̇(h̃l+1 )) p α̃l+2
                                             d˜                             d˜
                          h                                   i W l+1>
                         = diag(σ̇(hl+1 )) − diag(σ̇(h̃l+1 ))    p αl+2                             (170)
                                                                    d˜
                                               l+1>
                                            W
                          + diag(σ̇(h̃l+1 )) p (αl+2 − α̃l+2 )
                                                 d˜

Then we can lower bound αl+1 − α̃l+1 2 by
                                     h                                   i W l+1>
               αl+1 − α̃l+1 2 ≥       diag(σ̇(hl+1 )) − diag(σ̇(h̃l+1 ))    p αl+2
                                                                               d˜  2
                                                                                            (171)
                                                    W l+1> l+2
                                                  l+1                 l+2
                                  − diag(σ̇(h̃ )) p (α            − α̃ )
                                                        d˜                 2
                                                  h                  i         p
The first term on the right-hand side is equal to σ̇(hl+1        l+1      l+1    ˜ αl+2 i where
                                                      1 ) − σ̇(h̃1 ) hW1      / d,
                                                               p
W1l+1 is the first row of W l+1 . We know that W1l+1 2 = Θ         d˜ with high probability as its
elements are sampled from N (0, 1), and in their (S85) they claimed that αl+2 2 = O(1), which
is true. In addition, they assumed that σ̇ is Lipschitz. Hence, we can see that
      h                                    i W l+1>
        diag(σ̇(hl+1 )) − diag(σ̇(h̃l+1 ))    p αl+2 = O hl+1      1   −  h̃l+1
                                                                            1     = O     θ  − θ̃
                                                 d˜       2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                  (172)

On the other hand, suppose that claim (169) is true, then αl+2 − α̃l+2 2 = O d˜−1/2 θ − θ̃               .
                                                                                                     2
Then we can see that the second term on the right-hand side is O d˜−1/2 θ − θ̃                 because
                  p                                                                        2
  W l+1 2 = O( d)     ˜ and σ̇(x) is bounded by a constant as σ is Lipschitz. Thus, for a very large d,˜
the second-term is an infinitesimal compared to the first term, so we can only prove that

                                     αl+1 − α̃l+1 2 = O θ − θ̃                                    (173)
                                                                     2

which is different from (169) because it lacks a critical d˜−1/2 and thus leads to a contradiction.
Hence, we cannot prove (169) with the d˜−1/2 factor, and consequently we cannot prove (168) with


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



   p
the d˜ in the denominator on the right-hand side. As a result, their Lemma 1 and Theorem 2.1
cannot be proved without this critical d˜−1/2 . Similarly, we can also construct a counterexample
where θ and θ̃ only differ in the first row of some W l .

E.2   O UR F IXES

Regarding Problem 1, we can still use an O(1) learning rate for the first layer in the NTK formulation
given that kxk2 ≤ 1. This is because for the first layer, we have
                                              1          1
                                ∇W 0 f (x) = √ x0 α1> = √ xα1>                                    (174)
                                              d0         d0

For all l ≥ 1, we have xl 2 = O(d˜1/2 ). However, for l = 0, we instead have x0 2 = O(1).
Thus, we can prove that the norm of ∇W 0 f (x) has the same order as the gradient with respect to
any other layer, so there is no need to use a smaller learning rate for the first layer.
Regarding Problem 2, in our formulation (8) and initialization (9), the initialization of the last layer
                                                                          L(0)
of the NTK formulation is changed from the Gaussian initialization Wi,j ∼ N (0, 1) to the zero
                 L(0)
initialization Wi,j     = 0. Now we show how this modification solves Problem 2.
The main consequence p
                     of changing the initialization of the last
                                                             p  layer is that (86) becomes different:
                                                              4
              L         ˜                     L
instead of W 2 ≤ 3 d, we now have W 2 ≤ C0 ≤ 3 d.                ˜ In fact, for any r ∈ (0, 1/2), we
can prove that W L 2 ≤ 3d˜r for sufficiently large d.
                                                   ˜ In our proof we choose r = 1/4.

Consequently, instead of αl 2 ≤ M3 , we can now prove that αl 2 ≤ M3 d˜r−1/2 for all l ≤ L by

induction. So now we can prove αl − α̃l = O d˜r−1/2 θ − θ̃
                                               2
                                                                  instead of O θ − θ̃        ,
                                                                         2                          2
because

       • For l < L, we now have αl+1 2 = O(d˜r−1/2 ) instead of O(1), so we can have the
         additional d˜r−1/2 factor in the bound.
       • For l = L, although αL+1 2 = 1, note that W L 2 now becomes O(d˜r ) instead of
         O(d˜1/2 ), so again we can decrease the bound by a factor of d˜r−1/2 .

Then, with this critical d˜r−1/2 , we can prove the approximation theorem with the form
                                                    (t)
                                  sup f (t) (x) − flin (x) ≤ C d˜r−1/2                            (175)
                                  t≥0

for any r ∈ (0, 1/2), though we cannot really prove the O(d˜−1/2 ) bound as originally claimed in
(164). So this is how we solve Problem 2.
One caveat of changing the initialization to zero initialization is whether we can still safely assume
that λmin > 0 where λmin is the smallest eigenvalue of Θ, the kernel matrix of our new formulation.
The answer is yes. In fact, in our Proposition 3 we proved that Θ is non-degenerated (which means
that Θ(x, x0 ) still depends on x and x0 ), and under the overparameterized setting where dL   n,
chances are high that Θ is full-rank. Hence, we can still assume that λmin > 0.
As a final remark, one key reason why we need to initialize W L as zero is that the dimension of the
output space (i.e. the dimension of hL+1 ) is finite, and in our case it is 1. Suppose we allow the
dimension of hL+1 to be d˜ which goes to infinity, then using the same proof techniques, for the NTK
                                                    L+1(t)
formulation we can prove that supt hL+1(t) − hlin             ≤ C, i.e. the gap between two vectors
                                                            2
of infinite dimension is always bounded by a finite constant. This is the approximation theorem we
need for the infinite-dimensional output space. However, when the dimension of the output space is
                           L+1(t)
finite, supt hL+1(t) − hlin         ≤ C no longer suffices, so we need to decrease the order of the
                                   2
norm of W L in order to obtain a smaller upper bound.



                                                   40
