Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E NHANCING THE I NDUCTIVE B IASES OF G RAPH N EU -
RAL ODE FOR M ODELING P HYSICAL S YSTEMS

 Suresh Bishnoi, Ravinder Bhattoo, Jayadeva, Sayan Ranu, N. M. Anoop Krishnan ∗
 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi, India 110016
 {srz208500,cez177518,jayadeva,sayanranu,krishnan}@iitd.ac.in
                                              A BSTRACT
         Neural networks with physics-based inductive biases such as Lagrangian neural
         networks (L NN), and Hamiltonian neural networks (H NN) learn the dynamics
         of physical systems by encoding strong inductive biases. Alternatively, Neural
         ODEs with appropriate inductive biases have also been shown to give similar per-
         formances. However, these models, when applied to particle-based systems, are
         transductive in nature and hence, do not generalize to large system sizes. In this
         paper, we present a graph-based neural ODE, G NODE, to learn the time evolution
         of dynamical systems. Further, we carefully analyze the role of different inductive
         biases on the performance of G NODE. We show that similar to L NN and H NN, en-
         coding the constraints explicitly can significantly improve the training efficiency
         and performance of G NODE significantly. Our experiments also assess the value of
         additional inductive biases, such as Newton’s third law, on the final performance
         of the model. We demonstrate that inducing these biases can enhance the per-
         formance of the model by orders of magnitude in terms of both energy violation
         and rollout error. Interestingly, we observe that the G NODE trained with the most
         effective inductive biases, namely MCG NODE, outperforms the graph versions
         of L NN and H NN, namely, Lagrangian graph networks (L GN) and Hamiltonian
         graph networks (H GN) in terms of energy violation error by 4 orders of magni-
         tude for a pendulum system, and 2 orders of magnitude for spring systems. These
         results suggest that NODE-based systems can give competitive performances with
         energy-conserving neural networks by employing appropriate inductive biases.
1    I NTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORKS
Learning the dynamics of physical systems is a challenging problem that has relevance in several
areas of science and engineering such as astronomy (motion of planetary systems), biology (move-
ment of cells), physics (molecular dynamics), and engineering (mechanics, robotics)(LaValle, 2006;
Goldstein, 2011). The dynamics of a system are typically expressed as a differential equation,
solutions of which may require the knowledge of abstract quantities such as force, energy, and
drag(LaValle, 2006; Zhong et al., 2020; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020). From an experimental per-
spective, the real observable for a physical system is its trajectory represented by the position and
velocities of the constituent particles. Thus, learning the abstract quantities required to solve the
equation, directly from the trajectory, can extremely simplify the problem of learning the dynam-
ics (Finzi et al., 2020).
Infusing physical laws as prior has been shown to improve learning in terms of additional properties
such as energy conservation, and symplectic nature (Karniadakis et al., 2021; Lutter et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2021). To this extent, three broad approaches have been proposed, namely, Lagrangian
neural networks (L NN) (Cranmer et al., 2020a; Finzi et al., 2020; Lutter et al., 2019), Hamiltonian
neural networks (H NN) (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019; Greydanus et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2020;
2021), and neural ODE (N ODE) (Chen et al., 2018; Gruver et al., 2021). The learning efficiency of
L NNs and H NNs is shown to enhance significantly by employing explicit constraints (Finzi et al.,
2020) and their inherent structure Zhong et al. (2019). In addition, it has been shown that the
superior performance of H NNs and L NNs is mainly due to their second-order bias, and not due to
their symplectic or energy conserving bias (Gruver et al., 2021). More specifically, an H NN with
separable potential (V (q)) and kinetic (T (q, q̇)) energies is equivalent to a second order N ODE of
the form q̈ = F̂ (q, q̇). Thus, a N ODE with a second-order bias can give similar performances to
   ∗
     SB: School of Interdisciplinary Research, SR: Department of Computer Science, NMAK and RB: Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, J: Department of Electrical Engineering, SR and NMAK: Yardi School of Artificial
Intelligence (joint appointment).


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that of an H NN (Gruver et al., 2021). Recently, a Bayesian-symbolic approach, which assumes
the knowledge of Newtonian mechanics along with symbolic features, has been used to learn the
dynamics of physical systems Xu et al. (2021).
An important limitation pervading these models is their transductive nature; they need to be trained
on each system separately before simulating their dynamics. For instance, a N ODE trained on 5-
pendulum can work only for 5-pendulum. This approach is referred to as transductive. In contrast,
an inductive model, such as G NODE, when trained on 5-pendulum “learns” the underlying function
governing the dynamics at a node and edge level. Hence, a G NODE, once trained, can perform infer-
ence on any system size that is significantly smaller or larger than the ground truth as we demonstrate
later in § 4. This inductive ability is enabled through Graph neural networks (Scarselli et al., 2008)
due to their inherent topology-aware setting, which allows the learned system to naturally general-
ize. Although the idea of graph-based modeling has been suggested for physical systems (Cranmer
et al., 2020b; Greydanus et al., 2019), the inductive biases induced due to different graph struc-
tures and their consequences on the dynamics remain poorly explored. In this context, there are a
few recent works that aim to develop better representations of physical systems through equivariant
graph neural networks Satorras et al. (2021); Han et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2022). However, the
present work focuses on the inductive biases for physical systems rather than focusing on better
representation learning. Some of the proposed inductive biases may also be a natural consequence
of forcing equivariance. For example, enforcing invariance to the Lagrangian w.r.t. space trans-
lation and rotation also enforces Newton’s third law, which we achieve through an inductive bias
(§ 3). In the context of generalizability to unseen systems, there exists work on few-shot based
on meta-learning (Lee et al., 2021). Meta-learning assumes the availability of a limited amount of
training data to adapt to an unseen system (task). This is different from our objective where we
perform zero-shot generalizability, i.e., inference on an unseen system without any further training.
To summarize, our key contributions are as follows:
1. Topology-aware modeling, where the physical system is modeled using a graph-based N ODE
   (G NODE), enabling zero-shot generalizability to unseen system sizes.
2. Decoupling the dynamics and constraints, where the equation of motion of the G NODE is
   decoupled into individual terms such as forces, Coriolis-like terms, and explicit constraints.
3. Decoupling the internal and body forces, where the internal forces due to the interaction among
   particles are decoupled from the forces due to external fields.
4. Newton’s third law, where the forces of interacting particles are enforced to be equal and oppo-
   site. We theoretically prove that this inductive bias enforces the conservation of linear momen-
   tum, in the absence of an external field, for the predicted trajectory exactly.
We analyze the role of these biases on n-pendulum and spring systems. Interestingly, depending
on the nature of the system, we show that some of these biases can either significantly improve
the performance or have marginal effects. We also show that the final model with the appropriate
inductive biases significantly outperforms the simple version of G NODE with no additional inductive
biases and even the graph versions of L NN and H NN.
2   BACKGROUND ON DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
A dynamical system can be defined by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) of the form, q̈ =
F (q, q̇, t), where F represents the dynamics of the system. Thus, the time evolution of the system
can be obtained by integrating this equation of motion. In Lagrangian mechanics, the dynamics of a
system are derived based on the Lagrangian of the system, which is defined as (Goldstein, 2011):
                                    L(q, q̇, t) = T (q, q̇) − V (q)                                (1)
Once the Lagrangian of the system is computed, the dynamics can be obtained using the Euler-
                               d
Lagrange (EL) equation as dt      (∇q̇ L) = ∇q L. NotePthat the EL equation is equivalent to
                                                              n
D’Alembert’s principle written in terms of the force as i=1 (Ni − mi q̈i ) · δqi = 0, where δqi
represents a virtual displacement consistent with the constraints of the system. Thus, an alternative
to the EL equation can be written in terms of the forces and other components as (LaValle, 2006;
Murray et al., 2017)
                           M (q)q̈ + C(q, q̇)q̇ + N (q) + Υ(q̇) + AT λ = Π                        (2)
where M (q) represents the mass matrix, C(q, q̇) the Coriolis-like forces, N (q) the conservative
forces, Υ(q̇) represents the non-conservative forces such as drag or friction, and Π represents any


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


external forces. We note that Lagrangian dynamics is traditionally applied in systems with conser-
vative forces, i.e., where a Lagrangian is well-defined. However, Eq. 2 is generic and can be applied
to model any dynamical system irrespective of whether the system has a well-defined Lagrangian or
not. Examples of systems where a well-defined Lagrangian may not exist include that of a colloidal
system undergoing Brownian motion.
The constraints of the system are given by A(q)q̇ = 0, where A(q) ∈ RkD represents k constraints.
Thus, A represents the non-normalized basis of constraint forces given by A = ∇q (ϕ), where
ϕ is the matrix corresponding to the constraints of the system and λ is the Lagrange multiplier
corresponding to the relative magnitude of the constraint forces. Note that M, C, and N are directly
derivable from the Lagrangian of the system L as M = ∇q̇q̇ L, C = ∇qq̇ L, and N = ∇q L. Thus,
decoupling the dynamic equation simplifies the representation of the dynamics F with enhanced
interpretability. To learn the dynamics, Eq. 2 can be represented as

                                q̈ = M −1 Π − C q̇ − N − Υ − AT λ

                                                                                                 (3)

To solve for λ, the constraint equation can be differentiated with respect to time to obtain Aq̈ + Ȧq̇ =
0. Substituting for q̈ from Eq. 3 and solving for λ, we get

                      λ = (AM −1 AT )−1 (AM −1 (Π − C q̇ − N − Υ) + Ȧq̇)                            (4)
Accordingly, q̈ can be obtained as

  q̈ = M −1 Π − C q̇ − N − Υ − AT (AM −1 AT )−1 AM −1 (Π − C q̇ − N − Υ) + Ȧq̇                      (5)

3   I NDUCTIVE BIASES FOR NEURAL ODE
To learn dynamical systems, N ODEs parameterize the dynamics F (qt , q̇t ) using a neural network
and learn the approximate function F̂ (qt , q̇t ) by minimizing the loss between the predicted and
actual trajectories, that is, L = ||qt+1 − q̂t+1 ||. Thus, a N ODE essentially learns a cumulative F̂ ,
that consists of the contribution of all the terms contributing to the dynamics. In contrast, in an
L NN, the learned L is used in the EL equation to obtain the dynamics. Similarly, in L NN with
explicit constraints, the learned Lagrangian is used to obtain the individual terms in the Eq. 5 by
differentiating the L NN, which is then substituted to obtain the acceleration. However, this approach
is transductive in nature. To overcome this challenge, we present a graph-based version of the
N ODE namely, G NODE, which models the physical system as a graph. We show, that G NODE can
generalize to arbitrary system size after learning the dynamics F̂ .
3.1 G RAPH NEURAL ODE (G NODE ) FOR PHYSICAL SYSTEMS
In this section, we describe the architecture of G NODE. The graph topology is used to learn the
approximate dynamics F̂ by minimizing the loss on the predicted positions.
Graph structure. An n-particle system is represented as an undirected graph G = {V, E}, where
nodes represent particles and edges represent the connections or interactions between them. For
instance, in a pendulum or springs system, the nodes correspond to bobs or balls, respectively, and
the edges correspond to the bars or springs, respectively.
Input features. Each node is characterized by the features of the particles themselves, namely,
the particle type (t), position (qi ), and velocity (q̇i ). The type distinguishes particles of differing
characteristics, for instance, balls or bobs with different masses. Further, each edge is represented
by the edge features wij = (qi − qj ), which represents the relative displacement of the nodes
connected by the given edge.
Neural architecture: Here, we provide a summary of the various neural layers within G NODE (see
a detailed description in App. A and ). Fig. 8 in the appendix provides a pictorial description. In the
pre-processing layer, we construct a dense vector representation for each node vi and edge eij using
MLPs. In many cases, internal forces in a system that govern the dynamics are closely dependent on
the topology of the structure. We model this through a deep, message-passing G NN. Let zi = hL          i
denote the final representation constructed by the G NN over each node. These representations are
passed through another MLP to predict the acceleration of each node.
Trajectory prediction and training. Based on the predicted q̈, the positions and velocities are
predicted using the velocity Verlet integration. The loss function of G NODE is computed by using


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the predicted and actual accelerations at timesteps 2, 3, . . . , T in a trajectory T, which is then back-
propagated to train the MLPs. Specifically, the loss function is as follows.
                                             n T
                                                                       !
                                       1 X X   T,t ˆT,t  2
                                 L=                  q̈ − q̈i                                          (6)
                                       n i=1 t=2 i

Here, (q̈ˆiT,t ) is the predicted acceleration for the ith particle in trajectory T at time t and q̈iT,t is
the true acceleration. T denotes a trajectory from T, the set of training trajectories. Note that the
accelerations are computed directly from the ground truth trajectory using the Verlet algorithm:
                                           1
                               q̈(t) =         [q(t + ∆t) + q(t − ∆t) − 2q(t)]                         (7)
                                         (∆t)2
Since the integration of the equations of motion for the predicted trajectory is also performed using
the same algorithm as q(t + ∆t) = 2q(t) − q(t − ∆t) + q̈(∆t)2 , equivalent to training from
trajectory/positions. It should be noted that the training approach presented here may lead to learning
the dynamics as dictated by the Verlet integrator. Thus, the learned dynamics may not represent the
“true” dynamics of the system, but one that is optimal for the Verlet integrator1 .
G NODE learns Newtonian dynamics directly without decoupling the constraints and other compo-
nents governing the dynamics from the equation q̈ = F̂ (q, q̇, t). Next, we analyze the effect of
providing the constraints explicitly in the form of inductive biases and enhance the performance of
G NODE. In the subsequent sections, we iteratively stack inductive biases on top of G NODE. Thus,
the final proposed architecture, MCG NODE, is the eventual model that considers all biases. The
detailed differences between all the graph architectures proposed in the work are included in App. K
and Fig. 23.
3.2 D ECOUPLING THE DYNAMICS AND CONSTRAINTS (CG NODE ).
To this extent, while keeping the graph architecture exactly the same, we use Eq. 5 to compute the
acceleration of the system. In this case, the output of G NODE is Ni = squareplus(MLPV (zi ))
instead of q̈i , where Ni is the conservative force on particle i (refer Eq. 2). Then, the acceleration
is predicted using Eq. 5 with explicit constraints. This approach, termed as constrained G NODE
(CG NODE), enables us to isolate the effect of imposing constraints explicitly on the learning, and
the performance of G NODE. It is worth noting that for particle systems in Cartesian coordinates, the
mass matrix is a diagonal one, with the diagonal entries, mii s, representing the mass of the ith par-
ticle. Thus, the mii s are learned as trainable parameters. As a consequence of this design, the graph
directly predicts the Ni of each particle. Note that in the case of systems with drag, the graph would
contain a cumulative of Ni and Υi . Examples of such systems are demonstrated later (see App. E).

3.3 D ECOUPLING THE INTERNAL
AND BODY FORCES (CDG NODE )
In a physical system, internal forces
arise due to interactions between con-
stituent particles. On the contrary, the
body forces are due to the interac-
tion of each particle with an external
field such as gravity or electromag-
netic field. While internal forces are
closely related to the system’s topol-       Figure 1: Architecture of CDG NODE (see App. K).
ogy, the effect of external fields on
each particle is independent of the topology of the structure. In addition, while the internal forces
are a function of the relative displacement between the particles, the external forces due to fields
depend on the actual position of the particle.
To decouple the internal and body forces, we modify the graph architecture of the G NODE. Specifi-
cally, the node inputs are divided into local and global features. Only the local features are involved
in the message passing. The global features are passed through an MLP to obtain an embedding,
which is concatenated with the node embedding obtained after message passing. This updated em-
bedding is passed through an MLP to obtain the particle level force, Ni . Here, the local node
   1
       See App. A for details on why we use Verlet integrator


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


features are the particle types and the global features are position and velocity. Note that in the
case of systems with drag, the Υi can be learned using a separate node MLP using particle type and
velocity as global input features. This architecture is termed as constrained and decoupled G NODE
(CDG NODE). The architecture of CDG NODE is provided in Fig. 1.
3.4 N EWTON ’ S THIRD LAW (MCG NODE )
According to Newton’s third law, “every action has an equal and opposite reaction”. In particular,
the internal forces on each particle exerted by the neighboring particles should be equal and opposite
so that the total system is in equilibrium. That is, fij = −fji , where fij represents the force on
particle i due to its neighbor j. Note that this is a stronger requirement than the EL equation itself,
      d
i.e., dt (∇q˙i L) = ∇qi L. EL equation enforces thatPnthe  rate of change of momentum of each particle
                                                        i
is equal to the total force on the particle, Ni = j=1      fij , where ni is the number of neighbors of
i — it does not enforce any restrictions on the individual component forces, fij from the neighbors
that add to this force. Thus, although the total force on each particle may be learned by the G NODE,
the individual components may not be learned correctly. We show that G NODE with an additional
inductive bias enforcing Newton’s third law, namely momentum conserving G NODE (MCG NODE),
conserves the linear momentum of the learned dynamics exactly.
Theorem 1 In the absence of an external field, MCG NODE exactly conserves the momentum.
Proof of the theorem is provided in Appendix B. To enforce this bias, we modify the graph archi-
tecture as follows. In particular, the output of the graph after the message passing is taken from the
edge embedding instead of taking from the node embedding. The final edge embedding is obtained
after the message passing is passed through an MLP to obtain the force fij . Then the nodal force is
computed as the sum of all the forces from the edges incident on the node. Note that while doing the
sum, the symmetry condition fij = −fji is enforced. Further, the global forces coming from any
external field are added separately to obtain the total nodal forces. Finally, the parameterized masses
are learned as the masses in a particle system in Cartesian coordinates are diagonal in nature.
4 E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
In this section, we benchmark G NODE and the impact of the inductive biases. Our implementation is
available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/graph neural ODE-8B3D. Details of the simulation
environment are provided in App. I.
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
• Baselines: To compare the performance of G NODE and its associated versions MCG NODE,
CDG NODE, and CG NODE, we compare with graph-based physics-informed neural networks,
namely, (1) Lagrangian graph network (L GN) (Cranmer et al., 2020a), and (2) Hamiltonian graph
network (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019). Since the exact architecture and details of the graph ar-
chitecture are not provided in the original works, a full graph architecture (Cranmer et al., 2020b;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020) is used for modeling L GN and H GN2 . Since Cartesian coordinates
are used, the parameterized masses are learned as a diagonal matrix as performed in (Finzi et al.,
2020). We note that while in G NODE, the predicted acceleration is the direct output of the graph
neural network, in L GN (or H GN) the output is the Lagrangian (or Hamiltonian) and further differ-
entiation of the Lagrangian (or Hamiltonian) provides acceleration. These additional computational
steps make L GN or H GN computationally expensive. We empirically establish this in App. F. This
result is consistent with earlier results that note neural ODEs (N ODE) as being more efficient and
generalizable than Hamiltonian neural networks if appropriate inductive biases are injected Gruver
et al. (2021). Thus, we also compare with N ODE (Gruver et al., 2021). Finally, we also compare
with SymODE-Net (Zhong et al., 2019) (App. H) and graph network simulator (GNS) (App. L).
• Datasets and systems: To compare the performance G NODEs with different inductive biases and
with the baseline models, we selected systems on which N ODEs are shown to give good perfor-
mance (Zhong et al., 2021; Finzi et al., 2020), viz, n-pendulums and springs, where n = (3, 4, 5).
Further, to evaluate the zero-shot generalizability of G NODE to large-scale unseen systems, we sim-
ulate 5, 20, and 50-link spring systems, and 5-, 10-, and 20-link pendulum systems. The details of
the experimental systems are given in Appendix. The training data is generated for systems without
drag for each particle. The timestep used for the forward simulation of the pendulum system is
10−5 s with the data collected every 1000 timesteps and for the spring system is 10−3 s with the data
collected every 100 timesteps. The detailed data-generation procedure is given in App. J.
  2
    We also evaluated the performance of L GN and H GN on the G NN of G NODE and observe that the perfor-
mance is inferior. Details are provided in App. C


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Comparison of the energy violation and rollout error between N ODE, G NODE, CG NODE,
CDG NODE, MCG NODE for n-pendulum and spring systems with n = 3, 4, 5 links. For the pen-
dulum system, the model is trained on the 5-pendulum system and for the spring system, the model
is trained on the 5-spring system and evaluated on all other systems. The shaded region shows the
95% confidence interval from 100 initial conditions.
• Evaluation Metric: Following the work of (Finzi et al., 2020), we evaluate performance by
computing the following three error metrics, namely, (1) the relative error in the trajectory, defined
as the rollout error, (RE(t)), (2) Energy violation error (EE(t)), (3) the relative error in momentum
                                                  ||q̂(t)−q(t)||2                 ||Ĥ−H||2
conservation, (ME(t)), given by: RE(t) = ||q̂(t)||      2 +||q(t)||2
                                                                     ; EE(t) = (||Ĥ|| +||H||
                                                                                              ; M E(t) =
                                                                                    2      2
  ||M̂−M||2
||M̂||2 +||M||2
                Note that all the variables with a hat, for example, x̂, represent the predicted values
based on the trained model, and the variables without the hat, that is x, represent the ground truth.
• Model architecture and training setup: For all versions of G NODE, L GN, and H GN, the MLPs
are two-layers deep. We use 10000 data points generated from 100 trajectories to train all the
models. This dataset is divided randomly in a 75:25 ratio as a training and validation set. Detailed
training procedures and hyper-parameters are provided in App. J. All models were trained till the
decrease in loss saturates to less than 0.001 over 100 epochs. The model performance is evaluated
on a forward trajectory, a task it was not explicitly trained for, of 10s in the case of the pendulum and
20s in the case of spring. Note that this trajectory is 2-3 orders of magnitude larger than the training
trajectories from which the training data has been sampled. The dynamics of the n-body system are
known to be chaotic for n ≥ 2. Hence, all the results are averaged over trajectories generated from
100 different initial conditions.
4.2 E VALUATION OF INDUCTIVE BIASES IN G NODE
• Performance of (G NODE). Fig. 2 shows the performance of G NODE on the pendulum and spring
systems of sizes 3 to 5. The G NODE for the pendulum is trained on a 5-pendulum system and that of
the spring is trained on a 5-spring system. Hence, the 3- and 4-pendulum systems and 3- and 4-spring
systems are unseen, and consequently, allow us to evaluate zero-shot generalizability. We observe
that energy violation and rollout errors of G NODE for the forward simulations are comparable, both
in terms of the value and trend with respect to time, across all of the systems. Furthermore, when
we compare with N ODE, which has been trained on each system separately, while the errors are
comparable in 5-pendulum, G NODE is better in 5-spring. It is worth highlighting that N ODE has an
unfair advantage on 5-pendulum since it is trained and tested on the same system, while 5-pendulum
is unseen for G NODE (trained on 5-pendulum). This confirms the generalizability of G NODE to
simulate the dynamics of unseen systems of arbitrary sizes. More experiments comparing N ODE
with G NODE to further highlight the benefit of topology-aware modeling are provided in App.D.
• G NODE with explicit constraints (CG NODE). Next, we analyze the effect of incorporating the
constraints explicitly in G NODE. To this extent, we train the 5-pendulum system using CG NODE
model with acceleration computed using Equation 5. Further, we evaluate the performance of the
model on 4- and 5-pendulum systems. Note that the spring system is an unconstrained system and
hence CG NODE is equivalent to G NODE for this system. We observe that (see Fig. 2) CG NODE
exhibits ∼4 orders of magnitude superior performance both in terms of energy violation and rollout
error. This confirms that providing explicit constraints significantly improves both the learning
efficiency and the predictive dynamics of G NODE models where explicit constraints are present, for
example, pendulum systems, chains, or rigid bodies.
• Decoupling internal and body forces (CDG NODE). Now, we analyze the effect of decoupling
local and global features in the G NODE by employing the CDG NODE architecture. It is worth


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Comparison of the energy violation and rollout error between G NODE, L GN, and H GN for
n-pendulum and spring systems with n = 3, 4, 5 links. For both the pendulum and spring systems,
the model is trained on a 5-link structure and evaluated on all other systems. The shaded region
shows the 95% confidence interval from 100 initial conditions.

noting that the decoupling of the local and global features makes the G NODE model parsimonious
with only the relative displacement and node type given as input features for message passing to
the graph architecture. In other words, the number of features given to the graph architecture is
lower in CDG NODE in G NODE. Interestingly, we observe that the CDG NODE performs better than
CG NODE and G NODE by ∼1 order of magnitude for pendulum and spring systems, respectively.
• Newton’s third law (MCG NODE). Finally, we empirically evaluate the effect of enforcing New-
ton’s third law, that is, fij = −fji on the graph using the graph architecture namely, MCG NODE.
Figure 2 shows the performance of MCG NODE for both pendulum and spring systems. Note that it
was theoretically demonstrated that this inductive bias enforces the exact conservation of momen-
tum, in the absence of an external field. Figure 4 shows the M E of MCG NODE in comparison
to N ODE, G NODE, CG NODE, CDG NODE, and MCG NODE for pendulum and spring systems. We
observe that in the spring system, the M E of MCG NODE is zero. In the case of a pendulum, al-
though lower than N ODE, G NODE, and CG NODE, the M E of MCG NODE is comparable to that of
CDG NODE. Correspondingly, MCG NODE exhibits improved performance for the spring system in
comparison to other models. However, in the pendulum system, we observe that the performance of
MCG NODE is similar to that of CDG NODE. This is because, in spring systems, the internal forces
between the balls govern the dynamics of the system, whereas in pendulum the dynamics are gov-
erned mainly by the force exerted on the bobs by the external gravitational field. Interestingly, we ob-
serve that the energy violation error of MCG NODE remains fairly constant, while this error diverges
for other models. This confirms that strong enforcement of momentum conservation in turn ensures
that the energy violation error stays constant over time, ensuring stable long-term equilibrium dy-
namics of the system. In addition, MCG NODE exhibits significantly improved training efficiency
than N ODE (see App.F). Finally, we also evaluate the ability of MCG NODE to learn the dynamics of
systems with drag and external forces (see App. E). We observe that MCG NODE clearly outperforms
N ODE in this case as well. MCG NODE will, thus, be particularly useful for the statistical analysis
of chaotic systems where multiple divergent trajectories correspond to the same energy state.

4.3 C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES
Now, we compare the G NODE that exhibited the best performance, namely, MCG NODE with the
baselines namely, L GN and H GN. Note that both L GN and H GN are energy-conserving graph neural
networks, which are expected to give superior performance in predicting the trajectories of dynam-
ical systems (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019). Especially, due to their energy-conserving nature,
these models are expected to have lower energy violation error than other models, where energy
conservation bias is not explicitly enforced. Figure 3 shows the energy violation and rollout error of
G NODE, L GN, and H GN trained on a 5-link system and tested on 3, 4, 5-link pendulum and spring
systems. Interestingly, we observe that MCG NODE outperforms both L GN and H GN in terms of
rollout error and energy error for both spring and pendulum systems. Specifically, in the case of
pendulum systems, we observe that the energy violation and rollout errors are ∼ 5 orders of mag-
nitude lower in the case of MCG NODE in comparison to L GN and H GN. Further, we compare the
M E of MCG NODE with L GN and H GN (see Fig. 4 right palette). We observe in both pendulum and
spring systems that the M E of MCG NODE is significantly lower than that of L GN and H GN. Thus,
in the case of spring systems, although the performance of H GN and MCG NODE are comparable
for both RE and EE, we observe that MCG NODE exhibits zero M E, while in H GN and L GN M E


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Momentum error (M E) of N ODE, G NODE, CG NODE, CDG NODE, and MCG NODE (top
palette), and L GN, H GN, MCG NODE (bottom palette) for spring (top row of both the palettes) and
pendulum (bottom row of both the palettes) systems with 3, 4, and 5 links. The shaded region
represents the 95% confidence interval based on 100 forward simulations.


Figure 5: Energy violation and rollout error between G NODE, L GN, and H GN for spring systems
with 5, 20, 50 links and pendulum system with 5, 10, 20 links. Note that for all the systems, G NODE,
L GN, and H GN are trained on 5-pendulum and 5-spring systems and tested on others. The shaded
region represents the 95% confidence interval based on 100 forward simulations.

diverges. The superior performance of MCG NODE could be attributed to the carefully constructed
inductive biases, namely, (i) explicit constraints—improves data efficiency and reduces the error
in pendulum systems, (ii) decoupling internal and body forces—leads to superior performance in
pendulum systems which act under gravity, (iii) momentum conservation—leads to superior perfor-
mance in spring systems by enforcing an additional conservation law strongly. We note that these
inductive biases may also be adapted suitably for LGN and HGN and thereby improve their perfor-
mance. Thus, the contribution of our work is not the neural architecture in isolation, but the core
design principles that are generic enough to be abstracted beyond neural ODEs.
4.4 G ENERALIZABILITY
Now, we focus on the zero-shot generalizability of G NODE, L GN, and H GN to large systems that
are unseen by the model. To this extent, we model 5-, 10-, and 20-link pendulum systems and
5-, 20-, and 50-link spring systems. Note that all the models are trained on the 5-link systems.
In congruence with the comparison earlier, we observe that MCG NODE performs better than both
L GN and H GN when tested on systems with a large number of links. However, we observe that the
variation in the error represented by the 95% confidence interval increases with an increase in the
number of particles. This suggests that the increase in the number of particles essentially results in
increased noise in the prediction of the forces. However, the error in the MCG NODE is significantly
lower than the error in L GN and H GN for both pendulum and spring systems, as confirmed by the
95% confidence interval, which could again be attributed to the three inductive biases infused in
MCG NODE, that are absent in L GN and H GN. This suggests that MCG NODE can generalize to
larger system sizes with increased accuracy.
4.5   L EARNING THE DYNAMICS OF 3D SOLID

                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To demonstrate the applicability of
MCG NODE to learn the dynamics
of complex systems, we consider a
challenging problem, that is, infer-
ring the dynamics of an elastically
deformable body. Specifically, a 5 ×
5 × 5 solid cube, discretized into
125 particles, is used for simulating
the ground truth. A 3D solid sys- Figure 6: (RE) and (M E) of G NODE, MCG NODE and
tem is simulated using the peridy- GNS for particle-based system. Simulation is performed us-
namics framework. The system is ing peridynamics on a 3D box of 125 particles (5 × 5 × 5).
compressed isotropically and then released to simulate the dynamics of the solid, that is, the con-
traction and expansion in 3D. We observe that MCG NODE performs inference much superior to
G NODE and GNS (see Fig. 6and App. L). It should also be noted that although the momentum er-
ror in MCG NODE seems high, this is due to the fact that the actual momentum in these systems is
significantly low. This is demonstrated by plotting the absolute momentum error in these systems
which in MCG NODE is close to zero, while in G NODE it explodes (see Fig. 21). These results sug-
gest that the MCG NODE could be applied to much more complex systems such as solids or other
particle-based systems where momentum conservation is equally important as energy conservation.

4.6   ROBUSTNESS TO N OISE
Finally, we show the robustness to noise of the MCG NODE in comparison to G NODE, and additional
baselines, namely, H GN and L GN. Fig. 7 shows the performance of these models on 5-spring and
5-pendulum systems for varying noise values. Note that the noise is given in terms of % standard
deviation of the distribution of the original output values. We observe that MCG NODE is robust
against noise in comparison to other models.

5     C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we carefully analyze various inductive bi-
ases that can affect the performance of a G NODE. Specif-
ically, we analyze the effect of a graph architecture, ex-
plicit constraints, decoupling global and local features
that makes the model parsimonious, and Newton’s third
law that enforces a stronger constraint on the conserva-
tion of momentum. We observe that inducing appro-
priate inductive biases results in an enhancement in the
performance of G NODE by ∼2-3 orders magnitude for
spring systems and ∼5-6 orders magnitude for pendu-
lum systems in terms of energy violation error. Further,
MCG NODE outperforms the graph versions of both La-
grangian and Hamiltonian neural networks, namely, L GN
and H GN. Altogether, the present work suggests that the
performance of G NODE-based models can be enhanced Figure 7: Impact of noise on perfor-
and even made superior to energy-conserving neural net- mance of G NODE, MCG NODE, L GN,
works by inducing the appropriate inductive biases.           and H GN. Note that the noise is given in
Limitations and Future Works: The present work fo- terms of % standard deviation of the dis-
cuses on particle-based systems such as pendulum and tribution of the original output values.
spring systems. While these simple systems can be used to evaluate model performances, real life
is more complex in nature with rigid body motions, contacts, and collisions. Extending G NODE
to address these problems can enable the modeling of realistic systems. A more complex set of
systems involve plastically deformable systems such as steel rod, and viscoelastic materials where
the deformation depends on the strain rate of materials. Further, instead of explicitly providing
the constraints, learning the constraints directly from the trajectory can enhance the application of
the models to unseen systems. Note that the present work is limited to physical systems. A sim-
ilar approach could be employed in other dynamical systems as well. From the neural modeling
perspective, the G NODE is essentially a graph convolutional network. Using attention over each
message passing head may allow us to better differentiate neighbors based on the strength of their
interactions. We hope to pursue these questions in the future.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, and Skye Wanderman-Milne. Jax: composable transformations of python+ numpy
  programs, 2018. URL http://github. com/google/jax, 4:16, 2020.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary dif-
  ferential equations. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 6572–6583, 2018.
Miles Cranmer, Sam Greydanus, Stephan Hoyer, Peter Battaglia, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
 Lagrangian neural networks. In ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models and
 Differential Equations, 2020a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iE8tFa4Nq.
Miles Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David Spergel,
 and Shirley Ho. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive biases. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020b.
Marc Finzi, Ke Alexander Wang, and Andrew G Wilson. Simplifying hamiltonian and lagrangian
 neural networks via explicit constraints. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Bal-
 can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
 13880–13889. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/
 file/9f655cc8884fda7ad6d8a6fb15cc001e-Paper.pdf.
Jonathan Godwin*, Thomas Keck*, Peter Battaglia, Victor Bapst, Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Kimberly
  Stachenfeld, Petar Veličković, and Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez. Jraph: A library for graph neural
  networks in jax., 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind/jraph.
Herbert Goldstein. Classical mechanics. Pearson Education India, 2011.
Samuel Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian neural networks. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:15379–15389, 2019.
Nate Gruver, Marc Anton Finzi, Samuel Don Stanton, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Deconstructing
  the inductive biases of hamiltonian neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Jiaqi Han, Wenbing Huang, Hengbo Ma, Jiachen Li, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. Learn-
   ing physical dynamics with subequivariant graph neural networks. 2022.
Wenbing Huang, Jiaqi Han, Yu Rong, Tingyang Xu, Fuchun Sun, and Junzhou Huang. Equivariant
 graph mechanics networks with constraints. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
 tations, 2022.
George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.
Steven M LaValle. Planning algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2006.
Seungjun Lee, Haesang Yang, and Woojae Seong. Identifying physical law of hamiltonian systems
  via meta-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=45NZvF1UHam.
Ziming Liu, Yuanqi Du, Yunyue Chen, and Max Tegmark. Physics-augmented learning: A new
  paradigm beyond physics-informed learning. In NeurIPS 2021 AI for Science Workshop, 2021.
Michael Lutter, Christian Ritter, and Jan Peters. Deep lagrangian networks: Using physics as model
 prior for deep learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=BklHpjCqKm.
Richard M Murray, Zexiang Li, and S Shankar Sastry. A mathematical introduction to robotic
  manipulation. CRC press, 2017.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Victor Bapst, Kyle Cranmer, and Peter Battaglia. Hamiltonian graph
  networks with ode integrators. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–1909, 2019.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 8459–8468. PMLR, 2020.
Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural net-
  works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
  The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
Samuel Schoenholz and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Jax md: a framework for differentiable physics. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Kai Xu, Akash Srivastava, Dan Gutfreund, Felix Sosa, Tomer Ullman, Josh Tenenbaum, and Charles
  Sutton. A bayesian-symbolic approach to reasoning and learning in intuitive physics. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:2478–2490, 2021.
Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Symplectic ode-net: Learning
  hamiltonian dynamics with control. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Dissipative symoden: En-
  coding hamiltonian dynamics with dissipation and control into deep learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.08860, 2020.
Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Benchmarking energy-conserving
  neural networks for learning dynamics from data. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp.
  1218–1229. PMLR, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 Figure 8: Architecture of G NODE.


A    D ETAILS OF G NODE
The architecture of G NODE is depicted in Fig. 8. G NODE constitutes of the following neural layers.
Pre-Processing. In the pre-processing layer, we construct a dense vector representation for each
node vi and edge eij using MLPem as:
                        h0i = squareplus(MLPem (one-hot(ti ), qi , q̇i ))                         (8)
                       h0ij = squareplus(MLPem (wij ))                                            (9)
squareplus is an activation function. Note that the MLPem corresponding to the node and edge
embedding functions are parameterized with different weights. Here, for the sake of brevity, we
simply mention them as MLPem .
Acceleration prediction. In many cases, internal forces in a system that govern the dynamics are
closely dependent on the topology of the structure. To capture this information, we employ multiple
layers of message-passing between the nodes and edges. In the lth layer of message passing, the
node embedding is updated as:
                                                                            
                                                       X
                      hl+1  = squareplus hli +            WVl · hlj ||hlij 

                       i                                                                      (10)
                                                      j∈Ni

where, Ni = {vj ∈ V | eij ∈ E} are the neighbors of vi . WVl is a layer-specific learnable weight
matrix. hlij represents the embedding of incoming edge eij on vi in the lth layer, which is computed
as follows.
                            hl+1                    l       l     l   l

                             ij = squareplus hij + WE · hi ||hj                                 (11)
Similar to WVl , WEl is a layer-specific learnable weight matrix specific to the edge set. The mes-
sage passing is performed over L layers, where L is a hyper-parameter. The final node and edge
representations in the Lth layer are denoted as zi = hL                 L
                                                        i and zij = hij respectively. Finally, the
acceleration of the particle q̈i is predicted as:
                                  q̈i = squareplus(MLPV (zi ))                                  (12)


Why Verlet integrator: The canonical coordinates employed in Newtonian mechanics are the po-
sition (q) and velocity (q̇) (or momentum) as these quantities are the direct observables. Verlet
algorithm is obtained by substracting the Taylor series expansion of r(t + ∆t) with r(t − ∆t). The
expression thus obtained is time-reversible and has error to the order of (O(∆t4 )). Due to the time-
reversible nature, Verlet algorithm is energy conserving (symplectic), and hence performs better
than other traditional integrators such as RK4 in predicting the long term trajectory of dynamical
systems without drift.

B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
P ROOF. Consider a system without any external field where the dynamics is governed by internal
forces, for instance, a n-spring system. The conservation of linear momentum for this system implies


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Figure 9: comparison of L GN and H GN with the full graph architecture.
    Pn
that i=1 dt d
                m̂ii q̇ˆi = 0, where q̇ˆi represents the predicted velocity, m̂ii represents the learned
mass of the particle i, and q̇i represents the ground truth velocity. Assume the error in the rate of
change of momentum of the predicted trajectory to be ε̂t . To prove that MCG NODE conserves the
momentum exactly, it is sufficient to prove that ε̂t = 0. Consider,
                  n              n                            n                 n         n
                 X              X   d                       X                  X         X
          ε̂t =         ε̂i,t =        m̂ii q̇ˆi − mii q̇i =     (N̂i − Ni ) =     N̂i −     Ni     (13)
                 i=1            i=1
                                    dt                       i=1               i=1       i=1
Note that inPequation 3, all terms except Ni are either known or are zero. Thus, without loss of
              n
generality, i=1 Ni = 0, in the absence of an external field. Hence,
                            n               n               ni
                                                          n X                 ni
                                                                            n X
                            X               X             X                 X    (fij + fji )
                    ε̂t =         ε̂i,t =         N̂i =             fij =                          (14)
                            i=1             i=1           i=1 j=1           i=1 j=1
                                                                                          2
                                                     (f +f )
The inductive bias fij = −fji implies that ij 2 ji = 0. Thus,
                           n
                          X    d
                                   mii q̇ˆi = ε̂t = 0                                 □
                          i=1
                              dt

C    P ERFORMANCE OF L GN AND H GN WHEN IMPLEMENT ON THE G NN OF
     G NODE .
In Fig. 9, we compare the performance of L GN and H GN implemented on the full graph net-
work (Cranmer et al., 2020b; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020) against the versions implemented on
the G NN used in G NODE. As visible, the full graph network version provides superior performance.

D    Z ERO - SHOT GENERALIZABILITY: N ODE VS G NODE VS MCG NODE
To showcase zero-shot generalizability, we compare the performance of N ODE, G NODE, MCG N -
ODE in Figure 10. In the case of N ODE, the system is trained and evaluated on each of the pendulum
and spring systems separately. In the case of G NODE and MCG NODE, the training is performed
on 5-spring and 5-pendulum system and evaluated on all other systems. First, we observe that the
performance of N ODE and G NODE are comparable for both rollout and energy error. This suggests
that the performance of G NODE, with no additional inductive bias, is comparable to that of N ODE
with the additional advantage that G NODE can generalize to any system size. Now, we compare
the performance of N ODE with MCG NODE, which has all the additional inductive biases discussed
earlier. We observe that MCG NODE performs significantly better than N ODE, as expected. It is
worth noting that while the inductive bias of explicit constraints can be infused in N ODE in a similar
fashion as in G NODE, other inductive biases such as decoupling the global and local features and
Newton’s third law are unique to the graph structure. These inductive biases cannot be infused in
a N ODE structure. This, in turn, demonstrates the superiority of G NODE which allows additional
inductive biases due to the explicit representation of the topology through the graph structure.



                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Energy error and trajectory error for N ODE, G NODE, and MCG NODE for spring and
pendulum systems with 3-,4-, and 5-links. The shaded region represents the 95% confidence interval
based on 100 forward simulations.


Figure 11: MCG NODE on 5-link spring with non-zero drag and external force with N ODE as base-
line.

E    D RAG AND EXTERNAL FORCE

Here, we evaluate the ability of MCG NODE to learn the dynamics of systems subjected to drag
linear in velocity (drag force given by −0.1q̇) and an external force. Fig. 11 shows the performance
of MCG NODE and N ODE on a 5-spring system with linear drag and external force. We observe that
the MCG NODE exhibits superior performance in both the cases.


F   T RAINING EFFICIENCY

Data Efficiency: Here, we compare the training efficiency of MCG NODE with the N ODE and
H GN. Despite our best efforts, L GN was unable to learn the dynamics from the small amount of
data provided and was exploding up on forward simulation leading to NaN values. Similar behavior
was observed on H GN with low values data points. We focus on the best graph-based architecture
and compare the performance with the baseline N ODE 5-spring and 5-pendulum systems. Figure 12
shows the performance of MCG NODE in comparison to N ODE for the dataset sizes of 100, 500,
1000, 5000, and 10000 in terms of the geometric mean of the energy error and rollout error. We
observe that the learning of MCG NODE is significantly simplified in comparison to that of N ODE—
MCG NODE exhibits orders of magnitude better performance in terms of both energy and rollout
error for both pendulum and spring systems. Further, we observe that MCG NODE performs orders
of magnitude better than H GN.
Computational Efficiency: We further compare the computation times of the training and infer-
ence phases on G NODE, MCG NODE, H GN and L GN. Tables 1-2 present the results. As visible,
MCG NODE, is the fastest on average. The difference with L GN and H GN is the highest in spring
systems. MCG NODE benefits from the inductive biases as well as the fact that the neural architec-
ture directly predicts the force (acceleration is computed from this) on each particle. In contrast,


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Training efficiency of MCG NODE in comparison with the G NODE. The shaded region
represents the 95% confidence interval based on 100 forward simulations.

                      Models      Training time (in sec)   Forward Simulation time (in sec)
                      MCG NODE           2433                            0.87
                      G NODE             6341                            1.02
                      H GN               2512                            0.76
                      L GN               55042                          14.82


                    Table 1: Training and inference times in pendulum systems.

                      Models      Training time (in sec)   Forward Simulation time (in sec)
                      MCG NODE            1576                           0.06
                      G NODE              6977                           0.10
                      H GN                14053                          0.43
                      L GN               141962                          5.81


                      Table 2: Training and inference times in spring systems.


H GN and L GN predict the Hamiltonian and Langrangian, which needs to be further differentiated to
obtain acceleration. L GN is the slowest since it requires double differentiation.


G    E RRORS ON I NTERNAL AND E XTERNAL F ORCES

In this section, we report the errors in the predicted internal and external forces on each particle of
a system. Figs. 13-16 presents the results on G NODE, MCG NODE, L GN and H GN. As visible, the
predicted force (represented using dashed lines) overlaps closely with the actual forces (solid line)
in MCG NODE (Fig. 14). While the error is also low in G NODE (Fig. 13), it is inferior to MCG NODE
showcasing the usefulness of the inductive biases. We also note that the error is the highest in L GN
(Fig. 15).


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Error in force calculation using G NODE. The solid lines represent the true force and the
dashed lines represent the predicted ones. A close overlap among the solid and dashed lines indicate
low error. Fx and Fy denote the total forces in the x and y direction respectively. Fz is always 0.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Error in force calculation using MCG NODE. The solid lines represent the true force and
the dashed lines represent the predicted ones. A close overlap among the solid and dashed lines
indicate low error. Fx and Fy denote the total forces in the x and y direction respectively. Fz is
always 0.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: Error in force calculation using L GN. The solid lines represent the true force and the
dashed lines represent the predicted ones. A close overlap among the solid and dashed lines indicate
low error. Fx and Fy denote the total forces in the x and y direction respectively. Fz is always 0.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 16: Error in force calculation using H GN. The solid lines represent the true force and the
dashed lines represent the predicted ones. A close overlap among the solid and dashed lines indicate
low error. Fx and Fy denote the total forces in the x and y direction respectively. Fz is always 0.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 17: Comparison of MCG NODE, L GN, H GN, and SymODEN. Note that SymODEN is trained
and tested for 3-,4-,5-links system, whereas in case of MCG NODE, L GN and H GN training is done
only on 5-links system and tested on 3-,4-,5-links.
H     C OMPARISON OF MCG NODE , L GN , H GN , S YM ODEN
Fig. 17 shows the performance of an additional baseline, namely, SymODE-Net (SymODEN) Zhong
et al. (2019) on 3,4,5-spring and pendulum systems. SymODE-Net being a feed-forward MLP is
transductive in nature and thus cannot do zero-shot knowledge transfer. Hence, it is trained and
tested on each system separately. We observe that the performance of SymODE-Net is comparable
to L GN but poorer than H GN and MCG NODE.

I     E XPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS
I.1   S IMULATION E NVIRONMENT

All the simulations and training were carried out in the JAX environment (Schoenholz & Cubuk,
2020; Bradbury et al., 2020). The graph architecture was developed using the jraph package (God-
win* et al., 2020). The experiments were conducted on a machine with Apple M1 chip having 8GB
RAM and running MacOS Monterey.

I.2   n-P ENDULUM

In an n-pendulum system, n-point masses, representing the bobs, are connected by rigid bars which
are not deformable. These bars, thus, impose a distance constraint between two point masses as
                                          ||qi − qi−1 || = li                                             (15)
                                                                     th          th
where, li represents the length of the bar connecting the (i − 1)            and i    mass. This constraint can
be differentiated to write in the form of a Pfaffian constraint as
                                        qi q̇i + qi−1 q̇i−1 = 0                                           (16)
Note that such constraint can be obtained for each of the n masses considered to obtain the A(q).
The mass of each of the particles is mi and the force on each bob due to the acceleration due to
gravity in mi g. This force will be compensated by the constraint forces, which in turn governs the
motion of the pendulum. For L GN, the Lagrangian of this system has contributions from potential
energy due to gravity and kinetic energy. Thus, the Lagrangian can be written as
                                       n
                                       X
                                              1/2mi q˙i T q˙i − mi gyi

                                  L=                                                                      (17)
                                        i=1

And, for H GN, the Hamiltonian is given by
                                        n
                                        X
                                              1/2mi q˙i T q˙i + mi gyi

                                  H=                                                                      (18)
                                        i=1

where g represents the acceleration due to gravity in the y direction.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I.3   n- SPRING SYSTEM

In this system, n-point masses are connected by elastic springs that deform linearly with extension or
compression. Note that similar to a pendulum setup, each mass mi is connected only to two masses
mi−1 and mi+1 through springs so that all the masses form a closed connection. Thus, the force
experienced by each bob i due to a spring connecting i to its neighbor j is fij = 1/2k(||qi −qj ||−ri ).
For L GN, the Lagrangian of this system is given by
                            Xn                  n
                                                X
                        L=               T
                                1/2mi q˙i q˙i −    1/2k(||qi−1 − qi || − r0 )2                     (19)
                             i=1                 i=1
And,for H GN, the Hamiltonian by:
                          X n                   n
                                                X
                     H=       1/2mi q˙i T q˙i +   1/2k(||qi−1 − qi || − r0 )2                      (20)
                             i=1                 i=1
where r0 and k represent the undeformed length and the stiffness, respectively, of the spring.

J     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
J.1   DATASET GENERATION

Software packages: numpy-1.22.1, jax-0.3.0, jax-md-0.1.20, jaxlib-0.3.0, jraph-0.0.2.dev
Hardware: Chip: Apple M1, Total Number of Cores: 8 (4 performance and 4 efficiency), Memory:
8 GB, System Firmware Version: 7459.101.3, OS Loader Version: 7459.101.3
For NODE, all versions of G NODE, LGN: All the datasets are generated using the known Lagrangian
of the pendulum and spring systems, along with the constraints, as described in Section I. For each
system, we create the training data by performing forward simulations with 100 random initial
conditions. For the pendulum system, a timestep of 10−5 s is used to integrate the equations of
motion, while for the spring system, a timestep of 10−3 s is used. The velocity-Verlet algorithm is
used to integrate the equations of motion due to its ability to conserve the energy in long trajectory
integration.
While for HGN, datasets are generated using Hamiltonian mechanics. Runge-Kutta integrator is
used to integrate the equations of motion due to the first order nature of the Hamiltonian equations
in contrast to the second order nature of L GN, N ODE, and all versions of G NODE.
From the 100 simulations for pendulum and spring system, obtained from the rollout starting from
100 random initial conditions, 100 data points are extracted per simulation, resulting in a total of
10000 data points. Data points were collected every 1000 and 100 timesteps for the pendulum and
spring systems, respectively. Thus, each training trajectory of the spring and pendulum systems
are 10s and 1s long, respectively. Here, we do not train from the trajectory. Rather, we randomly
sample different states from the training set to predict the acceleration.


J.2   A RCHITECTURE

For N ODE, we use a fully connected feed-forward neural network with 2 hidden layers, each having
16 hidden units with a square-plus activation function. For all versions of G NODE, graph architecture
is used with each MLP consisting of two layers with 5 hidden units. One round of message passing
is performed for both pendulum and spring. For L GN and H GN, full graph architecture is used
with each MLPs consist of two layers with 16 hidden units and one round of message passing
were performed. The hyper-parameters were optimized based on the good practices of the model
development.

J.3   E DGE FEATURES : POSITION VS VELOCITY

Figure 18 shows the loss curve with relative position and relative velocity as edge features. We
observe that when relative velocity is provided as the edge feature, model struggles to learn and
saturates quickly.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 18: Loss curve when (a) relative position is used as edge feature and (b) relative velocity is
used as edge feature.



J.4   T RAINING DETAILS

The training dataset is divided in 75:25 ratio randomly, where the 75% is used for training and 25%
is used as the validation set. Further, the trained models are tested on its ability to predict the correct
trajectory, a task it was not trained on. Specifically, the pendulum systems are tested for 1s, that is
105 timesteps, and spring systems for 20s, that is 2 × 104 timesteps on 100 different trajectories
created from random initial conditions. All models are trained for 10000 epochs. A learning rate of
10−3 was used with the Adam optimizer for the training.

•NODE

                                     Parameter                      Value
                             Hidden layer neurons (MLP)               16
                            Number of hidden layers (MLP)              2
                                 Activation function              squareplus
                                      Optimizer                    ADAM
                                    Learning rate                   1.0e−3
                                      Batch size                      100

•G NODE, CGNODE, CDGNODE, MCG NODE

                                     Parameter                         Value
                            Node embedding dimension                      5
                            Edge embedding dimension                      5
                            Hidden layer neurons (MLP)                    5
                           Number of hidden layers (MLP)                  2
                                Activation function                  squareplus
                         Number of layers of message passing              1
                                     Optimizer                        ADAM
                                    Learning rate                      1.0e−3
                                     Batch size                          100

•LGN, HGN


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 19: Plot comparing (a) relative energy error, (b) relative trajectory error, (c) absolute energy
error, (d) absolute trajectory error for the 5-Spring-MCG NODE system


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 20: Loss curve for peridynamics system using (a) MCG NODE architecture and (b) G NODE
architecture.


Figure 21: Absolute trajectory error error and absolute momentum error for peridynamics simulation
using of G NODE, and MCG NODE.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 22: Comparison of Energy violation and rollout error for 5-link pendulum using G NODE,
MCG NODE, G NODE-woV (G NODE without velocity as input) and MCG NODE-woV (MCG NODE
without velocity as input).


                                    Parameter                      Value
                           Node embedding dimension                    8
                           Edge embedding dimension                    8
                           Hidden layer neurons (MLP)                 16
                          Number of hidden layers (MLP)                2
                               Activation function               squareplus
                        Number of layers of message passing            1
                                    Optimizer                     ADAM
                                   Learning rate                   1.0e−3
                                    Batch size                       100


K    G RAPH A RCHITECTURES : G NODE , CG NODE , CDG NODE , MCG NODE

The detailed differences between each of the architectures presented in the work are as follows.

• GNODE
Summary: Graph version of N ODE that allows inductivity to unseen system sizes.
Node inputs: position (q), velocity (q̇), and type (t)
Edge inputs: wij = (qi − qj )
Node output: acceleration of each particle (q̈i ). Note that we do not use Eq. 5 here to predict q̈.
Instead, we directly predict the acceleration using q̈i = F̂ (q, q̇, t), where F̂ is the approximate
dynamics learned by the G NODE. Here, predicting force and acceleration are equivalent problems
since the acceleration is a simple scaling of the force when the masses of the particles are equal as
in the present case.
Edge output: Nil.
Architecture: Fig. 8. Here, G NODE directly predicts the acceleration and not the force although
they are equivalent problems.

                          Pn PT   T,t                 2
Loss function: L = n  1                         ˆT,t
                             i=1   t=2 q̈i − q̈i

Assumed knowns: None, since we do not use Eq. 5 here.
Inductive bias: Modeling the physical system as a graph with the particles as nodes and connections


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


between them as edges.

•CG NODE
Summary: Same as G NODE except for the property that the neural network predicts the force from
which acceleration is computed using Eq. 5.
Node inputs: Same as in G NODE
Node output: The force Ni on each particle i
Edge output: Nil, same as in G NODE
Architecture: Fig. 8
Loss function: Same as in G NODE. The acceleration is obtained using Eq. 5, where N is obtained
from the CG NODE, A(q) is assumed to be known, M is the learnable diagonal mass matrix, Π is
the known external force, C is 0, Υ is the learnable external drag. Note that unless specified, Π and
Υ is considered to be 0, that is, the system is not subjected to external force or drag. Details below.
Assumed knowns: (i) Governing equation for acceleration as given by Eq. 5. (ii) k constraints
(holonomic or Pfaffian) in the physical system represented by A(q) ∈ RkD based on the topology
and nature (rigid/deformable)) of the system. For instance, the bar in the pendulum is rigid whereas
the springs are deformable.
Inductive bias: Same as G NODE + explicit constraints as given by A(q) and acceleration as given
by Eq. 5.

•CDG NODE
Summary: Same as CG NODE except that the architecture is modified to decouple the computations
of internal and body forces. The raw node and edge inputs are the same. However, since we learn
two representations per node, global and local, these inputs are used in the following manner:
Input for global node representations: position (q) and velocity (q̇); these features are not
involved in message passing.
Input for local node representations: type (t).
Input for local edge representations: wij = (qi − qj ), i.e., same as in G NODE. Note that node
local input and edge inputs are involved in message passing.
Node output: Same as in CG NODE, but the local node output and the global node output are
concatenated and passed through an MLP to obtain the total node force (Ni ) as shown in Fig. 1. The
intuition is that the local node output represents the internal forces (for instance, the spring forces)
and the global node output represents the body forces (for instance, the gravitational force), which
when combined gives the total force on each particle. This design thus enables more expressive
power for the neural network.
Edge outputs: Nil, same as in CG NODE.
Architecture: Fig. 1.
Loss function: Same as in CG NODE.
Assumed knowns: Same as in CG NODE.
Inductive bias: Same as in CG NODE + decoupling the computation of internal forces (which
depend on the topology and is a function of the wij ) and body forces (which typically depends on
the position of the particle rather than the topology of the system, for instance, gravitational or
electromagnetic force).

•MCG NODE
Summary: Same as CDG NODE except that the architecture is modifed to enforce Newton’s third
law by incorporation of an additional MLP to predict the individual interaction forces at the edge
level.
Node global input, node local input, edge input: Same as in CDG NODE.
Edge output: Force fij on particle i due to the interaction from the neighboring
                                                                         P          particle j.
Node output: Total force Ni for each particle given by Ni = Ngi + Ni fij , where Ni represents
of the set of all the j neighbors of i and Ngi represents the force due to external fields obtained by
passing the global node output through an MLP.
Architecture: Fig. 8 with a difference that there are two MLPs, one to compute Ngi which takes
as input the global node representation and a second that takes the edge representation as input to
predict the fij . We will include a separate figure to explcitly differentiate between CDG NODE and
MCG NODE.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 23: Architecture of (a) G NODE, (b) CG NODE, CDG NODE and (c) MCG NODE. Note that
the architecture of CG NODE and CDG NODE are equivalent.


Loss function: Same as in CG NODE.
Assumed knowns: same as in CG NODE.
Inductive bias: Same as in CDG NODE + Newton’s third law, that is, the internal forces between
the particles are equal and opposite.


L   MCG NODE VS GNS
The tables 3, 4 demonstrate that GNS performs inferior to MCGNode.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Time(s)    GNS       GNODE     MCGNODE
                            0.00      0.74      0.92          0.26
                            1.00      0.88      1.00          0.28
                            2.00      0.90      1.00          0.30
                            3.00      0.89      1.00          0.36
                            4.00      0.81      1.00          0.52
                            5.00      0.84      1.00          0.80
                            6.00      0.88      1.00          0.81
                            8.00      0.88      1.00          0.76
                            9.00      0.85      1.00          0.75
                            9.90      0.84      1.00          0.70

                                    Table 3: Momentum error


                          Time(s)    GNS       GNODE     MCGNODE
                            0.00      0.00      0.00          0.00
                            1.00      1.00      0.96          0.01
                            2.00      1.00      1.00          0.02
                            3.00      1.00      1.00          0.04
                            4.00      1.00      1.00          0.06
                            5.00      1.00      1.00          0.06
                            6.00      1.00      1.00          0.09
                            7.00      1.00      1.00          0.12
                            8.00      1.00      1.00          0.16
                            9.90      1.00      1.00          0.21

                                     Table 4: Rollout error


                                               28
