Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A T HEORETICAL S TUDY OF I NDUCTIVE B IASES IN
C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING
 Jeff Z. HaoChen & Tengyu Ma
 Department of Computer Science
 Stanford University
 {jhaochen,tengyuma}@stanford.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Understanding self-supervised learning is important but challenging. Previous
         theoretical works study the role of pretraining losses, and view neural networks
         as general black boxes. However, the recent work of Saunshi et al. (2022)
         argues that the model architecture — a component largely ignored by previous
         works — also has significant influences on the downstream performance of self-
         supervised learning. In this work, we provide the first theoretical analysis of
         self-supervised learning that incorporates the effect of inductive biases originating
         from the model class. In particular, we focus on contrastive learning — a popular
         self-supervised learning method that is widely used in the vision domain. We
         show that when the model has limited capacity, contrastive representations would
         recover certain special clustering structures that are compatible with the model
         architecture, but ignore many other clustering structures in the data distribution.
         As a result, our theory can capture the more realistic setting where contrastive
         representations have much lower dimensionality than the number of clusters in the
         data distribution. We instantiate our theory on several synthetic data distributions,
         and provide empirical evidence to support the theory.


1   INTRODUCTION

Recent years have witnessed the effectiveness of pre-trained representations, which are learned
on unlabeled data with self-supervised losses and then adapted to a wide range of downstream
tasks (Chen et al., 2020a;b; He et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020c; Gao et al., 2021;
Su et al., 2021; Chen & He, 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019). However, understanding
the empirical success of this emergent pre-training paradigm is still challenging. It requires novel
mathematical frameworks and analyses beyond the classical statistical learning theory. The prevalent
use of deep neural networks in self-supervised learning also adds to the mystery.
Many theoretical works focus on isolating the roles of self-supervised losses, showing that they
encourage the representations to capture certain structures of the unlabeled data that are helpful for
downstream tasks (Arora et al., 2019; HaoChen et al., 2021; 2022; Wei et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021;
Saunshi et al., 2020). However, these works oftentimes operate in the sufficient pre-training data
(polynomial in the dimensionality) or even infinite pre-training data regime, and view the neural
network as a black box. The only relevant property of neural networks in these works is that they
form a parameterized model class with finite complexity measure (e.g., Rademacher complexity).
Recently, Saunshi et al. (2022) argue that the pre-training loss is not the only contributor to the
performance of self-supervised learning, and that previous works which view neural networks as
a black box cannot tell apart the differences in downstream performance between architectures
(e.g., ResNet (He et al., 2015) vs vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)). Furthermore,
self-supervised learning with an appropriate architecture can possibly work under more general
conditions and/or with fewer pre-training data than predicted by these results on general architecture.
Therefore, a more comprehensive and realistic theory needs to take into consideration the inductive
biases of architecture.
This paper provides the first theoretical analyses of the inductive biases of nonlinear architectures in
self-supervised learning. Our theory follows the setup of the recent work by HaoChen et al. (2021)


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   implementable                           not implementable
                           1   0.5       0

                       1   1         0   0                       1   1      1
                       1   1         0   0                       1   1      1
                       1   1         0   0                       1   1      1
                       1   1         0   0                       1   1      1
       spurious        1   1         0   0        spurious       1   1      1
      dimension        1   1         0   0       dimension       0   1      0
                       1   1         0   0                       0   1      0
                       1   1         0   0                       0   1      0
                       1   1         0   0                       0   1      0
                       1   1         0   0                       0   1      0


                    invariant dimension                        invariant dimension

Figure 1: A simple example where the linear function class learns the correct feature and
ignores the spurious feature. A simplified version of the synthetic example proposed in Saunshi
et al. (2022). The orange points are the original data and blue points are augmented data (obtained by
adding noise in the spurious dimension). The dimension invariant to augmentation is desired. Edges
represent positive pairs that are constructed from augmentation. We say a real-valued function
implements a cluster if it outputs 1 on the cluster and outputs 0 on all other data. We note that
here implementing means matching the exact value, rather than simply matching the label after
applying some linear threshold. The figure above shows two possible ways to partition the data
into two clusters, but only the one on the left-hand side (which captures the invariant dimension) is
implementable by a linear function. Here we use black numbers to indicate the target output on
the data, and green numbers to indicate the output of the implementing function which extrapolates
outside of the data support. Note that linear model is not composed with a threshold function. The
partition on the right hand side is not implementable because any linear model that outputs constant
1 on the upper-left small cluster would also output 1 on the bottom-left small cluster due to linear
extrapolation. Here we use red numbers to indicate the output of the linear function that contradicts
with the target.


on contrastive learning and can be seen as a refinement of their results by further characterizing the
model architecture’s impact on the learned representations.
We recall that HaoChen et al. (2021) shows that contrastive learning, with sufficient data and a
parameterized model class of finite complexity, is equivalent to spectral clustering on a so-called
population positive-pair graph, where nodes are augmented images and an edge between the
nodes x and x′ is weighted according to the probability of encountering (x, x′ ) as a positive pair.
They essentially assume that the positive-pair graph contains several major semantically-meaningful
clusters, and prove that contrastive representations exhibit a corresponding clustering structure in the
Euclidean space, that is, images with relatively small graph distance have nearby representations.
Their results highly rely on the clustering property of the graph—the representation dimensionality
and pre-training sample complexity both scale in the number of clusters. The important recent work
of Saunshi et al. (2022), however, demonstrates with a synthetic setting that contrastive learning
can provably work with linear model architectures even if the number of clusters is huge (e.g.,
exponential in the dimensionality). Beyond the simple synthetic example discussed in their paper,
there has been no previous work that formally characterizes this effect in a general setting.
In this work, we develop a general theory that leverages the inductive bias to avoid the dependency
on the potentially huge number of clusters: although there exists a large number of clusters in the
positive-pair graph, the number of clusters implementable by the model (which we call minimal
implementable clusters) could be much smaller, even exponentially. Figure 1 shows an example
where a linear function can only implement one clustering structure but not the other, despite both
being valid clusters in the positive-pair graph. It’s possible that a minimal implementable cluster
consists of multiple well-separated sub-clusters but none of these sub-clusters can be implemented
by the model class.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We show that contrastive representations would only recover the clustering structures that are
compatible with the model class, hence low-dimensional contrastive learned representations would
work well on the downstream tasks. Concretely, suppose the number of minimal implementable
clusters is m which can be much smaller than the number of natural clusters in the graph m̃.
HaoChen et al. (2021) prove the efficacy of contrastive learning assuming the representation
dimensionality (hence also sample complexity) is larger than m̃. We develop a new theory
(Theorem 1) that makes the representation dimensionality only depend on m instead of m̃. We
also extend this result to a more complex setting where we can deal with even more structured
clusters, e.g., when there are 2s clusters with certain geometric structures, but the representation
dimensionality can scale with only s instead of 2s . See Theorem 2 and its instantiation on Example 1
for this result.
We instantiate our theory on several synthetic data distributions and show that contrastive learning
with appropriate model architectures can reduce the representation dimensionality, allowing better
sample complexity. We consider a data distribution on a hypercube first proposed by Saunshi
et al. (2022) which contains a small subspace of features that are invariant to data augmentation
and a large subspace of spurious features. When the function class is linear, we show that the
contrastive representations can solve downstream binary classification tasks if the downstream label
only depends on one dimension of invariant features (Theorem 3). When the function class is ReLU
networks (hence more expressive), we show that the contrastive representations can solve more
diverse downstream classification problems where the label can depend on all invariant features
(Theorem 4). We also provide examples for Lipschitz-continuous function classes (Theorem 5) and
convolutional neural networks (Theorem 6).
We provide experimental results to support our theory. We propose a method to test the number of
implementable clusters of ResNet-18 on the CIFAR-10 dataset and show that there are indeed only
a small number of implementable clusters under the model architecture constraint (Section B).


2   R ELATED WORKS

The empirical success of contrastive learning has attracted a series of theoretical works that study the
contrastive loss (Arora et al., 2019; HaoChen et al., 2021; 2022; Tosh et al., 2020; 2021; Lee et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021; Nozawa & Sato, 2021; Ash et al., 2022; Tian, 2022), most of which treat
the model class as a black box except for Lee et al. (2020) which studies the learned representation
with linear models, and Tian (2022) and Wen & Li (2021) which study the training dynamics of
contrastive learning for linear and 2-layer ReLU networks.
Several theoretical works also study non-contrastive methods for self-supervised representation
learning (Wen & Li, 2022; Tian et al., 2021; Garrido et al., 2022; Balestriero & LeCun, 2022). There
are also works theoretically studying self-supervised learning in other domains such as language
modeling (Wei et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Saunshi et al., 2020).


3   F ROM CLUSTERS TO MINIMAL IMPLEMENTABLE CLUSTERS

In this section, we introduce our main theoretical results regarding the role of inductive biases of
architectures in contrastive learning. Recall that contrastive learning encourages two different views
of the same input (also called a positive pair) to have similar representations, while two random
views of two different inputs (also called a negative pair) have representations that are far from each
other. Formally, we use pdata to denote the distribution of a random view of random input, use
ppos to denote the distribution of a random positive pair, and X to denote the support of pdata . For
instance, X is the set of all augmentations of all images for visual representation learning.
Following the setup of HaoChen et al. (2022), for a representation map f : X → Rk where k is the
representation dimensionality, we learn the contrastive representation by minimizing the following
generalized spectral contrastive loss:
                                                                  2
                      Lλ (f ) := E(x,x+)∼ppos [ f (x) − f (x+ ) 2 ] + λ · R(f ),                    (1)


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          …
      A positive pair                                     …


                                                   Positive-pair graph


Figure 2: A demonstration of the positive-pair graph. When the positive pairs are formed by
applying data augmentation (such as rotation) to the same natural image, data with the same semantic
meaning (e.g., the two butterfly images) tend to belong to the same cluster in the positive-pair graph.
Datapoints with different semantic meanings (e.g., a butterfly image and a clock image) would not
be connected in the positive-pair graph, hence belongs to different clusters.


where λ > 0 is a hyperparameter indicating the regularization strength, and the regularizer
normalizes the representation covariance towards the identity matrix:
                                                                         2
                              R(f ) := Ex∼pdata [f (x)f (x)⊤ ] − I F .                             (2)
This loss is very similar to the popular Barlow Twins loss (Zbontar et al., 2021) and has been shown
to empirically work well (HaoChen et al., 2021).
Theoretically, the prior work proposes the notion of positive-pair graph with X being the vertex set
and an edge between the nodes x and x′ is weighted according to the probability of encountering
(x, x′ ) as a positive pair (i.e., ppos (x, x′ )). This graph is defined on the population data, and
intuitively captures the semantic relationship between different data — when the positive pairs are
formed by applying data augmentation to the same natural data, it is expected that datapoints in
the same cluster in the positive-pair graph would have similar semantic meanings. Figure 3 gives a
demonstration of the positive-pair graph.
Their analysis shows that learning contrastive representations with the above loss is equivalent
to spectral clustering Ng et al. (2001) on this positive-pair graph, hence can learn meaningful
representations when the graph has clustering structures.
Different from the prior work, we study the representation map that minimizes the contrastive loss
within a certain function class F. Here we assume functions in F map data in X to representations
in Rk for some dimensionality k. The main contribution of our result is the improvement of k due
to the consideration of this specific function class: by studying the representation learned within a
constrained model class F, we will show that the necessary representation dimensionality k is much
smaller than that required in the prior work. As a result, the sample complexity for the downstream
labeled task would be improved compared to the prior work.
Let {S1 , S2 , · · · , Sm } be a m-way partition of X , i.e., they are disjoint non-empty subsets of X
such that X = ∪i∈[m] Si . For any x ∈ X , let idx be the index such that x ∈ Sidx . We consider
a partition of the graph such that there is not much connection between any two clusters, which is
formalized by the following assumption.
Assumption 1 (α-separability). The probability of a positive pair belonging to two different sets is
less than α:
                                        Pr         (idx ̸= idx+ ) ≤ α.                             (3)
                                    (x,x+ )∼ppos


We consider downstream tasks that are r-way classification problems with label function y(·) : X →
[r]. We assume that the downstream task aligns with the clusters:
Assumption 2. The downstream label y(x) is a constant on each Si .
Our key assumptions about the function class are that it can implement desirable clustering structures
(Assumption 4) but cannot break the positive-pair graph into too many clusters (Assumption 3).
Let S ⊂ X be a subset of X , pSdata be the distribution pdata restricted to set S, and pSpos be the
positive pair distribution ppos conditioned on both datapoints in the pair belonging to set S. For any


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


function g : S → R, we define the following expansion quantity:
                                          E(x,x+ )∼pSpos [(g(x) − g(x+ ))2 ]
                            QS (g) :=                                               .                  (4)
                                        Ex∼pSdata ,x′ ∼pSdata [(g(x) − g(x′ ))2 ]

We let QS (g) = ∞ if the denominator is 0. Here the numerator represents the discrepancy between
a random positive pair, and the denominator represents the global variance of g. Intuitively, a smaller
value QS (g) means that function g does a better job at separating the set S into disjoint sub-clusters,
and hence implements an inner-cluster connection structure that is sparse. For instance, if S contains
two disjoint sub-clusters, and g has different constant values on each of them, then QS (g) = 0. On
the other hand, if S is densely connected, then QS (g) > 0 regardless of the choice of g.
The first assumption about the function class F assumes that no function in the class can break one
cluster into two well-separated sub-clusters:
Assumption 3 (F-implementable inner-cluster connection larger than β). For any function f ∈ F
and any linear head w ∈ Rk , let function g(x) = w⊤ f (x). For any i ∈ [m] we have that:
                                               QSi (g) ≥ β.                                            (5)

We note that when the function class F contains all the functions from X to Rk , Assumption 3
essentially says that each of {S1 , S2 , · · · , Sm } has large internal expansion, hence recovers
Assumption 3.5 in HaoChen et al. (2021). However, when F has limited capacity, each cluster
Si can still contain well-separated sub-clusters, but just those sub-clusters cannot be implemented
by functions in F.
Assumption 3 implies that the function class cannot be too expressive. However, in order for the
learned representation map to be useful for downstream tasks, it needs to be expressive enough to
represent the useful information. Thus, we introduce the following assumption on the function class.
Assumption 4 (Implementability). Recall that idx is the index such that x ∈ Sidx . There exists a
function f ∈ F such that f (x) = eidx for all x ∈ pdata where ei ∈ Rm is the vector where the i-th
dimension is 1 and other dimensions are 0.

When both Assumption 3 and Assumption 4 hold, we say {S1 , S2 , · · · , Sm } are minimal
implementable clusters with respect to F.
We also introduce the following Assumption 5 which is true for any function class implemented by
a neural network where the last layer is linear. We note that this assumption is needed only for the
technical rigour of the proof, and is not essential to the conceptual message of our theory.
Assumption 5 (Closure under scaling). For any function f ∈ F and vector u ∈ Rm , define function
f ′ (x) = u ⊙ f (x) where ⊙ means element-wise product. Then, we have f ′ ∈ F.

Let Pmin := mini∈[m] Prx∼pdata (x ∈ Si ) and Pmax := maxi∈[m] Prx∼pdata (x ∈ Si ) be the sizes
of the smallest and largest sets respectively. Under the above assumptions, we have the following
theorem that shows learning a representation map within F and representation dimensionality k =
m can solve the downstream task:
Theorem 1. Suppose {S1 , S2 , · · · , Sm } are minimal implementable clusters with respect to F (i.e.,
Assumptions 1 and 3 hold), and the function class F satisfies Assumptions 4 and 5. For λ > α/Pmin ,
consider a learned representation map fˆ = arg minf ∈F Lλ (f ) that minimizes the contrastive loss.
Then, when k = m, for any downstream task that satisfies Assumption 2, there exists a linear head
W ∈ Rr×k which achieves downstream error
                                                        2    α    Pmax
                         Ex∼pdata W fˆ(x) − ey(x) 2 ≤ ·

                                                                         .                        (6)
                                                             β Pmin − α

We note that Pmax ≈ Pmin when the partitions are balanced. Thus, so long as α ≪ Pmin (i.e., the
probability of a positive pair crossing different clusters is smaller than the probability of it containing
data from the smallest cluster), the right-hand side is roughly α/β. Thus, when the inter-cluster
connection α is smaller than the inner-cluster connection that is implementable by the function class
β, the downstream accuracy would be high.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Comparison with HaoChen et al. (2021). We note that our result requires k = m, whereas
HaoChen et al. (2021) provides analysis in a more general setting for arbitrary k that is large enough.
Thus, when the function class F is the set of all functions, our theorem recovers a special case of
HaoChen et al. (2021). Our result requires a stricter choice of k mainly because when F has limited
capacity, a higher dimensional feature may contain a lot of “wrong features” while omitting the
“right features”, which is a phenomenon that doesn’t occur when F contains all functions.

4     A N EIGENFUNCTION VIEWPOINT
In this section, we introduce an eigenfunction perspective that generalizes the theory in the previous
section to more general settings. We first introduce the background on eigenfunctions and discuss its
relation with contrastive learning. Then we develop a theory that incorporates the model architecture
with assumptions stated using the language of eigenfunctions. The advantage over the previous
section is that we can further reduce the required representation dimensionality when the minimal
implementable clusters exhibit certain internal structures.
Our theory relies on the notion of Laplacian operator L which maps a function g : X → R to
another function L(g) : X → R defined as follows.
                                                ppos (x, x′ )
                                              Z
                           L(g)(x) := g(x) −                  g(x′ )dx′ .              (7)
                                                  pdata (x)
We say a function g is an eigenfunction of L with eigenvalue ψ ∈ R if for some scalar ψ
                              Ex∼pdata (ψ · g(x) − L(g)(x))2 = 0.

                                                                                                   (8)
This essentially means that L(g) = ψ · g on the support of pdata . Intuitively, small eigenfunctions
(i.e., eigenfunctions with small eigenvalues) correspond to clusters in the positive-pair graph. To see
this, let g implement the indicator function of cluster S, i.e., g(x) = 1 if x ∈ S, and g(x) = 0 if
x∈ / S. One can verify that L(g)(x) = 0 for all x, thus g is an eigenfunction with eigenvalue 0.
In this section, we provide a generalized theory based on characterizing the implementability of
eigenfunctions. Intuitively, we will assume that there exists k (and only k) orthogonal eigenfunctions
in the function class with very small eigenvalue, and the downstream task can be solved by these
eigenfunctions. More formally, let ϕ ≥ 0 be a very small real number (can be thought as 0), and
feig (x) : X → Rk be a k-dimensional representation map in the function class F such that
                                                                   2
                              E(x,x+ )∼ppos feig (x) − feig (x+ ) 2 ≤ ϕ

                                                                                                   (9)
and
                                   Ex∼pdata feig (x)feig (x)⊤ = I.

                                                                                                  (10)

Intuitively, when ϕ is small, each dimension of feig corresponds to one eigenfunction of the graph
Laplacian with small eigenvalue, as formalized by the following Proposition 1 in the case of ϕ = 0.
Proposition 1. For any i ∈ [k] and any function feig satisfying equation 9 with ϕ = 0 and
equation 10, we have that function g(x) = feig (x)i is an eigenfunction of L with eigenvalue 0.

Recall that our assumptions in the previous section intuitively say that even though a larger number
of clusters exist in the positive-pair graph, many of them are not implementable by the function class.
From the eigenfunction viewpoint, this means that only a small number of eigenfunctions with small
eigenvalue are in the function class. Thus, we can make the following corresponding assumption
which says that the vector-valued function feig contains all the implementable eigenfunctions with
small eigenvalue.
Assumption 6. Suppose g is a function implementable by F (in the sense that g(x) = f (x)i for
some f ∈ F and i ∈ [k]) and
                        E(x,x+ )∼ppos [(g(x) − g(x+ ))2 ] ≤ ϕ̃ · Ex∼pdata g(x)2 ,

                                                                                                  (11)
then there exists w̃ ∈ Rk such that
                               Ex∼pdata (w̃⊤ feig (x) − g(x))2 ≤ ϵ.

                                                                                                  (12)
Here both ϕ̃ and ϵ are very small and can be thought as 0.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We consider downtream tasks that can be solved by feig . Let ⃗y (x) ∈ Rr be a vector that represents
the downstream label of data x (e.g., the one-hot embedding of the label when the downstream task
is classification). We have the following assumption on the downstream task:
Assumption 7. There exists a linear head W ∗ ∈ Rr×m with norm ∥W ∗ ∥F ≤ B such that
                                                               2
                                Ex∼pdata W ∗ feig (x) − ⃗y (x) 2 ≤ ζ.

                                                                                                (13)
Here ζ is very small and can be thougth as 0.

We have the following theorem using the above two assumptions:
Theorem 2. Suppose function feig ∈ F satisfies Assumptions 6 with (ϕ̃, ϵ) andpAssumption 7 with
(B, ζ). Suppose ϕ̃ > ϕ or ϕ̃ = ϕ = 0. Then, for any λ > 0 such that ϕ ≤ ϕ̃(1− ϕ/λ) and learned
representation map fˆ = arg minf ∈F Lλ (f ), there exists a linear head W ∈ Rr×k such that
                                                          2                 ϕ
                                         W fˆ(x) − ⃗y (x) 2 ≲ ζ + B 2 k ϵ +

                          Ex∼pdata                                             .                        (14)
                                                                            λ
Since ζ, ϵ and ϕ are all very small values, the RHS of equation 14 is very small, hence the learned
representation acheives small downstream error. As we will see in the first example in the next
section, Theorem 2 indeed allows the representation dimensionality to be smaller than the number
of minimal implementable clusters in the graph, hence generalizes the result in the previous section.
Relationship between Theorem 2 and Theorem 1. We note that in the setting of Theorem1,
the identity function of each minimal implementable cluster would be an achievable eigenfunction.
Theorem 2 considers a more general situation than Theorem 1 where the minimal implementable
clusters may not be well-defined, yet still we can show good results when the dimensionality is
equal to the number of achievable eigenfunctions. We will mainly use Theorem 2 for the examples
because it’s more general and easier to be used, whereas we present Theorem 1 because it’s more
intuitive to understand. For instance, in our Example 1, Theorem 1 only applies when s = 1,
whereas Theorem 2 applies for arbitrary s.

5     I NSTANTIATIONS ON SEVERAL SYNTHETIC DATA DISTRIBUTIONS
In this section, we instantiate our previous theory on several examples of data distributions and
show that when the model class has limited capacity, one can learn low-dimensional representations
using contrastive learning and solve the downstream task with simple linear probing. In all of these
examples, if we use a much more expressive model class, the representation dimensionality needs
to be much higher, and hence more downstream samples are needed. These results demonstrate the
benefit of leveraging inductive biases of the model architecture in contrastive learning.

5.1   L INEAR FUNCTIONS

Our first example is the hypercube example proposed in Saunshi et al. (2022).
Example 1. The natural data x̄ ∼ {−1, 1}d is the uniform distribution over the d-dimensional cube.
Given a natural data x̄, an augmented data x ∼ A(x̄) is sampled as follows: first uniformly sample
a scalar τ ∼ [ 12 , 1], then scale the (s + 1)-th to d-th dimensions of x̄ with τ , while keeping the first s
dimensions the same. Intuitively, the last d − s dimensions correspond to spurious features that can
be changed by data augmentation, and the first s dimensions are invariance features that contain
information about the downstream task. The downstream task is a binary classification problem,
where the label y(x) = sgn(xi ) is the sign function of one of the first s dimensions i ∈ [s].

We consider contrastive learning with the linear function class defined below:
Definition 1 (Linear function class). Let U ∈ Rk×d be a matrix and we use fU (x) = U x to denote
the linear function with weight matrix U . We define the k-dimensional linear function class as
Flinear = {fU : U ∈ Rk×d }.

Saunshi et al. (2022) directly compute the learned representations from contrastive learning. Here
we show that the example can be viewed as an instantiation of our more general Theorem 2. In
particular, we have the following result:


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 3. In Example 1, suppose we set the output dimensionality as k = s and learn a linear
representation map that minimizes the contrastive loss fˆ = arg minf ∈Flinear Lλ (f ) for any λ > 0.
Then, there exists a linear head w ∈ Rk such that
                                 Ex∼p [(w⊤ fˆ(x) − y(x))2 ] = 0.
                                      data
                                                                                                (15)
In contrast, suppose the function class is the set of universal function approximators Funi . So long
as the output dimensionality is no more than 2d−1 , there exists solution fˆ′ ∈ arg minf ∈Funi Lλ (f )
such that for any linear head w ∈ Rk , we have
                                Ex∼pdata [(w⊤ fˆ′ (x) − y(x))2 ] ≥ 1.                            (16)

We note that as an implication of the lower bound, previous works that analyze universal function
approximators (Arora et al., 2019; Tosh et al., 2021; HaoChen et al., 2021) wouldn’t be able to show
good downstream accuracy unless the representation dimensionality is larger than 2d−1 . In contrast,
our theory that incorporates the inductive biases of the function class manages to show that a much
lower representation dimensionality k = s suffices.
We also note that this example shows a situation where Theorem 2 works but Theorem 1 doesn’t,
hence demonstrating how our theory derived from the eigenfunction viewpoint allows for lower
representation dimensionality. There are 2s model-restricted minimal clusters in the graph, each
encoded by one configuration of the s feature dimensions. However, all the function in Flinear that
implment a cluster span in a s-dimensional subspace, thus we can find s-dimensional eigenfunctions
that satisfies Assumption 6. As a result, learning s-dimensional representations already suffices for
solving the downstream task.

5.2   R E LU NETWORKS

In the previous example, the downstream task is only binary classification where the label is defined
by one invariant feature dimension. Here we show that when we use a ReLU network as the model
architecture, the linear probing can solve more diverse downstream tasks where the label can depend
on the invariant feature dimensions arbitrarily.
Example 2. The natural data distribution and the data augmentation are defined in the same way
as Example 1. The downstream task is a r-way classification problem such that the label function
y(·) : X → [r] satisfies y(x) = y(x′ ) if x1:s = x′1:s . In other words, the label only depends on the
first s dimensions of the data.
Definition 2 (ReLU networks). Let U ∈ Rk×d and b ∈ Rk , we use fU,b = σ(W x + b) to denote the
ReLU network with weight U and bias b, where σ is the element-wise ReLU activation. We define
the k-dimensional ReLU network function class as FReLU = {fU,b : U ∈ Rk×d , b ∈ Rk }.

We have the following theorem which shows the effectiveness of the ReLU network architecture.
Theorem 4. In Example 2, suppose we set the output dimensionality k = 2s and learn a ReLU
network representation map fˆ = arg minf ∈FReLU Lλ (f ) for some λ > 0. Then, we can find a linear
head W ∈ Rr×k such that
                                                            2
                                         W fˆ(x) − ey(x)

                              Ex∼p    data
                                                               = 0.
                                                                2
                                                                                              (17)

In contrast, suppose the function class is the set of universal function approximators Funi . So long
as the output dimensionality is no more than 2d−s , there exists solution fˆ′ ∈ arg minf ∈Funi Lλ (f )
                                                                                   2
                                                                 W fˆ′ (x) − ey(x)    ≥ 1.

such that for any linear head W ∈ Rr×k , we have Ex∼p    data                     2     2


5.3   L IPSCHITZ CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS

In many real-world settings where a neural network is trained with weight decay, the resulting
model usually has a limited weight norm which encourages the network to have a smaller
Lipschitz constant. The implicit bias of the optimizers can further encourage the smoothness of
the learned function. Here we provide an example showing that restricting the model class to
Lipschitz continuous functions allows us to use lower dimensional representations. In particular,


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we consider the following example where a large number of clusters are located close to each
other despite being disconnected in the positive-pair graph. Our result shows that contrastive
learning with Lipschitz continuous functions would group those clusters together, allowing for lower
representation dimensionality.
Example 3. Let S1 , S2 , · · · , Sm ⊂ Rd be m manifolds in Rm , each of which may contain lots
of disconnected subsets. Suppose the radius of every manifold is no larger than ρ, that is for any
i ∈ [m] and two data x, x′ ∈ Si , we have ∥x − x′ ∥2 ≤ ρ. We also assume that different manifolds
are separated by γ, that is for any i, j ∈ [m] such that i ̸= j, and x ∈ Si , x′ ∈ Sj , we have
∥x − x′ ∥2 ≥ γ. The data distribution pdata is supported on S1 ∪ S2 ∪ · · · ∪ Sm and satisfies
Prx∼pdata (x ∈ Si ) = 1/m for every i ∈ [m]. A positive pair only contains data in the same Si .
The downstream task is a r-way classification problem such that the label function y(·) : X → [r]
satisfies y(x) = y(x′ ) if x and x′ belong to the same set Si .

We introduce the following family of Lipschitz continuous functions with parameter κ:
Definition 3 (κ-Lipschitz continuous functions). A function f ∈ Rd → Rk is κ-Lipschitz if
∥f (x) − f (x′ )∥2 ≤ κ ∥x − x′ ∥2 for all x, x′ ∈ Rd . We define the κ-Lipschtiz function class FLip,κ
as the set of all κ-Lipschitz continuous functions in Rd → Rk .

We have the following theorem:
                                         √
Theorem 5. In Example 3, suppose κ ≥ 2m/γ. Let the output dimensionality k = m and learn
a κ-Lipschitz continuous function fˆ ∈ arg minFLip,κ Lλ (f ) for some λ > 0. Then, we can find a
linear head W ∈ Rr×k such that
                                                       2
                           Ex∼pdata W fˆ(x) − ey(x) 2 ≤ 2rmκ2 ρ2 .

                                                                                            (18)
On the other hand, suppose the positive-pair graph contains m̃ disconnected clusters, and
the function class is the set of universal function approximators Funi . So long as the output
dimensionality k < m̃, there exists solution fˆ′ ∈ arg minf ∈Funi Lλ (f ) such that for any linear
                                                       2
                                     W fˆ′ (x) − ey(x)    ≥ 1.

head W ∈ Rr×k , we have Ex∼p     data                     2     m̃

We note that a smaller κ (hence smoother function class) decreases the RHS of equation 18 and
leads to better downstream performance.

6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of contrastive learning that incoporates the inductive
biases of the model class. We prove that contrastive learning with appropriate model architectures
allows for lower representation dimensionality (hence better sample complexity), and instantiate this
theory on several interesting examples. One open questions is to allow k > m in our theory, which
we believe requires additional assumptions on the structure of the family of the models. We note
that our work only concerns the inductive biases originating from the model architecture, whereas
in practice the learned representations also depend on the optimization method. Hence, another
interesting future direction would be studying how the implicit bias introduced by the optimizer
influences self-supervised learning.


R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saunshi.
  A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dipendra Misra. Investigating the role
  of negatives in contrastive representation learning. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 7187–7209. PMLR, 2022.

Randall Balestriero and Yann LeCun. Contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning
  recover global and local spectral embedding methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11508, 2022.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.09882, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, PMLR, 13–
  18 Jul 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. Big self-
  supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10029, 2020b.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.10566, pp. 15750–15758, June 2020.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020c.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08821, 2021.
Quentin Garrido, Yubei Chen, Adrien Bardes, Laurent Najman, and Yann Lecun. On the
  duality between contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.02574, 2022.
Jeff Z. HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-
   supervised deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 34:5000–5011, 2021.
Jeff Z. HaoChen, Colin Wei, Ananya Kumar, and Tengyu Ma. Beyond separability: Analyzing the
   linear transferability of contrastive representations to related subpopulations. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In arXiv prepring arXiv:1506.01497, 2015.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, June 2020.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know helps:
  Provable self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01064, 2020.
Andrew Ng, Michael Jordan, and Yair Weiss. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 14:849–856, 2001.
Kento Nozawa and Issei Sato. Understanding negative samples in instance discriminative self-
  supervised representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  5784–5797, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Nikunj Saunshi, Sadhika Malladi, and Sanjeev Arora. A mathematical exploration of why language
  models help solve downstream tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03648, 2020.

                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nikunj Saunshi, Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Dipendra Misra, Cyril Zhang, Sanjeev Arora, Sham
  Kakade, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Understanding contrastive learning requires incorporating
  inductive biases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.14037, 2022.
Yixuan Su, Fangyu Liu, Zaiqiao Meng, Tian Lan, Lei Shu, Ehsan Shareghi, and Nigel Collier. Tacl:
  Improving bert pre-training with token-aware contrastive learning, 2021.
Yuandong Tian. Deep contrastive learning is provably (almost) principal component analysis. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.12680, 2022.
Yuandong Tian, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learning dynamics
  without contrastive pairs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10268–10278.
  PMLR, 2021.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive estimation reveals topic
  posterior information to linear models. arXiv:2003.02234, 2020.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive learning, multi-view
  redundancy, and linear models. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 1179–1206. PMLR, 2021.
Yifei Wang, Qi Zhang, Yisen Wang, Jiansheng Yang, and Zhouchen Lin. Chaos is a ladder: A
  new theoretical understanding of contrastive learning via augmentation overlap. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Colin Wei, Sang Michael Xie, and Tengyu Ma. Why do pretrained language models help in
  downstream tasks? an analysis of head and prompt tuning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:16158–16170, 2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11112–11122.
  PMLR, 2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. The mechanism of prediction head in non-contrastive self-supervised
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06226, 2022.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12310–
  12320. PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A        A DDITIONAL E XAMPLES
A.1       C ONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS

Our last example shows that convolutional neural networks can learn contrastive representation
more efficiently than fully connected networks when the downstream task has a certain rotational
invariance structure. We consider the following data generative model where the data contains a
feature patch that determines the downstream label.
Example 4. The natural data x̄ ∈ Rd is defined as follows: for some consecutive s dimensions
x̄t:t+s−1 (the informative patch), we have x̄t:t+s−1 ∈ {−γ, γ}s where γ > 1. 1 The other d − s
dimensions of x̄ (spurious dimensions) are all in {−1, 1}. Given a natural data x̄, its augmentations
are generated by first sampling τ ∼ U ni[0, 1], then multiplying the spurious dimensions of x̄ by
τ , while keeping the informative patch the same. The downstream task is a r-way classification
problem such that the label function y(·) : X → [r] satisfies y(x) = y(x′ ) if the informative patches
for x and x′ are the same.

We consider the following convolutional neural network model with k channels.
Definition 4 (Convolutional neural networks). Let U = [u1 , u2 , · · · , uk ]⊤ ∈ Rk×s and b ∈ Rk .
         conv
We use fU,b   : X → Rk to represent the following convolutional neural network: fU,b     conv
                                                                                              (x)i =
Pd        ⊤
  t=1 σ(ui xt:t+s−1 + bi ), where σ is ReLU activation function. We define the convolutional neural
                         conv
network class Fconv = {fU,b   : U ∈ Rk×s , b ∈ Rk }.

We have the following theorem which shows that contrastive learning with convolutional neural
networks requires lower representation dimensionality than using fully-connected ReLU networks.
Theorem 6. In Example 4, let output dimensionality k = 2s and learn a convolutional neural
network fˆ ∈ arg minFconv Lλ (f ) for some λ > 0. Then, we can find a linear head W ∈ Rr×k such
                                  2
               W fˆ(x) − ey(x)

that Ex∼p     data
                                     = 0.
                                       2
On the other hand, suppose the function class is the set of ReLU networks FReLU , so long as the
output dimensionality is less than d × 2s , there exists a function fˆ′ ∈ arg minf ∈FReLU Lλ (f ) such
                                                                             2
                                                           W fˆ′ (x) − ey(x)    ≥ 1s.

that for any linear head W ∈ Rr×k , we have Ex∼p        data                   2      d·2


B        N UMERICAL S IMULATIONS
Recall that our assumptions intuitively state that the model architecture cannot break the data into
too many well-separated clusters. In this section, we propose a method to empirically test how many
clusters a model architecture can partition positive-pair graph of the data distribution into. Given
a deep neural network and a target number of cluster r, ideally we aim to find a function f from
the model class that maps each data point to a one-hot vector in dimension r which includes the
cluster identity. That is, f (x) ∈ {e1 , . . . , er } where ei is the i-th natural basis in Rr . With this
constraint, we minimize the disagreement between the functions outputs of a positive-pair, that is,
                                 2
E(x,x+)∼ppos [∥f (x) − f (x+ )∥2 ], which compute the amount of inter-cluster edges. However, the
one-hot vector requirement makes it challenging for optimization. Note that when the r clustering
has the same probability mass 1/r, we have E[f (x)f (x)⊤ ] = I/r. We use this equation as the
constraint of f and arrive at a relaxation of the original optimization program.
                                                               2
                 br = min E(x,x+)∼ppos [ f (x) − f (x+ ) 2 ] s.t. E[f (x)f (x)⊤ ] = I/r              (19)
Thus, we use br as a surrogate for how the architecture can partition the graph into r clusters,
and a smaller br means that it’s easier to partition. We empirically implement equation 19 by
first minimizing the contrastive loss Lλ (fθ ) with representation dimension k = r and a heavily-
tuned regularization strength λ. Then, we whiten the obtained model fθ̂ (x) to have exactly the
                                                               1        √
covariance I/r, that is, f¯(x) = Ex∼pdata [fθ̂ (x)fθ̂ (x)⊤ ]− 2 fθ̂ (x)/ r is a valid solution for the
                                                                               2
program in equation 19. We compute br = E(x,x+)∼ppos [ f¯(x) − f¯(x+ ) 2 ]. We also try various
choices of λ and pick the smallest result as the final value of the estimated br .
    1
        Here we denote x̄d+i = x̄i .


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We run this test with a ResNet-18 model on CIFAR-10 and compute the br for r ∈ {10, 100, 500}
list the results the table below. Here we note that br increases from 0.127 to 0.315 as r increases
from 10 to 500, suggesting that although the network can partition the data relatively well into 10
clusters, it cannot partion the data into 500 well-separated clusters, which supports our theoretical
assumptions. More details can be found in Appendix B.1.

                                    r     10       100       500
                                    br    0.127    0.204     0.315



B.1   A DDITION EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

We train a ResNet-18 model on CIFAR-10 training set and test the br on the test set. We train
with SGD using initial learning rate 0.01 and decays with cosine schedule. All experiments
are run for 200 epochs. We test with r ∈ {10, 100, 500} and grid search using λ ∈
{0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000}, the result for each configurate is listed in the table below.


       λ           0.1     0.3      1        3         10      30       100      300       1000
       r = 10      0.445   0.127    0.134    0.144     0.151   0.155    0.215    0.343     0.901
       r = 100     0.887   0.660    0.408    0.245     0.204   0.220    0.254    0.424     1.579
       r = 500     1.031   0.981    0.710    0.554     0.427   0.372    0.315    0.481     1.231



C     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3
Proof of Theorem 1. Let Pi := Prx∼pdata (x ∈ Si ) be the probability of Si . Let f ∗ be the function
f ∗ (x) = √ 1 eidx . From Assumption 5 and Assumption 4, we have f ∗ ∈ F.
            Pidx

We first show that f ∗ achieve small contrastive loss. For the regularizer term, we have
                                                     X         1
                       Ex∼pdata f ∗ (x)f ∗ (x)⊤ =                 · eidx e⊤

                                                         Pi ·             idx = I.                 (20)
                                                               Pi
                                                     i∈[m]

Thus, we have R(f ∗ ) = 0. For the discrepancy term, let Pmin := mini∈[m] Pi be the probability
mass of the smallest set, we have
                   h
                                       2
                                         i   1                                 α
             Ex,x+ f ∗ (x) − f ∗ (x+ ) 2 ≤       ·    Pr     (idx ̸= idx+ ) ≤      .      (21)
                                           Pmin (x,x+)∼ppos                   Pmin
Combining equation 20 and equation 21 we have
                                  h
                                                       2
                                                         i              α
                 Lλ (f ∗ ) = Ex,x+ f ∗ (x) − f ∗ (x+ ) 2 + λ · R(f ) ≤      .                      (22)
                                                                       Pmin

Since fˆ = arg minf ∈F Lλ (f ) is the minimizer of contrastive loss within the function class, we have
                                                            α
                                     Lλ (fˆ) ≤ Lλ (f ∗ ) ≤      .                                  (23)
                                                           Pmin

Define matrix
                                                h           i
                                   M := Ex∼pdata fˆ(x)fˆ(x)⊤ .                                     (24)

We have
                                            2     Lλ (fˆ)    α
                                   ∥M − I∥F ≤             ≤       .                                (25)
                                                    λ       λPmin


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since λ > Pαmin , we know that M is a full rank matrix, thus we can define function
                                                          1
                                             f˜(x) := M − 2 fˆ(x).                             (26)

Let
                                                    h             i
                                       Q := Ex∼pdata f˜(x)f ∗ (x)⊤ ,                           (27)
and
                                          πf (x) := f˜(x) − Qf ∗ (x).                          (28)

We know that
                                    h             i
  Ex∼pdata πf (x)f ∗ (x)⊤ = Ex∼pdata f˜(x)f ∗ (x)⊤ − QEx∼pdata f ∗ (x)f ∗ (x)⊤ = 0.

                                                                                               (29)

Using Assumption 3 we have:
                               h                     i
                                                   2
                   E(x,x+)∼ppos πf (x) − πf (x+ ) 2
                                                 h                    i
                    X                                               2
                  ≥     (Pi − α) · E(x,x+)∼ppos i πf (x) − πf (x+ ) 2
                     i∈[m]
                                                                 h                     i
                                                                                     2
                         X
                  ≥β ·         (Pi − α) · Ex∼pdata i ,x′ ∼pdata i ∥πf (x) − πf (x′ )∥2
                         i∈[m]
                            X                            h          i
                                                                  2
                  =2β ·             (Pi − α) · Ex∼pdata i ∥πf (x)∥2
                            i∈[m]
                                     α               h
                                                              2
                                                                i
                  =2β · (1 −             ) · Ex∼pdata ∥πf (x)∥2 .                              (30)
                                    Pmin
On the other hand, we have
                                                h              i
                                                             2
                             E(x,x+)∼ppos πf (x) − πf (x+ ) 2

                                                          2
                          ≤E(x,x+)∼ppos f˜(x) − f˜(x+ )
                                                          2

                                                                     2
                          ≤ M −1 spec · E(x,x+)∼ppos fˆ(x) − fˆ(x+ )
                                                                     2
                                 r
                                     α         α
                          ≤ 1+              ·      .                                           (31)
                                   λPmin      Pmin

Combining equation 30 and equation 31 we have
                           h          i       r
                                                 α

                                                               α
                                    2
                  Ex∼pdata ∥πf (x)∥2 ≤ 1 +              ·              .                       (32)
                                                λPmin     2β(Pmin − α)

By Lemma 1, we know that there exists a matrix U ∈ Rm×m such that
                                                          r
                                              2               α             α
                         ∗         −1/2 ˆ
            Ex∼pdata f (x) − U M        f (x)     ≤ 1+               ·                         (33)
                                              2              λPmin     2β(Pmin − α)
                                                          α
                                                  ≤              .                             (34)
                                                     β(Pmin − α)
                                   √     √           √
Thus, if we define matrix W = diag{ P1 , P2 , · · · , Pm }U M −1/2 , then we have

                                    2                                             2
           Ex∼pdata eidx − W fˆ(x)      ≤ Pmax Ex∼pdata f ∗ (x) − U M −1/2 fˆ(x)               (35)
                                            2                                              2
                                                                 α
                                                    ≤ Pmax               ,                     (36)
                                                             β(Pmin − α)
which finishes the proof.



                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 1. Suppose f : X → Rm and g : X → Rm are two functions defined on X such that
                   Ex∼pdata f (x)f (x)⊤ = Ex∼pdata g(x)g(x)⊤ = I.

                                                                                    (37)
Define the projection of f onto g’s orthogonal subspace as:
                           πf (x) = f (x) − Ex′ ∼pdata f (x)g(x)⊤ g(x).

                                                                                         (38)
Then, there exists matrix U ∈ Rm×m such that
                               h                 i         h          i
                                               2                    2
                      Ex∼pdata ∥g(x) − U f (x)∥2 = Ex∼pdata ∥πf (x)∥2 .                  (39)

Proof of Lemma 1. Let matrix
                                      U = Ex′ ∼pdata g(x)f (x)⊤ .

                                                                                         (40)
We have
                  h                  i
                                   2
          Ex∼pdata ∥g(x) − U f (x)∥2                                                     (41)
                  h        i
                         2
         =Ex∼pdata ∥g(x)∥2 − 2Ex∼pdata g(x)⊤ U f (x) + Ex∼pdata f (x)⊤ U ⊤ U f (x)

                                                                                         (42)
                          2       2
         =m − 2 ∥U ∥F + ∥U ∥F                                                            (43)
                  2
         =m − ∥U ∥F .                                                                    (44)
On the other hand, we have
                h           i
                          2
       Ex∼pdata ∥πf (x)∥2                                                                (45)
                h               2
                                  i
     =Ex∼pdata f (x) − U ⊤ g(x) 2                                                        (46)
                h         i
                        2
     =Ex∼pdata ∥f (x)∥2 − 2Ex∼pdata f (x)⊤ U ⊤ g(x) + Ex∼pdata g(x)⊤ U U ⊤ g(x)

                                                                                         (47)
                  2
      =m − ∥U ∥F .                                                                       (48)
Thus, we have
                                  h                  i         h          i
                                                   2                    2
                          Ex∼pdata ∥g(x) − U f (x)∥2 = Ex∼pdata ∥πf (x)∥2 ,              (49)
which finishes the proof.

D    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4
Proof of Proposition 1. Define function
                                                   p
                                        g̃(x) =        pdata (x)g(x).                    (50)
Define the symmetric Laplacian operator
                                                       ppos (x, x′ )
                                               Z
                          L(g̃)(x)
                          e        = g̃(x) −       p         p            g̃(x′ )dx′ .   (51)
                                                    pdata (x) pdata (x′ )
It can be verified that
                                          Z
                                               g̃(x)L(g̃)(x)
                                                    e        = 0.                        (52)
                                           x

Notice that the operator L
                         e is PSD, we have that
                                        Z
                                                     2
                                          (L(g̃)(x))
                                           e           = 0,                              (53)
                                               x
which is equivalent to
                                       Ex∼pdata (L(g̃)(x))2 = 0,

                                                                                         (54)
hence finishes the proof.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Theorem 2. Notice that Lλ (feig ) ≤ ϕ, we know that Lλ (fˆ) ≤ ϕ, so
                                          h           i     2     ϕ
                               Ex∼pdata fˆ(x)fˆ(x)⊤ − I ≤ .                                                    (55)
                                                            F     λ

In Assumption 6, set f = fˆ and sum over i = 1, 2, · · · , k, we have that for some matrix W̃ ,

                                                               2
                             Ex∼pdata W̃ feig (x) − f (x)ˆ         ≤ kϵ.                                       (56)
                                                                       2


Let matrix Q := Ex∼pdata [fˆ(x)fˆ(x)⊤ ], we have that
                                                                              r !
                                    2      2ϕ                   2     2ϕ       ϕ
    Ex∼pdata Q−1/2 fˆ(x) − fˆ(x)         ≤     · Ex∼pdata fˆ(x)     ≤    k 1+     .                            (57)
                                    2       λ                   2      λ       λ
Thus,
                                                                                       r !
                                                            2               4ϕ          ϕ
                 Ex∼pdata       W̃ feig (x) − Q−1/2 fˆ(x)           ≤ 2kϵ +    k 1+        .                   (58)
                                                            2                λ          λ

Define matrix
                                                h                     i
                                   M := Ex∼pdata feig (x)Q−1/2 fˆ(x)⊤                                          (59)

Using Lemma 1 and equation 58 we have
                                                           r !
                                       2           4ϕ       ϕ          8ϕ
                             −1/2 ˆ
     Ex∼pdata feig (x) − M Q     f (x)     ≤ 2kϵ +    k 1+     ≤ 2kϵ +    k.                                   (60)
                                       2            λ       λ           λ
Thus, using Assumption 7, we have

                                          2
                 ∗     −1/2 ˆ
    Ex∼pdata W M Q          f (x) − ey(x)                                                                      (61)
                                                 2

                 h
                                          2
                                            i                                                          2
    ≤2Ex∼pdata       W ∗ feig (x) − ey(x) 2 + 2Ex∼pdata             W ∗ M Q−1/2 fˆ(x) − W ∗ feig (x)           (62)
                                                                                                       2
                       16ϕ 2
    ≤2ζ + 4B 2 kϵ +       B k.                                                                                 (63)
                        λ



E     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5
E.1     P ROOF FOR E XAMPLE 1
                                                      ⊤
Proof of Theorem 3. Define Û = [e1 , e2 , · · · , es ] ∈ Rs×d . We can verify that
                                            h                       i
                                                                  2
                           E(x,x+ )∼ppos fÛ (x) − fÛ (x+ ) 2 = 0                                             (64)

and
                                       Ex∼pdata fÛ (x)fÛ (x)⊤ = I.

                                                                                                               (65)
Thus, we can view fÛ as the feig in Section 4.
Let U ∈ Rk×d and i ∈ [k] such that
                                 E(x,x+ )∼ppos [(fU (x)i − fU (x+ )i )2 ] = 0.                                 (66)
Notice that x and x+ only differs on the s + 1-th to d-th dimensions, we know that Ui is 0 on the
s + 1-th to d-th dimensions. Thus, we have that Ui is in the span of e1 , e2 , · · · , es , and as a result
Assumption 6 holds with ϵ = 0.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since the downstream task’s label is equal to xi for i ∈ [s], we can set W ∗ = e⊤
                                                                                i and we would have
                                          ∗                    2

                              Ex∼pdata (W fÛ (x) − ⃗y (x)) = 0.                               (67)
Hence Assumption 7 holds with α = 0 and B = 1.
Applying Theorem 2 finishes the proof for the linear function class case.
For the case of universal function approximators, without loss of generality we assume the
downstream task’s label only depends on the first dimension of x, i.e., y(x) = sgn(x1 ). When
k ≤ 2d−1 ,√we can construct a function f : X → Rk such that for every diemnsion j ∈ [k], we have
f (x)j = k when x2:d viewed as a binary number equals to j, otherwise f (x)j = 0. It can be
verified that Lλ (f ) = 0 hence f is a minimizer of the contrastive loss. However, f (x) is agnostic to
the first dimension of x, hence the downstream error is at least 1.

E.2   P ROOF FOR E XAMPLE 2

Proof of Theorem 4. For any vector h ∈ {−1, 1}s , we define function bin(h) ∈ {0, 1, · · · , 2s − 1}
be the function that maps h to the corresponding number when viewing 21 (h + 1) as binary. Since
bin(·) is a one-to-one mapping,
                           √ we can    define U ∈ {k × d} such that the i-th row of U satisfies: the
                                    −1
first s dimensions equal to k · bin (i √ − 1), and the rest d − s dimensions
                                                                        √ are 0. Let bias vector
b ∈ Rk such that every dimension is − k · (r − 1). We have fU,b (x) = k · ebin(x1:s )+1 ∈ Rk .
                                                                                      2
Since Ex∼pdata [fU,b (x)fU,b (x)⊤ ] = I and E(x,x+ )∼ppos [∥fU,b (x) − fU,b (x+ )∥2 ] = 0, we can view
fU,b as the feig in Section 4. Assumption 7 naturally hold wihth B = 1.
For Assumption      6, consider a function         fU ′ ,b′ ∈ FReLU and index i ∈ [k] such that
E(x,x+ )∼ppos (fU ′ ,b′ (x)i − fU ′ ,b′ (x+ )i )2 = 0. Suppose there exist x̄ ̸= x̄′ and their


augmentations x, x′ such that fU ′ ,b′ (x)i > fU ′ ,b′ (x′ )i . Then, there must be (Ui )r+1:d ̸= 0 and
σ(Ui⊤ x) > 0. This suggests that there must exist another x̃ which is also an augmentation of x̄ but
σ(Ui⊤ x) ̸= σ(Ui⊤ x̃). Hence, we have
                             E(x,x+ )∼ppos (fU ′ ,b′ (x)i − fU ′ ,b′ (x+ )i )2 > 0,

                                                                                                   (68)
leading to contradiction. Hence, we know that fU ′ ,b′ (x)i = fU ′ ,b′ (x′ )i , so (fU ′ ,b′ )i can only be a
function of x1:s . Therefore, there exists a vector w ∈ Rk such that fU ′ ,b′ (x)i = w⊤ fU,b (x), which
means Assumption 6 holds with ϵ = 0. Applying Theorem 2 finishes the proof for equation 17.
The result about universal function approximators follows the same proof as for Theorem 3 execpt
for constructing the function using the last (d−s) dimensions rather than the last (d−1) dimensions.


E.3   P ROOF FOR E XAMPLE 3
                                                                                            √
Proof of Theorem 5. Let idx be the index such that x ∈ Sidx , and define function feig (x) = m·eidx .
It can be verified that feig satisfies equation 9 and equation 10. For f ∈ FLip,κ and i ∈ [m], define
g(x) = f (x)i . P Suppose Ex∼pdata [g(x)2 ] = 1, we can chooose m data x1 , x2 , · · · , xm such that
xi ∈ Si and m i∈[m] g(xi )2 ≤ 1. Define vector w̃ ∈ Rm such that w̃i = √1m · g(xi ). We have
              1

                                                       1 X
                Ex∼pdata (w̃⊤ feig (x) − g(x))2 =             Ex∼Si (g(xi ) − g(x))2

                                                                                                 (69)
                                                      m
                                                           i∈[m]
                                                      1 X 2 2
                                                    ≤    κ ρ = κ 2 ρ2 .                                 (70)
                                                      m
                                                           i∈[m]

Thus, feig satisfies Assumption 6 with ϵ = κ2 ρ2 .

          √ in the same Si have the same downstream label, we know that Assumption 7 holds
Since the data
with B = r and α = 0. Thus, applying Theorem 2 finishes the proof for the upper bound.
For the lower bound, Let set S̃ be the set among those m̃ clusters that has the largest size. When
k < m̃, we can construct a function that maps all data in S̃ to 0, hence the final error would be at
      1
least m̃ .


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.4    P ROOF FOR E XAMPLE 4

Proof of Theorem 6. For any vector h ∈ {−1, 1}s , we define function bin(h) ∈ {0, 1, · · · , 2s − 1}
be the function that maps h to the corresponding number when viewing 21 (h + 1) as binary.
Since bin(·) is
              √
                 a one-to-one mapping, we can define U ∈ {k × s} such that the i-th row of
U equal to γ−1 · bin−1 (i − 1). Let bias vector b ∈ Rk be such that every dimension is
                k
 √
   k
                                                   √
                                        conv
γ−1 (−s − (γ − 1)(s − 1)). We have fU,b (x) =        k · ebin(xt:t+s−1 )+1 ∈ Rk , where t is the starting
                                                                            conv
position of the informative patch in x. It can be verified that Ex∼pdata [fU,b       conv
                                                                                 (x)fU,b  (x)⊤ ] = I and
                                            2
                 conv        conv +
E(x,x+ )∼ppos [ fU,b  (x) − fU,b (x ) ] = 0. Also, Assumption 7 holds with B = 1 when viewing
                                      2
         conv
feig = fU,b .
Suppose some function fÛconv
                           ,b̂
                               and dimension i ∈ [k] satisfies
                                                                       2
                                                         conv +
                       E(x,x+ )∼ppos fÛconv,b̂
                                                (x)i − fÛ ,b̂
                                                               (x ) i      = 0.                                (71)

Then, we know that for any x ∈ pdata , suppose we define x̃ as the vector that replaces spurious
dimensions of x with 0. Notice that x̃ is in the support of x’s augmentations, and the model is
continuous, we know fÛconv
                         ,b̂
                             (x)i = fÛconv
                                         ,b̂
                                             (x̃)i Further notice that for any two data x, x′ with the same
informative patch (location might be different) and corresponding x̃, x̃′ , there must be fÛconv        ,b̂
                                                                                                             (x̃)i =
  conv ′                                                                                               conv
fÛ ,b̂ (x̃ )i due to the structure of the convolutional neural networks. Thus, We have fÛ ,b̂ (x)i =
fÛconv
     ,b̂
         (x′ )i . This suggests that the funciton fÛconv
                                                       ,b̂
                                                                                   conv
                                                           (·)i is in the span of fU,b  , hence finishes the proof
for the upper bound.
For the lower bound, we note that due to the lack of invariance to informative patch location, we
can construct a network with d · 2s -dimensional output that satisfies equation 9 and equation 10.
When then output dimension is less than d · 2s , there would exist a minimizer of the contrastive loss
that merges two of these d · 2s clusters. If these two clusters have different downstream label, there
                    1
would be at least d·2 s loss incurred due to the data being mapped to the same feature, hence finishes
the proof for the lower bound.


                                                        18
