Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


W HAT D O
S ELF -S UPERVISED V ISION T RANSFORMERS L EARN ?
 Namuk Park1∗ Wonjae Kim2 Byeongho Heo2                     Taekyung Kim2      Sangdoo Yun2
 1
   Prescient Design, Genentech 2 NAVER AI Lab
    park.namuk@gene.com        {wonjae.kim,bh.heo,taekyung.k,sangdoo.yun}@navercorp.com



                                                A BSTRACT
             We present a comparative study on how and why contrastive learning (CL) and
             masked image modeling (MIM) differ in their representations and in their per-
             formance of downstream tasks. In particular, we demonstrate that self-supervised
             Vision Transformers (ViTs) have the following properties: (1) CL trains self-
             attentions to capture longer-range global patterns than MIM, such as the shape of
             an object, especially in the later layers of the ViT architecture. This CL property
             helps ViTs linearly separate images in their representation spaces. However, it
             also makes the self-attentions collapse into homogeneity for all query tokens and
             heads. Such homogeneity of self-attention reduces the diversity of representations,
             worsening scalability and dense prediction performance. (2) CL utilizes the low-
             frequency signals of the representations, but MIM utilizes high-frequencies. Since
             low- and high-frequency information respectively represent shapes and textures,
             CL is more shape-oriented and MIM more texture-oriented. (3) CL plays a crucial
             role in the later layers, while MIM mainly focuses on the early layers. Upon these
             analyses, we find that CL and MIM can complement each other and observe that
             even the simplest harmonization can help leverage the advantages of both methods.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Contrastive Learning (CL) (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a;b; 2021) has been the most popular
self-supervised learning methods until recently. It aims to learn the invariant semantics of two random
views (Tian et al., 2020a;b) by making global projections of representations similar for positive
samples and dissimilar for negative samples. Since CL exploits the globally projected representations
to contrast each other, it can be deemed as an “image-level” self-supervised learning approach.
Deviating from CL, masked image modeling (MIM) (Bao et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022b; He et al.,
2022) has risen as a strong competitor of CL in the era of Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021) with its impressive performances of downstream tasks. MIM trains ViTs by reconstructing
the correct semantics of masked input patches. Unlike CL, it learns the semantics of patch tokens and
this can be deemed as a “token-level” self-supervised learning approach. Since MIM outperforms CL
in fine-tuning accuracy, it may appear prima facie as a more effective pre-training method than CL.
However, a different trend is observed for linear probing accuracy with CL outperforming MIM (See
Figure 1). For further exposition on CL and MIM, we refer the reader to Appendix B.
Then, which method—CL or MIM—should we use for the self-supervised learning of ViTs? Although
both methods are widely used, little is known about what they learn. This paper sheds light on their
nature by showing that ViTs trained through CL and MIM learn opposite knowledge. In particular,
we raise questions to better understand self-supervised learning, and then find the answers that can
potentially affect future improvements. The questions posed can be divided into the following proper-
ties of Vision Transformers: the behavior of self-attentions, the transformation of the representations,
and the position of lead role components. Our key questions and findings are elaborated below.
How do self-attentions behave? (Section 2) We find that CL primarily captures global relationships,
while MIM captures local relationships. This implies that the representations of CL contain more
global patterns, such as object shapes, than those of MIM. On the one hand, this property helps
    ∗
        Most of this work was done while the author was at NAVER AI Lab.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              83.75 SimMIM                                                        MAE                                            MAE
                                                          85.0             BEiT                          83.5
                               MAE                              DINO                  MoCo
Fine-tuning


                                            Fine-tuning
              83.50                                       80.0 MoCo                                               MoCo            BEiT


                                                                                              ImageNet
                                                                           SimMIM                        83.0
              83.25 BEiT            MoCo                  75.0
              83.00                                       70.0
                                                                                                         82.5
              82.75                  DINO                 65.0                                                    Supervised
                      60       70                                Ti    S          B     L H                     48.0      49.0   50.0
                       Linear Probing                                  Model Size                                        COCO
Figure 1: CL outperforms MIM in linear probing and small model regimes. In contrast, MIM
excels in fine-tuning, large model regimes, and dense prediction. Red squares (■) denote CL, and
blue triangles (▲) denote MIM. By default, we report the performance of ViT-B trained or pre-
trained on ImageNet-1K. We use the results from original papers and He et al. (2022) for object
detection. Regarding the scaling experiment, we report the results that we reproduced based on
official configurations except with 100 epochs, marking them as MoCo† and SimMIM† . Left: CL
outperforms MIM in linear probing but underperforms in fine-tuning. Middle: CL outperforms MIM
in small model regimes (ViT-Ti and ViT-S), and MIM shows superior scalability in large model
regimes (ViT-L and ViT-H). Right: MIM outperforms CL in the dense prediction downstream tasks,
such as object detection with Mask R-CNN (He et al., 2017) on COCO (Lin et al., 2014).

CL recognize objects and distinguish images. On the other hand, however, it also suggests that CL
struggles to preserve local information. In particular, we observe that self-attentions of CL in the
later layers for all query tokens and heads collapse into homogeneous attention maps. In such cases,
most self-attention maps focus on object boundaries, meaning that they can capture object shapes but
may lose interaction diversity between tokens. Consequently, CL and MIM each have advantages
over different tasks: CL works well for linear probing and classification tasks with smaller models,
whereas MIM outperforms CL in fine-tuning and dense prediction tasks with larger models.
How are representations transformed? (Section 3) CL transforms representations mainly based on
image-level information, and its self-attentions collect information on object shape over entire tokens.
This process makes tokens similar rather than diversifying them. As a result, CL distinguishes images
well but has difficulty distinguishing tokens. On the contrary, MIM preserves and amplifies token-level
information. Thus, the self-attentions for each token are substantially different and prohibit each
token from including redundant information. We observe the consistent property from our Fourier
analysis: CL primarily utilizes the low-frequency signals, but MIM utilizes high-frequencies. This
observation suggests that CL is shape-biased and MIM is texture-biased. In sum, self-supervised
models trained with CL and MIM learn the representations in different levels of detail.
Which components play an important role? (Section 4) Analyses of the importance of each CL
and MIM layer demonstrate that the later layers in CL and early layers in MIM play a key role. We
interpret this as a consistent observation since early layers are usually known to capture low-level
features—e.g., local patterns, high-frequency signals, and texture information—and later layers
capture global patterns, low-frequency signals, and shape information (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021;
Raghu et al., 2021; d’Ascoli et al., 2021; Graham et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2021; Park & Kim, 2022b).
From the above analyses and insights, we find that CL and MIM can complement each other and
show in Section 5 that even the simplest implementation, such as a linear combination of CL and
MIM objectives, can take advantage of both methods. Surprisingly, the hybrid models outperform
those pre-trained with either CL or MIM both in terms of fine-tuning and linear probing accuracy.

2             H OW D O S ELF -ATTENTIONS B EHAVE ?
We point out that CL and MIM may not be silver bullets for all tasks, as shown in Figure 1. CL
generally outperforms MIM in linear probing, while MIM dominates CL in the fine-tuning scheme.
However, when we dissect the size of the model, CL outperforms MIM after fine-tuning for small
models (cf. (Wang et al., 2022)), while MIM performs better on large models. Also, MIM yields
effective representations for dense prediction tasks, such as object detection, but CL falls short on
those tasks. This section explains these phenomena by investigating the behavior of self-attentions.


                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      !ery 1
                      !ery 2
                               Depth = 1   Depth = 4   Depth = 11   Depth = 1                             Depth = 4     Depth = 11

                                           (a) MoCo                                                      (b) SimMIM

Figure 2: Self-attentions of CL (MoCo) capture global relationships, but they collapse into
homogeneous attention maps for all query tokens and heads. Self-attentions of MIM (SimMIM)
mainly focus on local areas. We visualize the attention maps for two different query tokens in the
beginning through the end layers. We omit the results for self-attention heads, which show mostly
consistent results. Left: Self-attentions of CL capture global patterns and the shape of an object.
However, all attention maps capture the same shape information regardless of the query tokens. Right:
Self-attentions of MIM capture local patterns and are correlated with query tokens.

Our analyses mainly compare ViT-B/16 pre-trained on ImageNet-1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015) with
MoCo v3 (Chen et al., 2021) and SimMIM (Xie et al., 2022b). We use the ImageNet validation
images for our experiments. We observe that other methods, e.g., DINO (Caron et al., 2021), BEiT
(Bao et al., 2022), and MAE (He et al., 2022), have consistent properties (See Figure C.1).

CL mainly captures global relationships. We measure the              Attention distance (px)
ranges of self-attentions via attention distance (Dosovitskiy
                                                                                               100
et al., 2021). Attention distance is defined as the average dis-
tance between the query tokens and key tokens considering their                                 75
self-attention weights. Therefore, it conceptually corresponds
to the size of the receptive fields in CNNs.                                                    50
Figure 3 shows that the attention distance of CL (MoCo) is sig-                                 25         MoCo
nificantly higher than that of MIM (SimMIM), especially in the                                             SimMIM
                                                                                                 0
later layers. As seen in Figure 2, the qualitative visualization,                                    1              6           11
this implies that the representations of CL contain global pat-                                                  Depth
terns and shape information, so CL can help ViTs distinguish
between objects of images. Conversely, the self-attentions of       Figure 3: Effective receptive fields of
MIM mainly capture local relationships; i.e., MIM may have          CL are global, but those of MIM are
difficulty recognizing whole objects and their shapes. Section 3    local. This is particularly evident in the
also discuss this claim from a representational perspective.        later layers.


Self-attentions of CL collapse into homogeneity. We ob-
serve an interesting behavior of CL in Figure 2, which shows                                               MoCo
                                                                                                           SimMIM
                                                                    Normalized MI


the attention maps for query tokens from two different spatial
locations. The self-attentions of CL surprisingly indicate almost                          0.4
identical object shapes for the two query tokens, compared to
that of MIM. We describe this phenomenon as an attention
                                                                                           0.2
collapse into homogeneity. This collapsing trend in the self-
attentions of CL is observed across all the heads and query
tokens. In contrast, the self-attentions of MIM are more faithful                          0.0
to the two query tokens, as expected.                                                                1              6          11
                                                                                                                Depth
We use normalized mutual information (NMI) (Strehl & Ghosh,
2002) to measure the attention collapse. Let p(q) be a distribu- Figure 4: Self-attentions of CL have
tion of query tokens, and assume that these query tokens are little to do with query tokens. Nor-
uniformly distributed since a single query token is given for malized MI of CL is significantly lower
                                                                 than that of MIM in the later layers.
each spatial coordinate, i.e., p(q) = 1/N where N is the number
of the tokens. Then the joint distribution of query and key tokens is p(q, k) = π(k|q)p(q) where


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                1.00                                                 1.00
             0.25                                                                                                                       MoCo (B)
                                                                                                                                        SimMIM (B)
             0.20                                               0.95


                                                                                                        Similarity
Similarity                                                                                                           0.80


                                                   Similarity
             0.15                                               0.90
                           MoCo (B)                                                  MoCo (B)
             0.10          MoCo (S)                             0.85                 MoCo (L)                        0.60
                           SimMIM (B)                                                SimMIM (B)
             0.05          SimMIM (S)                                                SimMIM (L)
                                                                0.80
                    0.0            0.5       1.0                       0.0           0.5          1.0                       0.0         0.5          1.0
                          Normalized depth                                   Normalized depth                                     Normalized depth
                      (a) Between heads                                 (b) Between depths                                  (c) Between tokens

Figure 5: CL lacks representational diversity in the later layers. We measure cosine similarities of
representations in the self-attentions between the heads (left), depths (middle), and spatial coordinates
(right). All of the results show that the representational similarity of later self-attentions of CL is
higher than that of MIM. Increasing heads or depths of CL is not effective in improving the diversity.
Left: The similarity of representations from two heads in self-attention. Middle: The similarity
between representations before and after self-attentions transform them. Right: The similarities of
representations at two spatial coordinates. ViT-{S, L} is trained with 100 epochs.

π(k|q) is the softmax-normalized self-attention matrix. Thus, the normalized mutual information is
√ I(q,k)    where I(·, ·) is the mutual information and H(·) is the marginal entropy. Low mutual
       H(q)H(k)
information values show that attention maps are less dependent on the query tokens, implying an
attention collapse into homogeneity. Conversely, high mutual information means that the attention
maps strongly depend on the query tokens.
Figure 4 shows the degree of attention collapse in terms of the normalized mutual information (NMI).
Results show that the mutual information of CL is significantly lower than that of MIM in the later
layers, suggesting that the self-attentions of CL tend to collapse into homogeneous distributions.

Attention collapse reduces representational diversity. We conjecture that the self-attention col-
lapse into homogeneity eventually leads to homogeneous token representations. To support this
argument, we measure representational cosine similarities. In particular, we design three similarities:
between different self-attention heads (heads), between the before and after self-attention layers
(depths), and between different tokens (tokens).
Figure 5 shows the results, reporting the representation similarities for heads, depths, and tokens. As
expected, the similarities of CL are notably higher than those of MIM in the later layers, indicating
that the representations of CL have significant homogeneity. Even increasing the model size does not
solve the problem CL has and may rather worsen it. Increasing the number of heads (ViT-S to ViT-B;
Figure 5a) improves the representational diversity of MIM, but hardly improves the diversity of CL.
Increasing the depth of CL (ViT-B to ViT-L; Figure 5b) only adds redundant modules.

Implications of the behaviors we observed. In conclusion, the self-attention of CL captures global
patterns and shapes of objects. However, CL suffers from the problem of attention collapse into
homogeneity, which reduces the diversity of token representations. On the other hand, MIM primarily
captures local patterns and thus does not suffer from the attention collapse problem.
The behaviors mentioned above can explain the phenomena we observed in Figure 1:

    • CL outperforms MIM in linear probing tasks because it captures shapes, which helps recognize ob-
      jects and distinguish images. Although MIM preserves the texture and diversity of representations,
      their correlation with objects or content may not be as strong as shapes do.
    • The attention collapse prohibits CL from fully exploiting heads, depths, and tokens of ViTs.
      Since homogeneous representations are not very helpful in improving token representations, ViTs
      trained with CL waste a large part of network capability. Therefore, the fine-tuning accuracy of
      MIM is significantly higher than CL in large models.
    • CL is not suitable for dense prediction since the token features are homogeneous with respect to
      their spatial coordinates.


                                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        A!er                Before
                                                                                    A!er

                                                ✕
                                                    ✕
                     A!er



        Before                                                ✕
                                                             ✕
                                                                         Before



      (a) MoCo (one image)              (b) MoCo (two images)             (c) SimMIM (one image)

Figure 6: Self-attention layers of CL and MIM transform representations differently. We visu-
alize 196 spatial representation tokens for an example validation image in a representation space. The
blue (•) and red (•) data points denote the tokens before and after the self-attention transformation.
Left: The self-attentions of CL (e.g., MoCo) translate all the tokens equally, so the distances between
the tokens of an image do not increase. Middle: However, CL moves the “centers of representations
(represented by ×)” away from each other. Therefore, the images are linearly separable. The circle
(•) and triangle (4) data represent tokens from different images. Right: The self-attentions of MIM
(e.g., SimMIM) transform representations differently according to query tokens, thus increasing the
distances between tokens. See Figure 7 for quantitative analyses.

We further investigate the self-attention’s behavior with restricted receptive fields in Figure D.1. As
shown in the experiment, locally restricted self-attentions lead to lower linear probing but higher
fine-tuning accuracy, which is consistent with our observations.


3    H OW A RE R EPRESENTATIONS T RANSFORMED ?

In this section, we analyze the token representations of ViTs pre-trained with CL and MIM to
demonstrate how the properties of self-attentions we observed in Section 2 affect the representations
differently. We use the same pre-trained ViT-B/16 models by default default just as we did in Section 2.

CL transforms all tokens in unison, while MIM does so individually. To show how CL and
MIM transform token representations, we visualize them in representation space. Figure 6 shows
196 (14×14 patches) tokens before and after self-attention modules from a single image sample
of the ImageNet validation set. We use the three large singular vectors obtained via singular value
decomposition (SVD) as the bases of the space. To better visualize this, we display the representation
of MoCo and SimMIM in their crucial layers—the last layer and the first layer, respectively.
Figure 6a visualizes the changes that occur in the tokens of CL when transformed by self-attention
module; it indicates that the self-attentions of CL translate all tokens in unison. This phenomenon
occurs because the self-attention maps of CL are homogeneous, i.e., self-attention is almost indepen-
dent of the spatial coordinates and query tokens. Therefore, the modules add near-constant to all the
token representations. As a result, the inter-representation distance and the volume of representations
do not increase, which implies that CL cares less about individual tokens.
Nevertheless, self-attentions are essential for the discriminative power of CL. As shown in Figure 6b,
they help distinguish images by moving “the centers of the representation distribution” away from
each other. In short, this figure suggests that CL makes the image linearly separable even though it
loses the ability to distinguish tokens.
In contrast, MIM applies a different transformation to individual tokens, as shown in Figure 6c,
because different self-attentions are assigned to the individual spatial tokens. Thus, MIM alters the
distance between tokens of a single image as well as the volume of the representation distribution.
We find consistent results in quantitative analysis. Inspired by Jing et al. (2022), Figure 7 visualizes
singular value spectra for tokens and images. A singular value spectrum provides singular values of a
representation distribution obtained by SVD, so we can use it to represent the effective volume of
distributions in a representation space. The higher the singular value in a spectrum, the larger the


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                             -3.0


                                                                        Log singular value
                          MoCo                 SimMIM                                                                    MoCo
                                                            10                                                           SimMIM

                                                                                             -3.5


                                                                Depth
                                                            5

                                                                                             -4.0
                                                            0
                                                                                                    1           6           11
                                                                                                              Depth
                   (a) Singluar value spectum of tokens from a single image (token-level)

                                                                                              -2.0


                                                                        Log singular value
                          MoCo                 SimMIM                                                       MoCo
                                                            10                                              SimMIM
                                                                                              -4.0


                                                                Depth
                                                            5                                 -6.0
                                                                                              -8.0
                                                            0
                                                                                             -10.0
                                                                                                        1            6       11
                                                                                                                Depth
                            (b) Singluar value spectum of images (image-level)

Figure 7: CL barely changes or even decreases the distribution volume of tokens from a single
image, implying that it hardly distinguishes between token. Instead, it significantly increases the
distribution volume of images. To demonstrate these properties, we visualize singular value spectra,
the singular values of the distribution of representations sorted by the magnitude. The higher a
singular value, the larger the volume of a distribution. The right of this figure shows the 64th and
128th highest singular value for depth. Top: Singular value spectra of tokens from a single image. CL
decreases the singular values of the tokens, but MIM increases. Bottom: Singular value spectra of
images. CL significantly increases the volumes occupied by images, but MIM hardly does so.

volume of a representation distribution. To calibrate the scale, we use the relative log singular value
(∆ Log singular value), the difference with the (second) largest singular value for a depth.
Figure 7a shows singular value spectra of tokens from a single image. We calculate them for each
image in the ImageNet validation set and report averaged singular values over the dataset. In this figure,
the CL layers hardly increase or even decrease the singular value; consistent with the explanation
above, this implies that CL hardly distinguishes tokens. In contrast, MIM increases the singular
value, meaning that it changes the volume of tokens and can distinguish tokens. Another interesting
observation is that a few later layers of MIM decrease the volume, even though they capture local
patterns as shown in Figures 3 and 4. This is because they behave like decoders. Section 4 discusses
this in detail.
Figure 7b shows the singular value spectra of images. We average all tokens in an image to build
an image-level representation vector and conduct a singular value spectrum over the collection of
representations in the validation set. As opposed to the previous case, the representational volume of
CL is larger than that of MIM, which implies that CL makes the image-level representation separable.

CL exploits low-frequencies, and MIM exploits high-frequencies. We hypothesize that CL cap-
tures low-frequency and MIM captures high-frequency information in spatial dimensions since CL
provides image-level self-supervision to capture global patterns, while MIM provides token-level
self-supervision to exploit local patterns. To support this argument from a frequency perspective, we
conduct a Fourier analysis of the representations as following Park & Kim (2022b). In particular, we
report the relative log amplitude of Fourier-transformed representations by calculating the amplitude
difference between the highest and lowest frequencies of representations.
Figure 9 visualizes the relative amplitudes of CL and MIM. It shows that the high-frequency amplitude
of CL is significantly smaller than that of MIM, suggesting that CL mainly utilizes low-frequency
spatial information such as global structures and shapes. On the contrary, MIM usually uses high-
frequency spatial information such as narrow structures and fine textures.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Fraction of “shape” decisions



                                                                                 -10.0

          Shape categories


                                                                  Accuracy (%)
                                                                                 -15.0
                                                                                 -20.0
                                                                                                           MoCo
                                                                                 -25.0                     SimMIM

                                                                                                    0.2         0.5     0.8
                             Fraction of “texture” decision                                            Noise frequency
                             (a) Stylized ImageNet                    (b) Robustness for noise frequency

Figure 8: CL is biased toward shape, whereas MIM is biased toward texture. We report the
predictive results of models for linear probing tasks. However, we observe consistent results in fine-
tuned models (See Figure F.2). Left: Result of classification on Stylized ImageNet. It shows that CL is
more shape-biased than MIM and even than the supervised pre-trained model. Vertical lines represent
averaged results for the shape categories. We also report the results of supervised ViT with ImageNet-
1K class labels for comparison. Right: Accuracy drops on images with frequency-based random
noises. MIM shows a more significant amount of accuracy drop than CL with high-frequency noises,
demonstrating MIM’s texture-biased property. The frequency window size of the frequency-based
noise is 0.1π.

Another interesting finding is that the last few layers of                                          -1.0                      MoCo
MIM reduce the high frequencies even though they only                                                                         SimMIM
                                                                                    Log amplitude
focus on local areas (See Figure 3). We conjecture that MIM
implicitly divides ViTs into the encoder-decoder structure                                          -2.0
and allows intermediate layers to have linearly separable
information. In contrast, CL allows the last layer to have
such information. This is further elaborated in Figure 11.
                                                                                                    -3.0
CL is shape-biased, but MIM is texture-biased. Based
on the results of the Fourier analysis, we assume that CL and                                              0          5       10
MIM each have a bias toward shapes and textures, respec-                                                              Depth
tively. To demonstrate this claim, we use Stylized ImageNet
(Geirhos et al., 2019), a texture-altered dataset, by using                        Figure 9: CL exploits low-frequency,
AdaIN (Huang & Belongie, 2017). Figure 8a reports the                              but MIM exploits high-frequency.
linear probing results on Stylized ImageNet to evaluate the                        Moreover, a few last layers of CL
shape and texture biases of pre-trained models. Compared to                        reduce high-frequency by capturing
the model pre-trained with supervised learning, CL depends                         global patterns. MIM also reduces it
more on the shape and MIM depends on texture of images                             even though they capture local pat-
to classify images. In other words, CL is robust to texture                        terns, because the later layers behave
changes, and MIM is vulnerable to them.                                            like decoders. See also Figure 11.

Figure 8b shows the consistent results. In this experiment, we follow Park & Kim (2022a;b) and
measure the decrease in accuracy on the ImageNet dataset with frequency-based random noise. The
results suggest that CL is robust to high-frequency noises, but MIM is significantly more vulnerable
to them. Since high-frequency noises harm the fine details of images, we arrive at the same conclusion
that CL is more shape-biased and MIM is texture-biased. This can explain the robustness of CL
against adversarial perturbations (Bordes et al., 2022).


4    W HICH C OMPONENTS P LAY AN I MPORTANT ROLE ?

The previous sections consistently show through various perspectives that CL exploits image-level
global patterns while MIM captures token-level local patterns. This section analyzes pre-trained ViTs
from an architectural perspective and shows that the key components in CL and MIM are different.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   MAE                                              -1.0                                    MAE                       -1.0
                 0.6               MoCo                       0.6                                                           SimMIM


                                                                    Log amplitude
 Normalized MI
                                   SimMIM
                 0.4                                          0.4                   -2.0                                                              -2.0

                 0.2                                          0.2
                                                                                    -3.0                                                              -3.0
                 0.0                                          0.0
                       1    6         11    13   16      19                                0                    5            10      12   15   18
                           Depth                 Depth                                                     Depth                          Depth
                           (a) Self-attention                                                             (b) Fourier analysis

Figure 10: The explicit decoder architecture of MAE helps ViTs effectively leverage the advan-
tages of MIM. We analyze the encoder and decoder of a pre-trained model with a masking ratio
of zero. The left side of each figure represents the encoder and the right side the decoder. Left:
The mutual information of MAE is lower than that of SimMIM in the encoder but higher in the
decoder. Right: The decoder of MAE captures low-frequency information, and its encoder captures
high-frequency information. Moreover, the later layers (excluding the last layer) of MAE do not
reduce high-frequency information, while those of SimMIM do.

Later layers of CL and early layers of MIM are important. According to studies on ViT (Gra-
ham et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2021; Park & Kim, 2022b), the later layers use high-level information,
and the early layers exploit low-level information. Since CL and MIM each exploit global and local
patterns, we expect that the later layers of CL and early layers of MIM play a key role.
To evaluate the importance of each layer, we measure the
linear probing accuracy using intermediate representations
with the configuration of Table A.1. In Figure 11, we observe                                                   60
                                                                                               Linear Probing
the following properties: First, the linear probing accuracy
of MIM is higher than that of CL at the beginning. Con-                                                         40
versely, CL outperforms MIM at the end of the model. Such
result indicates that the later layers of CL and early layers
of MIM play an important role in making linearly separa-                                                        20                                MoCo
                                                                                                                                                  SimMIM
ble representations. Second, the accuracy of CL increases                                                                                         MAE
with increasing depth as expected, but the accuracy of MIM                                                          0
surprisingly decreases at the end of the model, i.e., the later                                                         1             6             11
layers of MIM are not very helpful in separating representa-                                                                         Depth
tions. We explain this observation as a phenomenon in which
MIM methods with shallow prediction heads, e.g., SimMIM,                                       Figure 11: Later layers of CL and
use later layers of the backbone as a decoder. Therefore,                                      early layers of MIM play a key role.
MIM with a deep self-attention decoder, e.g., MAE (He                                          We report linear probing accuracies by
et al., 2022), can be useful for linear probing performance.                                   using the representations of the inter-
Moreover, it also explains why SimMIM’s high-frequency                                         mediate layers. CL outperforms MIM
component and representational volumes drop in the later                                       in later layers, and MIM outperforms
layers as shown in Figures 7 and 9. Third, even the highest                                    CL in early layers.
linear probing accuracy of MIM is lower than that of CL.

The explicit decoder helps ViTs further leverage the advantages of MIM. Several previous
observations find that the implicit decoder of MIM with a shallow prediction head, such as SimMIM,
can impair performance. MAE (He et al., 2022) addresses this problem by introducing deep explicit
ViT decoders and reconstructing masked tokens only in the separate decoders.
In Figure 10, we analyze MAE to understand the properties of decoders more deeply. Figure 10a
shows the self-attention behaviors. The results indicate that the mutual information of MAE is lower
than that of SimMIM in the later layers of the encoder but higher in the decoder, implying that the
decoder reconstructs masked tokens based on its neighborhood tokens.
Figure 10b shows the results of the Fourier analysis. As explained in Figure 9, the last four layers of
SimMIM reduce the high-frequency components. In contrast, the later layers (excluding the last layer)
of MAE do not reduce them. Instead, the decoder of MAE prioritizes low-frequency information
compared with the encoder, allowing the backbone to efficiently utilize high-frequency information.


                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               82.25                          =0.2                                 MoCo                                   -1.0
                                                                                   SimMIM


                                                                                                          Log amplitude
                                                      Normalized MI
                                                                      0.4          SimMIM+MoCo
               82.00
 Fine-tuning                =0.0              =0.4                                                                        -2.0
               81.75
                                              =0.6                    0.2                                                                       MoCo
               81.50                                                                                                      -3.0                  SimMIM
                                                                                                                                                SimMIM+MoCo
                                         =1.0
                                                                      0.0
                       20          40            60                         1               6        11                          0         5            10
                               Linear Probe                                              Depth                                             Depth
                       (a) Performance                                          (b) Self-attention                               (c) Fourier analysis

Figure 12: The simple linear combination of CL (MoCo) and MIM (SimMIM) objectives out-
performs the vanilla CL and MIM. λ is the importance weight of CL, so λ = 0 means SimMIM
and λ = 1 means MoCo. Left: “CL + MIM” outperforms CL and MIM in both linear probing and
fine-tuning accuracy. Middle: Mutual information of “CL + MIM” decreases at the end of the model,
suggesting that the self-attentions of later layers collapse into homogeneity and capture the same
object shape information. Right: Fourier analysis shows that “CL + MIM” amplifies high frequencies
at the beginning and reduces them at the end. It implies that “CL + MIM” exploits high-frequency
information at the beginning and low-frequency information at the end.

5              A RE THE T WO M ETHODS C OMPLEMENTARY TO E ACH OTHER ?
We present comparative analyses on CL and MIM from three perspectives: self-attentions, repre-
sentation transforms, and the position of important layers. All of our results indicate that CL and
MIM train ViTs differently. These differences naturally imply that combining CL and MIM to train a
backbone may help leverage the advantages of both methods.
To show that CL and MIM are complementary, we introduce the simplest way to harmonize CL
and MIM by linearly combining two losses, i.e., L = (1 − λ)LMIM + λLCL where LMIM and LCL
each indicate the losses of MIM and CL, and λ is the importance weight of CL. We find that this
simple hybrid model trained with combined losses efficiently exploits the strengths of both methods.
Figure 12a shows linear probing and fine-tuning accuracy on ImageNet with varying λ. Surprisingly,
the hybrid models outperform MIM (λ = 0) and CL (λ = 1) in both aspects. Figure 12b and
Figure 12c can provide insights on how hybrid models behave by analyzing the model with λ = 0.2
in terms of self-attentions in Section 2 and Fourier analysis in Section 3, respectively; both results
show that the hybrid model exploits MIM properties in the early layers and CL properties in the
later layers. In particular, Figure 12b indicates that the self-attentions of the early layers are changed
according to the query token but those of the later layers are not. Likewise, Figure 12c shows that the
early layers exploit high-frequency, while the later layers try to exploit low-frequency.

6              C ONCLUSION
We conducted a comparative study highlighting various facets of two widely used self-supervised
learning methods for vision transformers: contrastive learning (CL) and masked image modeling
(MIM). The study demonstrated many opposing properties of the two methods: image informa-
tion (image-level vs. token-level; as in Section 2), feature representations (low-frequency vs. high-
frequency; as in Section 3), and lead role components (later layers vs. early layers; as in Section 4).
Furthermore, we suggested a possible application that exploits only the benefits from both methods
and showed how a combined model can outperform individual methods.

Future directions. Various future directions can be explored based on our study. We believe that
there are better ways than a simple linear combination of CL and MIM objectives. For example,
a novel self-supervised learning approach, in which CL is applied in the later layers and MIM in
the early layers, can be considered. Moreover, we may extend our findings on self-supervision for
multi-stage ViTs, such as PiT (Heo et al., 2021) and Swin (Liu et al., 2021). Another interesting
direction is to enhance the individual properties of CL and MIM. Techniques that help CL or MIM
learn shapes or textures, respectively, may also improve performance.


                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES

Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Florian Bordes, Randall Balestriero, and Pascal Vincent. High fidelity visualization of what your
  self-supervised representation knows about. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In International
 Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2020a.

Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.

Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b.

Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Randaugment: Practical automated
  data augmentation with a reduced search space. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.

Zihang Dai, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, and Mingxing Tan. Coatnet: Marrying convolution and
  attention for all data sizes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.

Stéphane d’Ascoli, Hugo Touvron, Matthew L Leavitt, Ari S Morcos, Giulio Biroli, and Levent Sagun.
  Convit: Improving vision transformers with soft convolutional inductive biases. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.

Benjamin Graham, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Hugo Touvron, Pierre Stock, Armand Joulin, Hervé Jégou,
  and Matthijs Douze. Levit: a vision transformer in convnet’s clothing for faster inference. In
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 2020.

Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.

Byeongho Heo, Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Seong Joon Oh.
  Rethinking spatial dimensions of vision transformers. In International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2021.

Gao Huang, Yu Sun, Zhuang Liu, Daniel Sedra, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Deep networks with
  stochastic depth. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2016.

Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017.

Li Jing, Pascal Vincent, Yann LeCun, and Yuandong Tian. Understanding dimensional collapse in
  contrastive self-supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.

Hanjoo Kim, Minkyu Kim, Dongjoo Seo, Jinwoong Kim, Heungseok Park, Soeun Park, Hyunwoo
  Jo, KyungHyun Kim, Youngil Yang, Youngkwan Kim, et al. Nsml: Meet the mlaas platform with a
  real-world case study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09957, 2018.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, 2014.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining
  Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.

Namuk Park and Songkuk Kim. Blurs behave like ensembles: Spatial smoothings to improve accuracy,
  uncertainty, and robustness. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022a.

Namuk Park and Songkuk Kim. How do vision transformers work? In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022b.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.

Maithra Raghu, Thomas Unterthiner, Simon Kornblith, Chiyuan Zhang, and Alexey Dosovitskiy.
 Do vision transformers see like convolutional neural networks? Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet
  Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV),
  2015.

Alexander Strehl and Joydeep Ghosh. Cluster ensembles—a knowledge reuse framework for combin-
  ing multiple partitions. Journal of machine learning research, 2002.

Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking the
  inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.

Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2020a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
  makes for good views for contrastive learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:6827–6839, 2020b.
Yuandong Tian, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learning dynamics
  without contrastive pairs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 2008.
Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam,
  Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8769–8778,
  2018.
Shaoru Wang, Jin Gao, Zeming Li, Jian Sun, and Weiming Hu. A closer look at self-supervised
  lightweight vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14443, 2022.
Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning
  for self-supervised visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Chen Wei, Haoqi Fan, Saining Xie, Chao-Yuan Wu, Alan Yuille, and Christoph Feichtenhofer.
  Masked feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022a.
Yixuan Wei, Han Hu, Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, and Baining
  Guo. Contrastive learning rivals masked image modeling in fine-tuning via feature distillation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14141, 2022b.
Zhenda Xie, Zigang Geng, Jingcheng Hu, Zheng Zhang, Han Hu, and Yue Cao. Revealing the dark
  secrets of masked image modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13543, 2022a.
Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Yutong Lin, Jianmin Bao, Zhuliang Yao, Qi Dai, and Han
  Hu. Simmim: A simple framework for masked image modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022b.
Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, and Yonghui Wu.
   Coca: Contrastive captioners are image-text foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01917,
   2022.
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. In International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba.
  Semantic understanding of scenes through the ade20k dataset. International Journal of Computer
  Vision, 127(3):302–321, 2019.
Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan Yuille, and Tao Kong. ibot: Image
   bert pre-training with online tokenizer. International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    S ETUP

We build the configurations based on Xie et al. (2022b) for fine-tuning and Caron et al. (2021) for
linear probing. Table A.1 summarizes the configurations. Most analyzes of ViTs use the official ViT-B
pre-trained models, and some analyzes use ViT-{S, L} pre-trained with official configurations but
epochs of 100. Due to memory limitations, ViT-L is pre-trained with a quarter batch size of the other
models. The hybrid model introduced in Section 5 uses the ViT backbone architecture of Xie et al.
(2022b) and employes a configureation based on their work for pre-training as shown in Table A.1.
For data augmentation and regularization, we adopt widely used settings, e.g., Randaugment (Cubuk
et al., 2020), label smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016), mixup (Zhang et al., 2018), cutmix (Yun et al.,
2019), stochastic depth (Huang et al., 2016). Layer decay (Bao et al., 2022) is also used for fine-tuning.
Neural network models are implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). The code for analysis is
available at https://github.com/naver-ai/cl-vs-mim. All experiments use {1, 4, 8} NVIDIA
A100 Tensor Core GPU. NSML (Kim et al., 2018) has been used for experiments.

                                     Table A.1: Training settings.
               C ONFIGURATION                 Linear Probing    Fine-tuning   Pre-training
               optimizer                            sgd           adamw         adamw
               base learning rate                 1.0e-0          1.25e-3        1.0e-4
               weight decay                        0.05            0.05           0.05
               batch size                           1k              2k            1k
               training epoch                       50             100            100
               learning rate schedule             cosine          cosine       multistep
               warmup epoch                          0              20            10
               warmup schedule                       ·            linear         linear
               randaugment                           ·             9, 0.5        9, 0.5
               label smoothing                       ·              0.1           0.1
               mixup                                 ·              0.8           0.8
               cutmix                                ·              1.0           1.0
               stochastic depth                      ·              0.1           0.1
               layer decay                           ·             0.65           1.0
               gradient clip                         ·              5.0           5.0



B    R ELATED W ORK

CL is a method based on comparing the global projection of two different random views. However,
this approach usually suffers from the collapsing problem, where all representations collapse into
constant solutions. To solve this problem, various methods such as negative samples and InfoNCE
(Oord et al., 2018) have been proposed. Negative samples is an effective technique to avoid the
collapsing problems, but they cause dimensional collapse (Jing et al., 2022) and require extra large
batches (Chen et al., 2020a) or memory queues (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b) to retrieve them.
We mainly analyze MoCo v3 (Chen et al., 2021), since the method includes these de facto standard
components—global projection, random views, and negative samples.
Some SSL methods, e.g. Grill et al. (2020); Caron et al. (2021), do not use negative samples and
use the projections of their Siamese representations as the positives. Such self-distillation has been
explored theoretically and empirically (Chen & He, 2021; Tian et al., 2021) to prevent the collapsing
problem, but we do not discuss the distillation scheme in this paper. Wei et al. (2022b) shows that
feature distillation improves the fine-tuning performance of CL by diversifying attention ranges; this
observation is consistent with our findings. While they focus on distillation to improve CL, we reveal
the fundamental nature of self-supervised learning by rigorously comparing CL and MIM.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                       SimMIM


              Attention distance (px)
                                                   BEiT                                                                 MAE
                                        100               DINO             DINO


                                                                                       Normalized MI
                                                                          MoCo
                                                                       SimCLR                          0.4                                      BEiT
                                         75                                                                      MoCo
                                                           MAE
                                         50
                                                                    SimMIM                             0.2
                                         25                                                                                                     DINO
                                                                                                                              SimCLR
                                          0                                                            0.0
                                              1              6               11                              1                 6                11
                                                            Depth                                                             Depth
                                              (a) Attention distance                                             (b) Normalized MI

Figure C.1: MIM and CL methods each have consistent properties. To show this, we visualize self-
attention behaviors in terms of attention distance and normalized mutual information (MI). SimCLR? ,
which was introduced in Chen et al. (2021), stands for MoCo with a momentum coefficient of 0. Left:
The attention distance of CL methods (namely MoCo, SimCLR? , and DINO) is higher than that
of MIM methods (namely SimMIM, BEiT, and MAE). This suggests that CL methods consistently
capture global patterns. Right: The normalized mutual information of MIM is higher than that of CL;
i.e., the self-attentions of MIM are more correlated with query tokens than CL.

                                                                                                                    MoCo (Ti)
              Attention distance (px)


                                        100                                                            0.6          MoCo (S)
                                                                                       Normalized MI
                                                                                                                    MoCo (B)
                                                                                                                    SimMIM (Ti)
                                         75         MoCo (Ti)                                          0.4          SimMIM (S)
                                                    MoCo (S)                                                        SimMIM (B)
                                         50         MoCo (B)
                                                    SimMIM (Ti)                                        0.2
                                         25         SimMIM (S)
                                                    SimMIM (B)
                                          0                                                            0.0
                                              1              6               11                              1                 6                11
                                                            Depth                                                             Depth
                                              (a) Attention distance                                             (b) Normalized MI

Figure C.2: ViTs exhibit consistent self-attention patterns, regardless of their size. To better
understand these patterns, we visualize the self-attention behaviors of three ViTs—ViT-{Ti, S,
B}—using two metrics: attention distance and normalized mutual information (MI). Left: All self-
attentions of MoCo capture global patterns in the later layers. In contrast, the self-attentions of
SimMIM capture local patterns. Right: Likewise, all self-attention maps of MoCo collapse into
homogeneity in the later layers.

Compared with CL, MIM has been rarely explored in vision tasks. Various methods, such as his-
tograms of oriented gradients (Wei et al., 2022a) and tokenization (Bao et al., 2022), have been
proposed as part of porting masked language models to the image domain with ViTs. Among them,
SimMIM (Xie et al., 2022b) and MAE (He et al., 2022) are simple yet effective methods to reconstruct
masked tokens without complicated pretext tasks. Because of its simplicity and superior performance
in downstream operations, MIM is attracting attention as a promising technique in image processing.
Nevertheless, we find hints suggesting that CL and MIM utilize different aspects of the data, making
them complementary. For example, Zhou et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2021); Yu et al. (2022) achieve
high predictive performance by harmonizing the image-level and the token-level self-supervised
learning. Xie et al. (2022a) also observe that, unlike supervised pre-trained models or CL, self-
attentions in SimMIM focus locally; this is a consistent result with our findings.

C    O UR I NSIGHTS A RE G ENERALIZABLE TO VARIOUS M ODELS
In the main text, we analyze ViT-B pre-trained using MoCo and SimMIM. We observe consistent
characteristics across various sizes of ViTs that have been pre-trained using other self-supervised
learning methods. To support this claim, we delve into the properties of self-attentions.


                                                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  MoCo                                             MoCo


                Std of Normalized MI
                                                                  SimMIM                                           SimMIM
                                       0.3


                                                                                 Density
                                       0.2

                                       0.1

                                       0.0                                           0.00       0.25    0.50     0.75       1.00
                                             1    3      6             11
                                                        Depth                                    Normalized MI
                                             (a) Standard deviations                       (b) Distribution at 3rd layer

Figure E.1: The presence of an outlier head in MoCo raises the average of normalized mutual
information. This observation explains how the normalized mutual information in a couple of
MoCo’s self-attention layers is similar to or even surpasses that in SimMIM. Left: We present the
standard deviation of the normalized mutual information. As depicted in this figure, the standard
deviation in SimMIM remains relatively consistent across different depths. In contrast, the standard
deviation in MoCo’s 3rd or 4th self-attention layer is notably higher than that in SimMIM. Right:
Distribution of mutual information for the third self-attention layer head. The visualization of this
kernel density estimation shows that MoCo has an outlier head with mutual information close to 1.0.
The red rectangles ( ) and blue triangles (4) refer to the mutual information of heads in MoCo and
SimMIM, respectively.


Figure C.1 visualizes the self-attention behaviors of different self-supervised learning methods in
terms of attention distance and normalized mutual information. As depicted in the figure, all CLs and
MIMs exhibit consistent properties. Similarly, Figure C.2 demonstrates that various sizes of models
also demonstrate consistent properties.

D    L OCALITY I NDUCTIVE B IAS I MPROVES F INE -T UNING ACCURACY OF CL

In Section 2, we demonstrate that the homogeneity of self-
                                                                                                                        kernel = 15
attention map, i.e., attention collapse of CL, helps ViT dis-
tinguish images but harms fine-tuning accuracy. As a result,
we anticipate that incorporating a locality inductive bias into
CL will improve fine-tuning accuracy but degrade linear
                                                                                                                                   kernel = 21
probing accuracy. One simple method to inject locality into
self-attentions is to limit the receptive field of self-attention
by using attention masks.                                                                                      kernel = 9            kernel = 27
                                                                                                                                        (global)
Figure D.1 shows the predictive performance of MoCo with
restricted local self-attentions. As expected, the results are
similar to the performance of MIM; As the kernel size de-
creases, the linear probing accuracy decreases but the fine-
tuning accuracy increases. These results are consistent with Figure D.1: Locality inductive bias
our findings.                                                  harms linear probing but improves
                                                               fine-tuning. We report the linear prob-
                                                               ing and fine-tuning accuracy of MoCo
E A C LOSER L OOK AT                                           with restricted self-attentions via atten-
THE ROLE OF S ELF - SUPERVISED V I T L AYERS tion masks.

The main text provides the key characteristics of CL and MIM. This section delves deeper into the
details not covered in the main text to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the subjects.

The role of the early modules. Figures 3 and 4 suggest that most layers of MoCo capture global
patterns and have only a weak correlation with query tokens. However, one or two of MoCo layers
exhibit unusual behavior. For example, the 3rd layer of MoCo focuses on local areas and its self-
attention map is dependent on the query. We explore this property in more detail.


                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            (a) MoCo                              (b) SimMIM

Figure E.2: The tokens of MoCo form a cluster for each image, while those of SimMIM are
intermingled. This aligns with the finding that, compared to SimMIM, MoCo is linearly separable. To
demonstrate this property, we visualize 3,528 tokens (196 tokens×18 images) from the representations
of the last layer via t-SNE, and find that a consistent pattern is observed even in the representations of
the intermediate layers. The colors represent three different classes. See also Figures 6 and 7.

Figure E.1a provides the variance of normalized mutual information with respect of heads. As the
results show, the variance of SimMIM is consistent across all depths whereas that of MoCo is not. In
particular, the 3rd layer of MoCo has high variance even though other layers do not. This suggests
that, while most of MoCo’s self-attention heads capture global patterns and have weak correlation
with query tokens, some heads deviate from this behavior and exhibit a different pattern.
Figure E.1b shows the distribution of normalized mutual information among heads in the 3rd layer to
analyse this phenomenon. In this figure, we use kernel density estimation with Gaussian kernel to
visualize the distribution. The results reveal several outlier heads in MoCo with mutual information
close to 1.0. As a result, these outliers significantly raises the average value of normalized mutual
information.

A comprehensive view through visualization of tokens from multiple images. Figure 6 visual-
izes how self-attention layers transform tokens from one or two images in representation space. The
figure demonstrates that MoCo transforms all tokens in union while SimMIM transforms them indi-
vidually. As a result, MoCo separates the representations at the image-level and SimMIM separates
them at the token-level.
The t-SNE visualization (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) in Figure E.2 provides consistent results
and offers even a more comprehensive perspective. In this figure, we visualize the last representations
of 3528 tokens from 18 images that belong to three different classes. The visualization demonstrates
that MoCo separates the representations into distinct classes and even images, while maintaining the
tokens close together in compact image clusters. On the other hand, SimMIM separates tokens from
images, resulting in a wide representation space for each image, but the images or even classes may
be challenging to linearly distinguish.

The first layer of MoCo aggregates tokens into compact clusters. Figures 6 and 7 shows that
all modules, except the first module, in MoCo behave consistently. However, we observe that MoCo’s
first module behaves differently and unusually than the others. We elaborate the behaviour of the first
layer of module.
Figure E.3a shows the qualitative visualization of tokens for a sample image, similar to Figure 6. This
visualization shows that the first MoCo layer aggregates tokens into compact clusters. Although this
figure only uses a single image, the layer aggregates all images into a small representation space as
well. In terms of singular values, we observe consistent results. Similar to Figure 7, Figures E.3b
and E.3c report the second largest log singular value, instead of the relative log singular value, to
investigate the absolute volume of the representations. As expected, most layers in both MoCo and
SimMIM increase the singular value, but surprisingly, the first layer of MoCo reduces the singular
value, meaning that the volumes of representations are decreased at both the token-level and image-
level. Based on these observations, we conjecture that the first module of MoCo behaves like an
embedding component.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Before          A!er                            5.0


                                                          Log singular value


                                                                                                                                  Log singular value
                                                                                                                                                       3.0
                                                                               4.0
                                                                                                                                                       2.0
                                                                               3.0
                                                                                                                         MoCo                          1.0                         MoCo
                                                                               2.0                                       SimMIM                                                    SimMIM

                                                                                     1                         6            11                                  1            6        11
                                                                                                       Depth                                                               Depth
        (a) Token visualization                                                 (b) Token-level analysis                                                (c) Image-level analysis

Figure E.3: The first layer of MoCo clumps tokens together. We demonstrate this property from
two perspectives: qualitative visualization and singular value of token distribution. Left: Similar to
Figure 6, we visualize tokens of a sample image in a representation space. The blue and red data
points represent the tokens before and after the self-attention transformation. As shown in this figure,
the first self-attention layer clumps tokens into a compact cluster. Middle and Right: Similar to
Figure 7, we visualize the second largest log singular value (not ∆ log singular value) for depth. The
singular value spectra demonstrate consistent results; the first layer of MoCo (gray area) not only
clumps tokens but also images into a compact cluster.

                                                         MoCo                                                 -1.0
                                                         SimMIM
                                                                                              Log amplitude
               Normalized MI


                               0.4                       MoCo (ft)
                                                         SimMIM (ft)
                                                                                                              -2.0

                               0.2                                                                                                                           SimMIM (ft)
                                                                                                                                                             SimMIM
                                                                                                              -3.0                                           MoCo (ft)
                                                                                                                                                             MoCo
                               0.0
                                     1            6                            11                                    0            5                              10
                                                 Depth                                                                            Depth
                                         (a) Normalized MI                                                           (b) Fourier analysis

Figure F.1: Self-attentions and representations in fine-tuned models exhibit consistency with
those of pre-trained models. Similar to Figures 4 and 9, we present the normalized mutual informa-
tion and the Fourier analysis results of fine-tuned models. The abbreviation “ft” stands for “fine-tuned
model.” Left: Similar to pre-trained models, the mutual information of MoCo’s self-attention maps is
generally lower compared to that of SimMIM. However, it is noteworthy that the mutual information
of the later self-attention maps in SimMIM decreases significantly. This is because the later layers of
a model trained with supervision or fine-tuning tend to capture global information. Right: Similarly,
SimMIM utilizes higher frequency information than MoCo.

F    F INE -T UNED M ODELS I NHERIT THE P ROPERTIES OF P RE - TRAINED
     M ODELS

The main text focuses on highlighting the key properties of pre-trained models. This section demon-
strates that these properties are also utilized by fine-tuned models. As a result, we can safely apply
the insights gained from the main text to various situations.

Consistent results in self-attention and Fourier analysis. Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate that MoCo
captures global areas and that its self-attentions are less related to the query tokens, compared with
SimMIM. In addition, Figure 9 shows that MoCo captures low-frequency information as opposite to
SimMIM. These results are consistent in the fine-tuning scheme.
Figure F.1a reveals the self-attention behaviours of fine-tuned MoCo and SimMIM in terms of
normalized mutual information. Similar to pre-trained models, the fine-tuned self-attention maps of


                                                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Fraction of “shape” decisions

                                                                                                 MoCo
                                                                                   -2.5          SimMIM



           Shape categories


                                                                    Accuracy (%)
                                                                                   -3.0
                                                                                   -3.5
                                                                                   -4.0
                                                                                   -4.5
                                                                                           0.2          0.5      0.8
                              Fraction of “texture” decision                                  Noise frequency
                              (a) Stylized ImageNet                   (b) Robustness for noise frequency

Figure F.2: Fine-tuned ViTs inherit the robustness against frequency-based noise. Similar to
Figure 8b, we measure the decrease in the accuracy of ViTs fine-tuned with MoCo and SimMIM.
Left: Even with fine-tuned ViTs, MoCo is relatively shape-biased and SimMIM relatively texture-
biased. This bias is just less apparent than in linear probing models. Right: The robustness against
frequency-based random noise also suggests the same: MoCo is robust against high-frequency noise,
but SimMIM is not. In conclusion, fine-tuned models inherit the properties of linear probing models.

MoCo have generally lower mutual information compared to those of SimMIM. The only significant
difference is that the mutual information of the later self-attention maps in fine-tuned SimMIM
decreases significantly, as later layers in models trained with supervision or fine-tuning tend to
capture more global information. As a result, the gap between the two methods is reduced. This is
also reflected in the consistent results of Fourier analysis as shown in Figure F.1b. In this analysis,
SimMIM captures higher-frequency information compared to MoCo in fine-tuning scheme as well.
However, the later layers of SimMIM attempt to capture low-frequency information. Therefore, the
gap of fine-tuned models is smaller than that of pre-trained models.

CL is shape-biased and MIM is texture-biased in fine-tuning scheme. In Figure 8, we demon-
strate that linear probing model with CL (MoCo) is more shape-biased and that with MIM (SimMIM)
is texture-biased, compared with each other. As in the experiment, we calculate the classification
results of ImageNet fine-tuned MoCo and SimMIM on Stylized-ImageNet, and measure the decrease
in accuracy against frequency-based random noise. As we would expected, Figure F.2 shows that the
property also extends to the fine-tuned model. Even though we still observe the difference between
MoCo and SimMIM, the performance gap between MoCo and SimMIM is quite reduced compared
to the gap between the linear probing models.

Later layers of CL and early layers of MIM are                                     0                                              0
important in find-tuning phases. As shown in Fig-
ure 11, the later layers of the CL and the early layers of
                                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


the MIM are linearly separable. This finding suggests                              2                                                  2
that these layers are significant, however, it does not
provide direct evidence that such properties are pre-                              4                                                  4
served during fine-tuning phases. We demonstrate that                                                             MoCo
these layers play a crucial role in fine-tuning phases as                                                         SimMIM
                                                                                   6                                                  6
well.                                                                                  1                  5 8                12
To support this claim, we conduct a study to mea-
                                                                                           Init depth           Init depth
sure the accuracy drop of fine-tuned models using pre-                             (a) Early layer              (b) Later layer
trained models with a few blocks initialized. As shown
in Figure F.3a, the results indicate that the initializing a         Figure F.3: The later layers of CL and
few early blocks in the pre-training models of SimMIM                early layers of MIM play a key role in
significantly harms the fine-tuning accuracy, compared               the fine-tuning scheme. To show this, we
to MoCo. These observations suggest that early lay-                  initialize a few blocks and measure the de-
ers of SimMIM play an important role in fine-tuning.                 crease in the fine-tuning accuracy of pre-
Conversely, Figure F.3b shows that initializing later                trained models.


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


blocks in the pre-training models of SimMIM does not significantly harms the fine-tuning accuracy,
suggesting that they are not important in fine-tuning compared with MoCo.
One limitation of this experiment is the evaluation of the accuracy drop in a single run. Since the
accuracy drop of MoCo is marginally higher than that of SimMIM at the first initialization depth in
Figure F.3b, additional experiments may improve the results. In this experiment, we utilized the same
fine-tuning settings for both MoCo and SimMIM; but experiments with fine-tuning settings tailored
to each method may provide further insight.

G    H YBRID M ODELS O UTPERFORM CL AND MIM IN D OWNSTREAM TASKS
The claim that CL and MIM are complemen- Table G.1: Hybrid models of CL and MIM out-
tary is demonstrated only on ImageNet in Sec- perform both CL and MIM in various tasks.
tion 5. To validate this claim in tasks beyond
ImageNet, we evaluated the pre-trained models       λ (I MPORTANCE OF CL) iNat-18 ADE20k
of the hybrid method introduced in Section 5
for another classification task and a semantic      0.0 (SimMIM)              62.1   35.4
segmentation task. In particluar, we measured       0.2 (SimMIM + MoCo)       68.8   42.2
the accuracy on iNaturalist 2018 (Van Horn
                                                    1.0 (MoCo)                66.2   39.7
et al., 2018) and the mIoU on ADE20K (Zhou
et al., 2019). As shown in Table G.1, the hybrid
model of SimMIM and MoCo outperforms both SimMIM and MoCo in various downstream tasks.
Therefore, we conclude that the effectiveness of this claim extends beyond ImageNet.


                                                 19
