Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F ROM t-SNE TO UMAP
WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

 Sebastian Damrich                                      Jan Niklas Böhm
 IWR at Heidelberg University                           University of Tübingen
 sebastian.damrich@uni-tuebingen.de                     jan-niklas.boehm@uni-tuebingen.de


 Fred A. Hamprecht                                      Dmitry Kobak
 IWR at Heidelberg University                           University of Tübingen
 fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de                   dmitry.kobak@uni-tuebingen.de



                                             A BSTRACT

         Neighbor embedding methods t-SNE and UMAP are the de facto standard for
         visualizing high-dimensional datasets. Motivated from entirely different view-
         points, their loss functions appear to be unrelated. In practice, they yield strongly
         differing embeddings and can suggest conflicting interpretations of the same data.
         The fundamental reasons for this and, more generally, the exact relationship be-
         tween t-SNE and UMAP have remained unclear. In this work, we uncover their
         conceptual connection via a new insight into contrastive learning methods. Noise-
         contrastive estimation can be used to optimize t-SNE, while UMAP relies on neg-
         ative sampling, another contrastive method. We find the precise relationship be-
         tween these two contrastive methods and provide a mathematical characterization
         of the distortion introduced by negative sampling. Visually, this distortion results
         in UMAP generating more compact embeddings with tighter clusters compared to
         t-SNE. We exploit this new conceptual connection to propose and implement a
         generalization of negative sampling, allowing us to interpolate between (and even
         extrapolate beyond) t-SNE and UMAP and their respective embeddings. Moving
         along this spectrum of embeddings leads to a trade-off between discrete / local and
         continuous / global structures, mitigating the risk of over-interpreting ostensible
         features of any single embedding. We provide a PyTorch implementation.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Low-dimensional visualization of high-dimensional data is a ubiquitous step in exploratory
data analysis, and the toolbox of visualization methods has been rapidly growing in the last
years (McInnes et al., 2018; Amid & Warmuth, 2019; Szubert et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).
Since all of these methods necessarily distort the true data layout (Chari et al., 2021), it is beneficial
to have various tools at one’s disposal. But only equipped with a theoretic understanding of the aims
of and relationships between different methods, can practitioners make informed decisions about
which visualization to use for which purpose and how to interpret the results.
The state of the art for non-parametric, non-linear dimensionality reduction relies on the neighbor
embedding framework (Hinton & Roweis, 2002). Its two most popular examples are t-SNE (van der
Maaten & Hinton, 2008; van der Maaten, 2014) and UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018). Both can produce
insightful, but qualitatively distinct embeddings. However, why their embeddings are different and
what exactly is the conceptual relation between their loss functions, has remained elusive.
Here, we answer this question and thus explain the mathematical underpinnings of the relationship
between t-SNE and UMAP. Our conceptual insight naturally suggests a spectrum of embedding
methods complementary to that of Böhm et al. (2022), along which the focus of the visualization
shifts from local to global structure (Fig. 1). On this spectrum, UMAP and t-SNE are simply two
instances and inspecting various embeddings helps to guard against over-interpretation of apparent
structure. As a practical corollary, our analysis identifies and remedies an instability in UMAP.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                Default NEG


    (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE   (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE   (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis    (d) Z̄ = |X|/m       (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                          (f) t-SNE          (g) NCVis           (h) UMAP        (i) Partition function

Figure 1: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE embedding spectrum of the MNIST dataset for various values of the
fixed normalization constant Z̄, see Sec. 5. As Z̄ increases, the scale of the embedding decreases,
clusters become more compact and separated before eventually starting to merge. The Neg-t-SNE
spectrum produces embeddings very similar to those of (f) t-SNE, (g) NCVis, and (h) UMAP,
when Z̄ equals  the partition function of t-SNE, the learned normalization parameter P Z of NCVis, or
|X|/m = n2 /m used by UMAP, as predicted in Sec. 4–6. (i) The partition function ij (1+d2ij )−1
tries to match Z̄ and grows with it. Here, we initialized all Neg-t-SNE runs using Z̄ = |X|/m; with-
out this ‘early exaggeration’, low values of Z̄ yield fragmented clusters (Fig. S11).


We provide the new connection between t-SNE and UMAP via a deeper understanding of contrastive
learning methods. Noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; 2012) can be
used to optimize t-SNE (Artemenkov & Panov, 2020), while UMAP relies on another contrastive
method, negative sampling (NEG) (Mikolov et al., 2013). We investigate the discrepancy between
NCE and NEG, show that NEG introduces a distortion, and this distortion explains how UMAP and
t-SNE embeddings differ. Finally, we discuss the relationship between neighbor embeddings and
self-supervised learning (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Le-Khac et al., 2020).
In summary, our contributions are
1. a new connection between the contrastive methods NCE and NEG (Sec. 4),
2. the exact relation of t-SNE and UMAP and a remedy for an instability in UMAP (Sec. 6),
3. a spectrum of ‘contrastive’ neighbor embeddings encompassing UMAP and t-SNE (Sec. 5),
4. a connection between neighbor embeddings and self-supervised learning (Sec. 7),
5. a unified PyTorch framework for contrastive (non-)parametric neighbor embedding methods.
Our code is available at https://github.com/berenslab/contrastive-ne and
https://github.com/hci-unihd/cl-tsne-umap.


2    R ELATED WORK

One of the most popular methods for data visualization is t-SNE (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008;
van der Maaten, 2014). Recently developed NCVis (Artemenkov & Panov, 2020) employs noise-
contrastive estimation (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; 2012) to approximate t-SNE in a sampling-
based way. Therefore, we will often refer to the NCVis algorithm as ‘NC-t-SNE’. UMAP (McInnes
et al., 2018) has matched t-SNE’s popularity at least in computational biology (Becht et al., 2019)
and uses another sampling-based optimization method, negative sampling (Mikolov et al., 2013),
also employed by LargeVis (Tang et al., 2016). Other recent sampling-based visualization methods
include TriMap (Amid & Warmuth, 2019) and PaCMAP (Wang et al., 2021).
Given their success, t-SNE and UMAP have been scrutinized to find out which aspects are essen-
tial to their performance. Initialization was found to be strongly influencing the global structure


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in both methods (Kobak & Linderman, 2021). The exact choice of the low-dimensional similarity
kernel (Böhm et al., 2022) or the weights of the k-nearest-neighbor graph (Damrich & Hamprecht,
2021) were shown to be largely inconsequential. Both algorithms have similar relevant hyperpa-
rameters such as, e.g., the heavy-tailedness of the similarity kernel (Yang et al., 2009; Kobak et al.,
2019).
While not obvious from the original presentations, the central difference between t-SNE and UMAP
can therefore only be in their loss functions, which have been studied by Damrich & Hamprecht
(2021); Böhm et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2021), but never conceptually connected. We achieve this
by deepening the link between negative sampling (NEG) and noise-contrastive estimation (NCE).
NEG was introduced as an ad hoc replacement for NCE in the context of learning word embed-
dings (Mikolov et al., 2013). The relationship between NEG and NCE has been discussed be-
fore (Dyer, 2014; Levy & Goldberg, 2014; Ruder, 2016; Ma & Collins, 2018; Le-Khac et al., 2020),
but here we go further and provide the precise meaning of NEG: We show that, unlike NCE, NEG
learns a model proportional but not equal to the true data distribution.
Both t-SNE and UMAP have parametric versions (van der Maaten, 2009; Sainburg et al., 2021) with
very different logic and implementations. Here we present a unified PyTorch framework for non-
parametric and parametric contrastive neighbor embeddings. As special cases, it includes UMAP
and t-SNE approximations with NCE (like NCVis) and the InfoNCE loss (Jozefowicz et al., 2016;
van den Oord et al., 2018), which has not yet been applied to neighbor embeddings.
Our resulting InfoNC-t-SNE elucidates the relationship between SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) and
neighbor embeddings. The parallel work of Hu et al. (2023) makes a qualitatively similar argument,
but does not discuss negative samples. Balestriero & LeCun (2022) show how SimCLR recovers
Isomap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), while we connect SimCLR to more modern neighbor embeddings.

3     BACKGROUND
3.1   N OISE - CONTRASTIVE ESTIMATION (NCE)

The goal of parametric density estimation is to fit a parametric model qθ to iid samples s1 , . . . , sN
from an unknown data distribution p over a space X. For maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
the parameters θ are chosen to maximize the log-likelihood of the observed samples
                                               XN
                                θ∗ = arg max

                                                       log qθ (si ) .                                 (1)
                                           θ           i=1

This approach crucially requires qθ to be a normalized model. It is otherwise trivial to increase
the likelihood arbitrarily
                     P      by scaling qθ . To circumvent the expensive computation of the partition
function Z(θ) = x∈X qθ (x), Gutmann & Hyvärinen (2010; 2012) introduced NCE. It turns the
unsupervised problem of density estimation into a supervised problem in which the data samples
need to be identified from a set containing the N data samples and m times as many noise sam-
ples t1 , . . . tmN drawn from a noise distribution ξ, e.g., the uniform distribution over X. Briefly,
NCE fits θ by minimizing the binary cross-entropy  between the true class assignment and posterior
probabilities P(data | x) = qθ (x)/ qθ (x)+mξ(x) and P(noise | x) = 1−P(data | x) (Supp. A.1):
                        " N                                X mN                               #
           ∗
                            X                qθ (si )                            qθ (ti )
         θ = arg min −          log                       −      log 1 −                        . (2)
                    θ       i=1
                                      qθ (si ) + mξ(si )     i=1
                                                                          qθ (ti ) + mξ(ti )

The key advantage of NCE is that the model does not need to be explicitly normalized by the partition
function, but nevertheless learns to equal the data distribution p and hence be normalized:
Theorem 1 (Gutmann & Hyvärinen (2010; 2012)). Let ξ have full support and suppose there exists
some θ∗ such that qθ∗ = p. Then θ∗ is a minimum of

                                        qθ (s)                            qθ (t)
         LNCE (θ) = −Es∼p log                      − mEt∼ξ log 1 −                          (3)
                                  qθ (s) + mξ(s)                    qθ (t) + mξ(t)

and the only other extrema of LNCE are minima θ̃ which also satisfy qθ̃ = p.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In NCE, the model typically includes an optimizable normalization parameter Z which we empha-
size by writing qθ,Z = qθ /Z. But importantly, Thm. 1 applies to any model qθ that is able to match
the data distribution p, even if it does not contain a learnable normalization parameter.
In the setting of learning language models, Jozefowicz et al. (2016) proposed a different version of
NCE, called InfoNCE. Instead of classifying samples as data or noise, the aim here is to predict
the position of a data sample in an (m + 1)-tuple containing m noise samples and one data sample
(Supp. A.2). For the uniform noise distribution ξ, this yields the expected loss function

                        InfoNCE                                 qθ (x)
                      L         (θ) = −   E      log             Pm              .               (4)
                                         x∼p            qθ (x) + i=1 qθ (xi )
                                       x1 ,...,xm ∼ξ

Ma & Collins (2018) showed that an analogue of Thm. 1 applies to InfoNCE.

3.2   N EIGHBOR EMBEDDINGS

Neighbor embeddings (NE) (Hinton & Roweis, 2002) are a group of dimensionality reduction
methods, including UMAP, NCVis, and t-SNE that aim to find a low-dimensional embedding
e1 , . . . , en ∈ Rd of high-dimensional input points x1 , . . . , xn ∈ RD , with D ≫ d and usually
d = 2 for visualization. NE methods define a notion of similarity over pairs of input points which
encodes the neighborhood structure and informs the low-dimensional embedding.
The exact high-dimensional similarity distribution differs between the NE algorithms, but recent
work (Böhm et al., 2022; Damrich & Hamprecht, 2021) showed that t-SNE and UMAP results stay
practically the same when using the binary symmetric k-nearest-neighbor graph (skNN) instead of
t-SNE’s Gaussian or UMAP’s Laplacian similarities. An edge ij is in skNN if xi is among the k
nearest neighbors of xj or vice versa. The high-dimensional similarity function is then given by
p(ij) = 1(ij ∈ skNN)/|skNN|, where |skNN| denotes the number of edges in the skNN graph and
1 is the indicator function. NCVis uses the same similarities. We will always use k = 15.
There are further differences in the choice of low-dimensional similarity between t-SNE and UMAP,
but Böhm et al. (2022) showed that they are negligible. Therefore, here we use the Cauchy kernel
ϕ(dij ) = 1/(d2ij + 1) for all NE methods to transform distances dij = ∥ei − ej ∥ in the embedding
space into low-dimensional similarities. We abuse notation slightly by also writing ϕ(ij) = ϕ(dij ).
All NE methods in this work can be cast in the framework of parametric density estimation. Here,
p is the data distribution to be approximated with a model qθ , meaning that the space X on which
both p and qθ live is the set of all pairs ij with 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n. The embedding positions e1 , . . . , en
become the learnable parameters θ of the model qθ . For t-SNE, NC-t-SNE (NCVis), and UMAP, qθ
is proportional to ϕ(∥ei − ej ∥), but the proportionality factor and the loss function are different.

        P MLE and therefore requires a normalized model qθ (ij) = ϕ(ij)/Z(θ), where
t-SNE uses
Z(θ) = k̸=l ϕ(kl) is the partition function. The loss function
                                         X                               X
   Lt-SNE (θ) = −Eij∼p log qθ (ij) = −

                                                  p(ij) log ϕ(ij) + log    ϕ(kl)   (5)
                                                 i̸=j                                 k̸=l
is the expected negative log-likelihood of the embedding positions θ, making t-SNE an instance of
MLE. Usually t-SNE’s loss function is introduced as the Kullback-Leibler divergence between p
and qθ , which is equivalent as the entropy of p does not depend on θ.
NC-t-SNE uses NCE and optimizes the expected loss function

                                       qθ,Z (ij)                               qθ,Z (ij)
LNC-t-SNE (θ, Z) = −Eij∼p log                         − mEij∼ξ log 1 −                        ,
                                 qθ,Z (ij) + mξ(ij)                      qθ,Z (ij) + mξ(ij)
                                                                                            (6)
where qθ,Z (ij) = ϕ(ij)/Z with learnable Z and ξ is approximately uniform (see Supp. D).
According to Thm. 1, NC-t-SNE has the same optimum as t-SNE and can hence be seen as a
sampling-based approximation of t-SNE. Indeed, we found that Z in NC-t-SNE and the partition
function Z(θ) in t-SNE converge approximately to the same value (Fig. S10).
UMAP’s expected loss function is derived in Damrich & Hamprecht (2021):
               LUMAP (θ) = −Eij∼p log qθ (ij) − mEij∼ξ log 1 − qθ (ij) ,

                                                                                                     (7)


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with qθ (ij) = ϕ(ij) and ξ is approximately uniform, see Supp. D. This is the effective loss function
actually implemented in the UMAP algorithm, but note that it has only about m/n of the repulsion
compared to the loss stated in the original UMAP paper (McInnes et al., 2018), as shown in Böhm
et al. (2022) and Damrich & Hamprecht (2021) (Supp. C).
In practice, the expectations in UMAP’s and NC-t-SNE’s loss functions are evaluated via sampling,
like in Eq. (2). This leads to a fast, O(n), stochastic gradient descent optimization scheme. Both
loss functions are composed of an attractive term pulling similar points (edges of the skNN graph)
closer together and a repulsive term pushing random pairs of points further apart. Similarly, t-SNE’s
loss yields attraction along the graph edges while repulsion arises through the normalization term.

4       F ROM NOISE - CONTRASTIVE ESTIMATION TO NEGATIVE SAMPLING
In this section we work out the precise relationship between NCE and NEG, going beyond prior
work (Dyer, 2014; Goldberg & Levy, 2014; Levy & Goldberg, 2014; Ruder, 2016). NEG differs
from NCE by its loss function and by the lack of the learnable normalization parameter Z. In our
setting, NEG’s loss function amounts to1

                                         qθ (x)                          qθ (x)
              LNEG (θ) = −Ex∼p log                  − mEx∼ξ log 1 −                 .        (8)
                                       qθ (x) + 1                      qθ (x) + 1
In order to relate it to NCE’s loss function, our key insight is to generalize the latter by allowing to
learn a model that is not equal but proportional to the true data distribution.
Corollary 2. Let Z̄, m ∈ R+ . Let ξ have full support and suppose there exist some θ∗ such that
qθ∗ = Z̄p. Then θ∗ is a minimum of the generalized NCE loss function

                                         qθ (x)                                    qθ (x)
       LNCE
         Z̄  (θ) =   −E  x∼p log                       −  mE x∼ξ  log   1 −                          (9)
                                   qθ (x) + Z̄mξ(x)                          qθ (x) + Z̄mξ(x)
and the only other extrema of LNCE
                               Z̄
                                   are minima θ̃ which also satisfy qθ̃ = Z̄p.
Proof. The result follows from Thm. 1 applied to the model distribution q̃θ := qθ /Z̄.

Dyer (2014) and Ruder (2016) pointed out that for a uniform noise distribution ξ(x) = 1/|X| and
as many noise samples as the size of X (m = |X|), the loss functions of NCE and NEG coincide,
since mξ(x) = 1. However, the main point of NCE and NEG is to use far fewer noise samples in
order to attain a speed-up over MLE. Our Cor. 2 for the first time explains NEG’s behavior in this
more realistic setting (m ≪ |X|). If the noise distribution is uniform, the generalized NCE loss
function with Z̄ = |X|/m equals the NEG loss function since (|X|/m)mξ(x) = 1. By Cor. 2, any
minimum θ∗ of the NEG loss function yields qθ∗ = (|X|/m)p, assuming that there are parameters
that make this equation hold. In other words, NEG aims to find a model qθ that is proportional to
the data distribution with the proportionality factor |X|/m which is typically huge. This is different
from NCE, which aims to learn a model equal to the data distribution.
Choosing m ≪ |X| does not only offer a computational speed-up but is necessary when optimizing
NEG for a neural network with SGD, like we do in Sec.7. Only one single mini-batch is passed
through the neural network during each iteration and is thus available for computing the loss. Hence,
all noise samples must come from the current mini-batch and their number m is upper-bounded by
the mini-batch size b. Mini-batches are typically much smaller than |X|. Thus, this common training
procedure necessitates m ≪ |X| highlighting the relevance of Cor. 2.
While NCE uses a model qθ /Z with learnable Z, we can interpret NEG as using a model qθ /Z̄
with fixed and very large normalization constant Z̄ = |X|/m. As a result, qθ in NEG needs to
attain much larger values to match the large Z̄. This can be illustrated in the setting of neighbor
embeddings. Applying NEG to the neighbor embedding      framework yields an algorithm that we call
‘Neg-t-SNE’. Recall that in this setting, |X| = n2 is the number of pairs of points. Böhm et al.


(2022) found empirically that t-SNE’s partition function Z(θ) is typically between 50n and 100n,
while in Neg-t-SNE, Z̄ = O(n2 ) is much larger for modern big datasets. To attain the larger values
of ϕ(ij) required by NEG, points that are connected in the skNN graph have to move much closer
    1
        We focus on the loss function, ignoring Mikolov et al. (2013)’s choices specific to word embeddings.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) UMAP, no annealing (b) UMAP with annealing (c) Neg-t-SNE, no ann.   (d) Neg-t-SNE with ann.

Figure 2: Embeddings of the MNIST dataset with UMAP and Neg-t-SNE with and without learning
rate annealing in our implementation. UMAP does not work well without annealing because it im-
plicitly uses the diverging 1/d2ij kernel in NEG, while Neg-t-SNE uses the more numerically stable
Cauchy kernel (Sec. 6). UMAP’s reference implementation also requires annealing, see Figs. S1a, d.


together in the embedding than in t-SNE. Indeed, using our PyTorch implementation of Neg-t-SNE
on the MNIST dataset, we confirmed that Neg-t-SNE (Fig. 1d) produced more compact clusters
than t-SNE (Fig. 1f). See Supp. K and Alg. S1 for implementation details.
We emphasize that our analysis only holds because NEG has no learnable normalization parameter
Z. If it did, then such a Z could absorb the term Z̄ in Eq. (9), leaving the parameters θ∗ unchanged.


5     N EGATIVE SAMPLING SPECTRUM

Varying the fixed normalization constant Z̄ in Eq. (9) has important practical effects that lead to a
whole spectrum of embeddings in the NE setting. The original NEG loss function Eq. (8) corre-
sponds to Eq. (9) with Z̄ = |X|/m. We still refer to the more general case of using an arbitrary Z̄
in Eq. (9) as ‘negative sampling’ and ‘Neg-t-SNE’ in the context of neighbor embeddings.
Figs. 1a–e show a spectrum of Neg-t-SNE visualizations of the MNIST dataset for varying Z̄. Per
Cor. 2, higher values of Z̄ induce higher values for qθ , meaning that points move closer together.
Indeed, the scale of the embedding decreases for higher Z̄ as evident from the scale bars in the
bottom-right corner of each plot. Moreover, clusters become increasingly compact and then even
start to merge. For lower values of Z̄ the embedding scale is larger and clusters are more spread out.
Eventually, clusters lose almost any separation and start to overlap for very small Z̄.
                                           P
Cor. 2 implies that the partition function x qθ (x) should grow withP Z̄, and indeed this is what we
observed (Fig. 1i). The match between the sum of Cauchy kernels ij ϕ(ij) and Z̄ was not perfect,
but that was expected: The Cauchy kernel is bounded by 1 from above, so values Z̄ > n2 are not


matchable. Similarly, very small values of Z̄ are difficult to match because of the heavy tail of the
Cauchy kernel. See Supp. I for a toy example where the match is perfect.
By adjusting the Z̄ value, one can obtain Neg-t-SNE embeddings very similar to NC-t-SNE and
t-SNE. If the NC-t-SNE loss function Eq. (6) has its minimum at some θ∗ and Z NC-t-SNE , then
the Neg-t-SNE loss function Eq. (9) with Z̄ = Z NC-t-SNE is minimal at the same θ∗ . We con-
firmed this experimentally: Setting Z̄ = Z NC-t-SNE , yields a Neg-t-SNE embedding (Fig. 1c) closely
resembling that of NC-t-SNE (NCVis) (Fig. 1g). Similarly, setting Z̄ to the partition function
Z(θt-SNE ), obtained by running t-SNE, yields a Neg-t-SNE embedding closely resembling that of
t-SNE (Figs. 1b, f). We used kNN recall and correlation between pairwise distances for quantitative
confirmation (Supp. H).
The Neg-t-SNE spectrum is strongly related to the attraction-repulsion spectrum of
Böhm et al. (2022). They introduced a prefactor (‘exaggeration’) to the attractive term in t-SNE’s
loss, which increases the attractive forces, and obtained embeddings similar to our spectrum when
varying this parameter. We can explain this as follows. The repulsive term in the NCE loss Eq. (3)
has a prefactor m and our spectrum arises from the loss Eq. (9) by varying Z̄ in the term Z̄m.
Equivalently, our spectrum can be obtained by varying the m value (number of noise samples per
one skNN edge) while holding Z̄m fixed (Fig. S8). In other words, our spectrum arises from varying
the repulsion strength in the contrastive setting, while Böhm et al. (2022) obtained the analogous
spectrum by varying the repulsion strength in the t-SNE setting (see also Supp. B.2).


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    UMAP’ S CONCEPTUAL RELATION TO t-SNE
Our comparison of NEG and NCE in Sec. 4 allows us for the first time to conceptually relate UMAP
and t-SNE. Originally, McInnes et al. (2018) motivated the UMAP algorithm by a specific choice
of weights on the skNN graph and the binary cross-entropy loss. Following LargeVis (Tang et al.,
2016), they implemented a sampling-based scheme which they referred to as ‘negative sampling’,
although UMAP’s loss function Eq. (7) does not look like the NEG loss Eq. (8). Thus, it has been
unclear if UMAP actually uses Mikolov et al. (2013)’s NEG. Here, we settle this question:
Lemma 3. UMAP’s loss function (Eq. 7) is NEG (Eq. 8) with the parametric model q̃θ (ij) = 1/d2ij .

Proof. Indeed, qθ (ij) = 1/(1 + d2ij ) = (1/d2ij )/(1/d2ij + 1) = q̃θ (ij)/ q̃θ (ij) + 1 .

Lem. 3 tells us that UMAP uses NEG but not with a parametric model given by the Cauchy kernel.
Instead it uses a model q̃θ , which equals the inverse squared distance between embedding points.
For large embedding distances dij both models behave alike, but for nearby points they strongly
differ: The inverse-square kernel 1/d2ij diverges when dij → 0, unlike the Cauchy kernel 1/(1+d2ij ).
Despite this qualitative difference, we found empirically that UMAP embeddings look very similar
to Neg-t-SNE embeddings at Z̄ = |X|/m, see Figs. 1d and h for the MNIST example.
To explain this observation, it is instructive to compare  the loss terms of Neg-t-SNE and
UMAP: The attractive term amounts to − log 1/(d2ij + 1) = log(1 + d2ij ) for UMAP and

− log 1/(d2ij + 1)/ 1/(d2ij + 1) + 1 = log(2 + d2ij ) for Neg-t-SNE, while the repulsive term

equals log (1 + d2ij )/d2ij and log (2 + d2ij )/(1 + d2ij ) , respectively. While the attractive terms
are similar, the repulsive term for UMAP diverges at zero but that of Neg-t-SNE does not (Fig. S7,
Supp. B.2). This divergence introduces numerical instability into the optimization process of UMAP.
We found that UMAP strongly depends on annealing its learning rate down to zero (Figs. 2a, b).
Without it, clusters appear fuzzy as noise pairs can experience very strong repulsion and get cat-
apulted out of their cluster (Fig. 2a). While Neg-t-SNE also benefits from this annealing scheme
(Fig. 2d), it produces a very similar embedding even without any annealing (Fig. 2c). Thus, UMAP’s
effective choice of the 1/d2ij kernel makes it less numerically stable and more dependent on opti-
mization tricks, compared to Neg-t-SNE.2 See Supp. E for more details.
Our conclusion is that at its heart, UMAP is NEG applied to the t-SNE framework. UMAP’s
sampling-based optimization is much more than a mere optimization trick; it enables us to con-
nect it theoretically to t-SNE. When UMAP’s loss function is seen as an instance of NEG, UMAP
does not use the Cauchy kernel but rather the inverse-square kernel. However, this does not make a
strong difference due to the learning rate decay. As discussed in Sec. 4, the fixed normalization con-
stant Z̄ in Neg-t-SNE / UMAP is much larger than the learned Z in NC-t-SNE or t-SNE’s partition
function. This explains why UMAP pulls points closer together than both NC-t-SNE and t-SNE and
is the reason for the typically more compact clusters in UMAP plots (Böhm et al., 2022).

7    C ONTRASTIVE NE AND CONTRASTIVE SELF - SUPERVISED LEARNING
Contrastive self-supervised representation learning (van den Oord et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2020; He
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020) and ‘contrastive neighbor embeddings’ (a term we
suggest for NC-t-SNE, Neg-t-SNE, UMAP, etc.) are conceptually very similar. The key difference
is that the latter use a fixed kNN graph to find pairs of similar objects, while the former rely on data
augmentations or context to generate pairs of similar objects on the fly. Other differences include
the representation dimension (∼ 128 vs. 2), the use of a neural network for parametric mapping, the
flavor of contrastive loss (InfoNCE vs. NCE / NEG), and the number of noise samples m. However,
these other differences are not crucial, as we establish here with our unified PyTorch framework.
As an example, we demonstrate that t-SNE can also be optimized using the InfoNCE loss, re-
sulting in ‘InfoNC-t-SNE’ (Supp. K and Alg. S1). Its result on MNIST was similar to that of
NC-t-SNE (Figs. 3b, c). For the default number of noise samples, m = 5, the embeddings of both
    2
      Recently, a pull request to UMAP’s GitHub repository effectively changed the kernel of parametric UMAP
to the Cauchy kernel, in order to overcome numerical instabilities via an ad hoc fix, see Supp. E.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   (a) Neg-t-SNE           (b) NC-t-SNE           (c) InfoNC-t-SNE


               (d) Param. Neg-t-SNE     (e) Param. NC-t-SNE   (f) Param. InfoNC-t-SNE

Figure 3: NE embeddings of MNIST are qualitatively similar in the non-parametric (top) and para-
metric settings (bottom). We used our PyTorch framework with m = 5 and batch size b = 1024.


algorithms were visibly different from t-SNE proper (Fig. 1f). Recent work in self-supervised learn-
ing (Chen et al., 2020) reports improved performance for more noise samples, in agreement with the
theory of Gutmann & Hyvärinen (2012) and Ma & Collins (2018). We observed that both NC-t-SNE
and InfoNC-t-SNE with m = 500 approximated t-SNE much better (Figs. S18k and S19k). Like
t-SNE, but unlike the m = 5 setting, m = 500 required early exaggeration to prevent cluster
fragmentation (Figs. S18 and S19). We discuss InfoNC-t-SNE’s relation to TriMap in Supp. F.
Next, we used our PyTorch framework to obtain parametric versions of all contrastive NE algo-
rithms discussed here (NC-t-SNE, InfoNC-t-SNE, Neg-t-SNE, UMAP). We used a fully connected
neural network with three hidden layers as a parametric RD → Rd mapping and optimized its pa-
rameters using Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) (Supp. K). We used batch size b = 1024 and sampled
all m negative samples from within the batch; the dataset was shuffled each epoch before batch-
ing. Using all four loss functions, we were able to get parametric embeddings of MNIST that were
qualitatively similar to their non-parametric versions (Fig. 3). The parametric versions of NCE and
InfoNCE produced much larger embeddings than their non-parametric counterparts, however the
final loss values were very similar (Figs. S9a, b). For NCE, the larger scale of the parametric em-
bedding was compensated by a smaller learned normalization parameter Z, so that both parametric
and non-parametric versions were approximately normalized (Fig. S9c). Our parametric UMAP
implementation is very similar to that of Sainburg et al. (2021). But our parametric, approximate
t-SNE implementations strongly differ from the parametric t-SNE of van der Maaten (2009), which
constructed separate kNN graphs within each batch and optimized the vanilla t-SNE loss function.
Neighbor embeddings methods achieve impressive results with only few noise samples, while exis-
tent common practice in the self-supervised learning literature (Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020; He et al., 2020) recommends very large m. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate that using
only m = 16 non-curated (Wu et al., 2017; Roth et al., 2020) noise samples can suffice for image-
based self-supervised learning. We used a SimCLR setup (Chen et al., 2020) to train representations
of the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009) using a ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) backbone, a fixed
batch size of b = 1024 and varying number of noise samples m. Other implementation details


Table 1: Test set classification accuracies on CIFAR-10 representations obtained with InfoNCE loss
and batch size b = 1024 saturate already at a low number of noise samples m, common for neighbor
embeddings. We used the ResNet18 output H ∈ R512 and report mean ± std across three seeds.

                          m=2          m = 16        m = 128       m = 512       m = 2b − 2
      kNN classifier      86.9 ± 0.2   91.7 ± 0.1    92.0 ± 0.3    92.2 ± 0.2    91.9 ± 0.1
      Linear classifier   90.7 ± 0.2   93.1 ± 0.2    93.3 ± 0.3    93.2 ± 0.3    93.3 ± 0.1


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


follow Chen et al. (2020)’s CIFAR-10 setup (Supp. K.4). The classification accuracy, measured on
the ResNet output, saturates already at m = 16 noise samples (Tab. 1). Note that, different from
the original SimCLR setup, we decoupled the batch size from the number of noise samples. Re-
cent work found conflicting evidence when varying m for a fixed batch size (Mitrovic et al., 2020;
Nozawa & Sato, 2021; Ash et al., 2022). Future research is needed to perform more systematic
benchmarks into the importance of m. Here, we present these results only as a proof of principle
that a similarly low m as in neighbor embeddings (default m = 5) can work in a SimCLR setting.

8   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

In this work, we studied the relationship between two popular unsupervised learning methods, noise-
contrastive estimation (NCE) and negative sampling (NEG). We focused on their application to
neighbor embeddings (NE) because this is an active and important application area, but also because
NEs allow to directly visualize the NCE / NEG outcome and to form intuitive understanding of how
different algorithm choices affect the result. Our study makes three conceptual advances.
First, we showed that NEG replaces NCE’s learnable normalization parameter Z by a large con-
stant Z̄, forcing NEG to learn a scaled data distribution. While not explored here, this implies that
NEG can be used to learn probabilistic models and is not only applicable for embedding learning as
previously believed (Dyer, 2014; Ruder, 2016; Le-Khac et al., 2020). In the NE setting, NEG led
to the method Neg-t-SNE that differs from NCVis / NC-t-SNE (Artemenkov & Panov, 2020) by a
simple switch from the learnable to a fixed normalization constant. We argued that this can be a use-
ful hyperparameter because it moves the embedding along the attraction-repulsion spectrum similar
to Böhm et al. (2022) and hence can either emphasize more discrete structure with higher repulsion
(Fig. S16) or more continuous structure with higher attraction (see Figs. S13–S14 for developmental
single-cell datasets). Our quantitative evaluation in Supp. H corroborates this interpretation. We be-
lieve that inspection of several embeddings along the spectrum can guard against over-interpreting
any single embedding. Exploration of  the spectrum does not require specialized knowledge. For
UMAP, we always have Z̄ UMAP = n2 /m; for t-SNE, Böhm et al. (2022) found that the partition
function Z t-SNE typically lies in [50n, 100n]. Our PyTorch package allows the user to move along
the spectrum with a slider parameter s such that s=0 and s=1 correspond to Z̄ = Z t-SNE and
Z̄ = Z̄ UMAP , respectively, without a need for specifying Z̄ directly.
A caveat is that Thm. 1 and Cor. 2 both assume the model to be rich enough to perfectly fit the data
distribution. This is a strong and unrealistic assumption. In the context of NEs, the data distribution
is zero for most pairs of points, which is impossible to match using the Cauchy kernel. Nevertheless,
the consistency of MLE and thus t-SNE also depends on this assumption. Even without it, the
gradients of MLE, NCE, and NEG are very similar (Supp. B). Finally, we validated our Cor. 2 in a
toy setting in which its assumptions do hold (Supp. I).
Second, we demonstrated that UMAP, which uses NEG, differs from Neg-t-SNE only in UMAP’s
implicit use of a less numerically stable similarity function. This isolates the key aspect of UMAP’s
success: Instead of UMAP’s appraised (Oskolkov, 2022; Coenen & Pearce, 2022) high-dimensional
similarities, the refined Cauchy kernel, or its stated cross-entropy loss function, it is the application
of NEG that lets UMAP perform well and makes clusters in UMAP plots more compact and con-
nections between them more continuous than in t-SNE, in agreement with Böhm et al. (2022). To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first time UMAP’s and t-SNE’s loss functions, motivated very
differently, have been conceptually connected.
Third, we argued that contrastive NEs are closely related to contrastive self-supervised learning
(SSL) methods such as SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) which can be seen as parametric InfoNC-t-SNE
for learning representations in S 128 based on the unobservable similarity graph implicitly con-
structed via data augmentations. We feel that this connection has been underappreciated, with the lit-
erature on NEs and on self-supervised contrastive learning staying mostly disconnected. Exceptions
are the concurrent works of Hu et al. (2023) and Böhm et al. (2023). They propose to use t-SNE’s
Cauchy kernel for SSL. Instead, we bridge the gap between NE and SSL with our InfoNC-t-SNE, as
well as with parametric versions of all considered NE methods, useful for adding out-of-sample data
to an existing visualization. Moreover, we demonstrated that the feasibility of few noise samples in
NE translates to the SimCLR setup. We developed a concise PyTorch framework optimizing all of
the above, which we hope will facilitate future dialogue between the two research communities.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Philipp Berens for comments and support as well as James Melville for discussions.
This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Germany’s Research
Foundation) via SFB 1129 (240245660; S.D., F.A.H.) as well as via Excellence Clusters 2181/1
“STRUCTURES” (390900948; S.D., F.A.H.) and 2064 “Machine Learning: New Perspectives for
Science” (390727645; J.N.B., D.K.), by the German Ministry of Education and Research (Tübingen
AI Center, 01IS18039A; J.N.B., D.K.), and by the Cyber Valley Research Fund (D.30.28739;
J.N.B.).
The authors thank the International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-
IS) for supporting J.N.B.

E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work analyses connections between popular contrastive learning methods and in particular vi-
sualization methods. Visualization methods are fundamental in exploratory data analysis, e.g., in
computational biology. Given the basic nature of visualization it can of course potentially be used
for malicious goals, but we expect mostly positive societal effects such as more reliable exploration
of biological data.
Similarly, contrastive self-supervised learning has the potential to overcome the annotation bottle-
neck that machine learning faces. This might free countless hours of labelling for more produc-
tive use but could also enable institutions with sufficient resources to learn from larger and larger
datasets, potentially concentrating power.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
All of our results are reproducible. We included proofs for the theoretical statement Cor. 2 and those
in Supp. B and D. The datasets used in the experiments including preprocessing steps are described
in Supp. J. We discuss the most important implementation details in the main text, e.g., in Sec. 7.
An extensive discussion of our implementation is included in Supp. K and in Alg. S1.
Our code and instructions for how to reproduce the experiments are publicly available. We separated
the implementation of contrastive neighbor embeddings from the scripts and notebooks needed to
reproduce our results, to provide dedicated repositories for people interested in using our method and
people wanting to reproduce our results. The contrastive neighbor embedding implementation can be
found at https://github.com/berenslab/contrastive-ne and the scripts and note-
books for reproducing our results at https://github.com/hci-unihd/cl-tsne-umap.
The relevant commits in both repositories are tagged iclr2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ehsan Amid and Manfred K Warmuth. TriMap: Large-scale Dimensionality Reduction Using
  Triplets. arXiv preprint arxiv: 1910.00204, 2019.
Aleksandr Artemenkov and Maxim Panov. NCVis: Noise Contrastive Approach for Scalable Visu-
  alization. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp. 2941–2947, 2020.
Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dipendra Misra. Investigating the Role of
  Negatives in Contrastive Representation Learning. In Proceedings of The 25th International Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  7187–7209, 2022.
Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning Representations by Maximiz-
  ing Mutual Information across Views. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 32, pp. 15535–15545, 2019.
Randall Balestriero and Yann LeCun. Contrastive and Non-Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
  Recover Global and Local Spectral Embedding Methods. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Etienne Becht, Leland McInnes, John Healy, Charles-Antoine Dutertre, Immanuel WH Kwok,
  Lai Guan Ng, Florent Ginhoux, and Evan W Newell. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing
  single-cell data using UMAP. Nature Biotechnology, 37(1):38–44, 2019.
Jan Niklas Böhm, Philipp Berens, and Dmitry Kobak. Attraction-Repulsion Spectrum in Neighbor
  Embeddings. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(95):1–32, 2022.
Jan Niklas Böhm, Philipp Berens, and Dmitry Kobak. Unsupervised visualization of image datasets
  using contrastive learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised Learning of Visual Features by Contrasting Cluster Assignments. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9912–9924, 2020.
David M Chan, Roshan Rao, Forrest Huang, and John F Canny. t-SNE-CUDA: GPU-Accelerated
  t-SNE and its Applications to Modern Data. In 2018 30th International Symposium on Computer
  Architecture and High Performance Computing, pp. 330–338. IEEE, 2018.
Tara Chari, Joeyta Banerjee, and Lior Pachter. The Specious Art of Single-Cell Genomics. bioRxiv,
  2021.
Benjamin Charlier, Jean Feydy, Joan Alexis Glaunès, François-David Collin, and Ghislain Durif.
  Kernel Operations on the GPU, with Autodiff, without Memory Overflows. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(74):1–6, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A Simple Framework for
  Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–1607, 2020.
Andy Coenen and Adam Pearce. A deeper dive into UMAP theory. https://pair-code.
  github.io/understanding-umap/supplement.html, 2022. Accessed: 2022-05-11.
Sebastian Damrich and Fred A Hamprecht. On UMAP’s True Loss Function. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 5798–5809, 2021.
Aaron Defazio, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. SAGA: A fast incremental gradient
  method with support for non-strongly convex composite objectives. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 27, 2014.
Andrew Draganov, Tyrus Berry, Jakob Rødsgaard Jørgensen, Katrine Scheel Nellemann, Ira Assent,
  and Davide Mottin. GiDR-DUN; Gradient Dimensionality Reduction–Differences and Unifica-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09689, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chris Dyer. Notes on Noise Contrastive Estimation and Negative Sampling. arXiv preprint arxiv:
  1410.8251, 2014.
Peter Eisenmann. Fast Visualization of High-Dimensional Data via Parallelized UMAP on GPUs.
  Master’s thesis, Karlsruhe Institue of Technology, 2019.
Yoav Goldberg and Omer Levy. word2vec Explained: Deriving Mikolov et al.’s Negative-Sampling
  Word-Embedding Method. arXiv preprint arxiv: 1402.3722, 2014.
Michael U Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 297–304, 2010.
Michael U Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-Contrastive Estimation of Unnormalized Statisti-
 cal Models, with Applications to Natural Image Statistics. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
 13(2), 2012.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum Contrast for
  Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Sam Roweis. Stochastic Neighbor Embedding. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 15, pp. 857–864, 2002.
Tianyang Hu, Zhili Liu, Fengwei Zhou, Wenjia Wang, and Weiran Huang. Your Contrastive Learn-
  ing Is Secretly Doing Stochastic Neighbor Embedding. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. Exploring the
  Limits of Language Modeling. arXiv preprint arxiv: 1602.02410, 2016.
Sabina Kanton, Michael James Boyle, Zhisong He, Malgorzata Santel, Anne Weigert, Fátima
  Sanchı́s-Calleja, Patricia Guijarro, Leila Sidow, Jonas Simon Fleck, Dingding Han, et al.
  Organoid single-cell genomic atlas uncovers human-specific features of brain development. Na-
  ture, 574(7778):418–422, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 1–15, 2015.
Dmitry Kobak and Philipp Berens. The art of using t-SNE for single-cell transcriptomics. Nature
 Communications, 10(1):1–14, 2019.
Dmitry Kobak and George C Linderman. Initialization is critical for preserving global data structure
 in both t-SNE and UMAP. Nature Biotechnology, pp. 1–2, 2021.
Dmitry Kobak, George Linderman, Stefan Steinerberger, Yuval Kluger, and Philipp Berens. Heavy-
 Tailed Kernels Reveal a Finer Cluster Structure in t-SNE Visualisations. In Joint European Con-
 ference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 124–139. Springer,
 2019.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s thesis, University
  of Toronto, 2009.
Phuc H Le-Khac, Graham Healy, and Alan F Smeaton. Contrastive Representation Learning: A
  Framework and Review. IEEE Access, 8:193907–193934, 2020.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. Neural Word Embedding as Implicit Matrix Factorization. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27, pp. 2177–2185, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


George C Linderman, Manas Rachh, Jeremy G Hoskins, Stefan Steinerberger, and Yuval Kluger.
  Fast interpolation-based t-SNE for improved visualization of single-cell RNA-seq data. Nature
  Methods, 16(3):243–245, 2019.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic Gradient Descent with Warm Restarts. Pro-
   ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 1–16, 2017.
Zhuang Ma and Michael Collins. Noise Contrastive Estimation and Negative Sampling for Condi-
  tional Models: Consistency and Statistical Efficiency. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3698–3707, 2018.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and
  Projection for Dimension Reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed Represen-
  tations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 26, pp. 3111–3119, 2013.
Jovana Mitrovic, Brian McWilliams, and Melanie Rey. Less can be more in contrastive learning. In
  Proceedings on ”I Can’t Believe It’s Not Better!” at NeurIPS Workshops, pp. 70–75, 2020.
Ashwin Narayan, fBonnie Berger, and Hyunghoon Cho. Assessing single-cell transcriptomic vari-
  ability through density-preserving data visualization. Nature Biotechnology, pp. 1–10, 2021.
Corey J Nolet, Victor Lafargue, Edward Raff, Thejaswi Nanditale, Tim Oates, John Zedlewski, and
  Joshua Patterson. Bringing UMAP Closer to the Speed of Light with GPU Acceleration. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 418–426, 2021.
Kento Nozawa and Issei Sato. Understanding Negative Samples in Instance Discriminative Self-
  supervised Representation Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, pp. 5784–5797, 2021.
Nikolay Oskolkov. How Exactly UMAP Works. https://towardsdatascience.com/
  how-exactly-umap-works-13e3040e1668, 2022. Accessed: 2022-05-11.
Jonathan S Packer, Qin Zhu, Chau Huynh, Priya Sivaramakrishnan, Elicia Preston, Hannah Dueck,
  Derek Stefanik, Kai Tan, Cole Trapnell, Junhyong Kim, Robert H. Waterston, and John I. Murray.
  A lineage-resolved molecular atlas of C. elegans embryogenesis at single-cell resolution. Science,
  365(6459):1265–1274, 2019.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–
  8035, 2019.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Pavlin G. Poličar, Martin Stražar, and Blaž Zupan. openTSNE: a modular Python library for t-SNE
  dimensionality reduction and embedding. bioRxiv, 2019.
Karsten Roth, Timo Milbich, and Bjorn Ommer. PADS: Policy-Adapted Sampling for Visual Sim-
  ilarity Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 6568–6577, 2020.
Sebastian Ruder. On word embeddings - Part 2: Approximating the Softmax. http://ruder.
  io/word-embeddings-softmax, 2016. Accessed: 2022-05-17.
Tim Sainburg, Leland McInnes, and Timothy Q Gentner. Parametric UMAP Embeddings for Rep-
  resentation and Semisupervised Learning. Neural Computation, 33(11):2881–2907, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Benjamin Szubert, Jennifer E Cole, Claudia Monaco, and Ignat Drozdov. Structure-preserving
  visualisation of high dimensional single-cell datasets. Scientific Reports, 9(1):1–10, 2019.
Jian Tang, Jingzhou Liu, Ming Zhang, and Qiaozhu Mei. Visualizing large-scale and high-
   dimensional data. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web,
   pp. 287–297, 2016.
Clanuwat Tarin, B Mikel, K Asanobu, L Alex, Y Kazuaki, and H David. Deep Learning for Classical
  Japanese Literature. In Proceedings of 2018 Workshop on Machine Learning for Creativity and
  Design (Thirty-second Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems), volume 3, 2018.
Joshua B Tenenbaum, Vin De Silva, and John C Langford. A Global Geometric Framework for
  Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction. Science, 290(5500):2319–2323, 2000.
Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive Multiview Coding. In Proceedings of
  the European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 776–794. Springer, 2020.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation Learning with Contrastive Pre-
  dictive Coding. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–1807, 2018.
Laurens van der Maaten. Learning a Parametric Embedding by Preserving Local Structure. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 384–391,
  2009.
Laurens van der Maaten. Accelerating t-SNE using Tree-Based Algorithms. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 15(1):3221–3245, 2014.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 9(11):2579–2605, 2008.
Daniel E. Wagner, Caleb Weinreb, Zach M. Collins, James A. Briggs, Sean G. Megason, and Al-
  lon M. Klein. Single-cell mapping of gene expression landscapes and lineage in the zebrafish
  embryo. Science, 360(6392):981–987, 2018.
Yingfan Wang, Haiyang Huang, Cynthia Rudin, and Yaron Shaposhnik. Understanding How Dimen-
  sion Reduction Tools Work: An Empirical Approach to Deciphering t-SNE, UMAP, TriMAP,
  and PaCMAP for Data Visualization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:1–73, 2021.
Chao-Yuan Wu, R Manmatha, Alexander J Smola, and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Sampling Matters in
  Deep Embedding Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 2840–2848, 2017.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised Feature Learning via Non-
  Parametric Instance Discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3733–3742, 2018.
Zhirong Yang, Irwin King, Zenglin Xu, and Erkki Oja. Heavy-Tailed Symmetric Stochastic Neigh-
  bor Embedding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2169–2177, 2009.
Zhirong Yang, Jaakko Peltonen, and Samuel Kaski. Scalable optimization of neighbor embedding
  for visualization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 127–135, 2013.
Zhirong Yang, Yuwei Chen, Denis Sedov, Samuel Kaski, and Jukka Corander. Stochastic cluster
  embedding. Statistics and Computing, 33(1):12, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UPPLEMENTARY TEXT

A     P ROBABILISTIC FRAMEWORKS OF NCE AND I NFO NCE
In this section we recap the probabilistic frameworks of NCE (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; 2012)
and InfoNCE (Jozefowicz et al., 2016; van den Oord et al., 2018).

A.1    NCE

In NCE the unsupervised problem of parametric density estimation is turned into a supervised prob-
lem in which the data samples need to be identified in a set S containing N data samples s1 , . . . , sN
and m times as many noise samples t1 , . . . , tmN drawn from a noise distribution ξ, which can be
(but does not have to be) the uniform distribution. In other words, we are interested in the posterior
probability P(y|x) of element x ∈ S coming from the data (y = data) rather than from the noise
distribution (y = noise).
The probability of sampling x from noise, P(x|noise), is just the noise distribution ξ, and similarly
P(x|data) is the data distribution p. Since the latter is unknown, it is replaced by the model qθ .
Since S contains m times as many noise samples as data samples, the prior class probabilities are
P(data) = 1/(m + 1) and P(noise) = m/(m + 1). Thus, the unconditional probability of an
element of S is P(x) = (qθ (x) + mξ(x))/(m + 1). The posterior probability for classifying some
given element x of S as data rather than noise is thus
                                       P(x|data)P(data)        qθ (x)
                         P(data|x) =                    =                .                           (10)
                                            P(x)          qθ (x) + mξ(x)

NCE optimizes the parameters θ by maximizing the log-likelihood of the posterior class distribu-
tions, or, equivalently, by minimizing the negative log-likelihoods. This is the same as a sum over
binary cross-entropy losses (Eq. (2) in the main text):
                     " N                                XmN                               #
       ∗
                         X                qθ (si )                           qθ (ti )
      θ = arg min −          log                       −     log 1 −                        .  (11)
                θ        i=1
                                   qθ (si ) + mξ(si )    i=1
                                                                      qθ (ti ) + mξ(ti )

In expectation, we have the loss function (Eq. (4) in the main text)

          NCE                           qθ (s)                              qθ (t)
        L      (θ) = −Es∼p log                        − mEt∼ξ log 1 −                  .             (12)
                                   qθ (s) + mξ(s)                     qθ (t) + mξ(t)

                                       h                        −1 i
Since qθ (x)/ qθ (x) + mξ(x) = 1/ 1 + qθ (x)/ mξ(x)                  , NCE’s loss function can also be

                                                           qθ (x)
seen as binary logistic regression loss function with log mξ(x)     as the input to the logistic function:

                                 qθ (s)                             qθ (t)
 LNCE (θ) = −Es∼p log σ log                   − mEt∼ξ log 1 − σ log            , (13)
                                mξ(s)                               mξ(t)

where σ(x) = 1/ 1 + exp(−x) is the logistic function.

A.2    I NFO NCE

Again, we are casting the unsupervised problem of density estimation as a supervised classification
problem. We consider a tuple of m + 1 samples T = (x0 , . . . , xm ) one of which comes from the
data and the rest from the noise distribution. Instead of classifying each sample independently as
noise or data (as in Sec. A.1), here we are interested in identifying the position of the single data
sample. This allows us to see the problem as a multi-class classification problem with m + 1 classes.
Let Y be the random variable that holds the index of the data sample. A priori, we have
P(Y = k) = 1/(m + 1) for all k = 0, . . . , m. Moreover, conditioned on sample k coming
from the data distribution, all other samples must come from the noise distribution, i.e., we


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


have P(xi |Y = k) = ξ(xi ) for i ̸= k. As the data distribution is unknown, we model it with
P(xk |Y = k) = qθ (xk ) as in Sec. A.1. This yields the likelihood of tuple T given the data in-
dex Y = k
                                                                 m
                                            Y           qθ (xk ) Y
                     P(T |Y = k) = qθ (xk )    ξ(xi ) =             ξ(xi ).                 (14)
                                                         ξ(xk ) i=0
                                                 i̸=k
Marginalizing over Y , we obtain
                                               m         m
                                          1 Y            X qθ (xk )
                                P(T ) =           ξ(xi )            .                               (15)
                                        m + 1 i=0          ξ(xk )
                                                            k=0
Finally, we can compute the posterior via Bayes’ rule as
                                                              qθ (xk )
                              P(T |Y = k)P(Y = k)     ξ(x )        qθ (xk )
             P(Y = k|T ) =                        = Pm qk (x ) = Pm            ,                    (16)
                                      P(T )               θ i
                                                                  i=0 qθ (xi )
                                                             i=0 ξ(xi )
where the last equality only holds for the uniform noise distribution. The InfoNCE loss is the cross-
entropy loss with respect to the true position of the data sample, i.e., in expectation and for uniform
ξ it reads:
                                                                 qθ (x)
                     LInfoNCE (θ) = −       E      log            P  m            .                 (17)
                                           x∼p           qθ (x) + i=1 qθ (xi )
                                       x1 ,...,xm ∼ξ
Similar to how the NCE loss can be seen as binary logistic regression loss function (Sec. A.1),
the  InfoNCE     loss can be viewed as multinomial logistic regression loss function with the terms
      qθ (xi )
log ξ(xi ) entering the softmax function.

B     G RADIENTS
B.1   G RADIENTS OF MLE, NCE, AND NEG

Here, we compute the gradients of MLE, NCE, and NEG, elaborating the discus-
sion in Artemenkov & Panov (2020).            Following the discussion in Secs. 3.2 and 4,
we consider
          P a normalized          model qθ (x)     =    ϕθ (x)/Z(θ) with partition function
                       ′
Z(θ) =      x ′ ϕ θ (x   ) for MLE, a model qθ,Z (x) =  ϕθ (x)/Z with learnable normalization
parameter Z for NCE, and a model qθ,Z̄ (x) = ϕθ (x)/Z̄ with fixed normalization constant Z̄ for
NEG. We show the results both for general Z̄ and noise distribution ξ and for the default value
Z̄ = |X|/m and a uniform noise distribution ξ(x) = 1/|X|.
Thus, the losses are
     LMLE (θ) = −Ex∼p log qθ (x) ,

                                                                                                    (18)

                                     qθ,Z (x)                                      qθ,Z (x)
  LNCE (θ, Z) = −Ex∼p log                             − mEx∼ξ log 1 −                           ,   (19)
                              qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)                              qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)
                                     qθ,Z̄ (x)                                     qθ,Z̄ (x)

  LNEG (θ, Z̄) = −Ex∼p log                            − mEx∼ξ log 1 −                           ,   (20)
                              qθ,Z̄ (x) + mξ(x)                             qθ,Z̄ (x) + mξ(x)

       NEG                      ϕθ (x)                               ϕθ (x)
     L (θ) = −Ex∼p log                         − mEx∼ξ log 1 −                      .               (21)
                              ϕθ (x) + 1                          ϕθ (x) + 1
For MLE, we find
                dLMLE (θ)    d
                          =      −Ex∼p log qθ (x)                                                   (22)
                     dθ     dθ                                                           !
                             d        X                                 X
                          =        −         p(x) log ϕθ (x) + log             ϕθ (x)               (23)
                            dθ          x                                  x
                               X   p(x) dϕθ (x)                  1         X dϕθ (x)
                          =−                   ·          −P             ·                          (24)
                                x
                                       ϕθ (x)      dθ          x ϕθ (x)      x
                                                                                     dθ
                               X   p(x)
                                                        1    dϕθ (x)
                          =−                   −1 ·        ·         .                              (25)
                                x
                                       qθ (x)         Z(θ)     dθ


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the NCE loss we will use the templates

                                 f (z)                  1
                        d log f (z)+c      d log 1+c/f      (z)
                                         =                                                          (26)
                               dz                  dz
                                             d log(1 + c/f (z))
                                         =−                                                         (27)
                                                      dz
                                                   1              −c       df (z)
                                         =−                   ·       2
                                                                         ·        ,                 (28)
                                             1 + c/f (z) f (z)               dz
                                               c            1       df (z)
                                         =            ·           ·                                 (29)
                                           f (z) + c f (z)            dz

                                   c
                        d log f (z)+c        d log (f (z)/c + 1)
                                         =−                                                         (30)
                               dz                     dz
                                                   1             1 df (z)
                                         =−                   · ·                                   (31)
                                             f (z)/c + 1 c             dz
                                                 1           df (z)
                                         =−               ·                                         (32)
                                             f (x) + c          dz
with some differentiable function f (z) and c independent of z.
For the NCE loss we get
 dLNCE (θ, Z)

                 d                          qθ,Z (x)                                     qθ,Z (x)
              =       −Ex∼p log                              − mEx∼ξ log 1 −
      dθ         dθ                   qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)                             qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)
                                                                                                     (33)

                 d                          qθ,Z (x)                                mξ(x)
              =       −Ex∼p log                              − mEx∼ξ log
                 dθ                   qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)                        qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)
                                                                                                     (34)
                   X                 mξ(x)             1     dqθ,Z (x)
              =−        p(x)                                                                         (35)
                    x
                              q θ,Z (x) +  mξ(x)   q θ,Z (x)    dθ

                                            −1           dqθ,Z (x)
                        +mξ(x)                                                                       (36)
                                    qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)        dθ
                   X   p(x)
                                                 mξ(x)          1 dϕθ (x)
              =−                    −1                                    .                          (37)
                    x
                         qθ,Z (x)          qθ,Z (x) +  mξ(x)    Z    dθ

We used our templates at the third equality sign with f (z) = qθ,Z (x) and c = mξ(x). The derivation
of the gradients for the NEG loss is entirely analogous to that for NCE with qθ,Z (x) replaced by
qθ,Z̄ (x).
Together, the gradients of the three losses are
        dLMLE (θ)        X   p(x)
                                                                               1      dϕθ (x)
                    =−                   −1                                                   ,     (38)
            dθ                   qθ (x)                                       Z(θ)      dθ
                         x∈X
     dLNCE (θ, Z)

                         X        p(x)                          mξ(x)           1     dϕθ (x)
                    =−                     −1                                                 ,     (39)
           dθ                    qθ,Z (x)                 qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x)      Z       dθ
                         x∈X
     dLNEG (θ, Z̄)

                         X        p(x)                           mξ(x)          1     dϕθ (x)
                    =−                     −1                                                 ,     (40)
           dθ                    qθ,Z̄ (x)                qθ,Z̄ (x) + mξ(x)     Z̄      dθ
                         x∈X
        dLNEG (θ)        X   p(x)
                                            m                      1                  dϕθ (x)
                    =−                   −                                                    .     (41)
            dθ                   ϕθ (x) |X|                   ϕθ (x) + 1                dθ
                           x∈X

The fractions involving mξ(x) in the gradients of LNCE and LNEG tend to one as m → ∞ high-
lighting that a higher number of noise samples improves NCE’s approximation of MLE (Gutmann


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


& Hyvärinen, 2010; 2012; Artemenkov & Panov, 2020). All four gradients are the same up to this
factor and the different choice of normalization. In all of them, the models qθ , qθ,Z , or qθ,Z̄ try to
match the data distribution p according to the first factor in each gradient. This similarity of the
gradients holds independent of the assumptions of Thm. 1 and Cor. 2. We optimize all losses with
stochastic gradient descent and can therefore expect our analysis to hold even if the assumptions are
violated.

B.2      G RADIENTS FOR NEIGHBOR EMBEDDINGS

Here, we rewrite the above gradients for the case of neighbor embeddings. This means that MLE,
NCE, and NEG become t-SNE, NC-t-SNE, and Neg-t-SNE, respectively. We  include two variants
of Neg-t-SNE: for a general value of Z̄ and for the default value Z̄ = n2 /m used by UMAP.
In addition, we also show the gradient of UMAP. Recall that for neighbor embedding, we have
X = {ij|1 ≤ i < j ≤ n}, θ = {e1 , . . . , en }, and ϕ(ij) = 1/(1 + ∥ei − ej ∥2 ). The noise
                                                                     −1
distributions are close to uniform, see Supp. D, so that ξ(ij) ≈ n2     .


             dLt-SNE

                        X                                               ϕ(ij)
                     =2                                       p(ij) − P                                     ϕ(ij)(ej − ei )   (42)
              dei                                                      k̸=l ϕ(kl)
                                 j̸=i

          dLNC-t-SNE

                        X         mξ(ij)                                ϕ(ij)
                     =2       ϕ(ij)
                                                              p(ij) −                                       ϕ(ij)(ej − ei )   (43)
            dei                     + mξ(ij)                              Z
                        j̸=i
                             | Z {z        }
                                            →1 for m→∞
                                        z     }|         {
         Neg-t-SNE

    dL               (Z̄)        X           mξ(ij)                      ϕ(ij)
                            =2          ϕ(ij)
                                                              p(ij) −                                       ϕ(ij)(ej − ei )   (44)
            dei                               + mξ(ij)                    Z̄
                                 j̸=i    Z̄

         dLNeg-t-SNE

                        X                       1                        ϕ(ij)
                     ≈2                                       p(ij) −    n
                                                                                                            ϕ(ij)(ej − ei )   (45)
            dei                             ϕ(ij) + 1                    2
                                                                            /m
                                 j̸=i       | {z }
                                             ∈[0.5,1]

             dLUMAP

                       X                                                 ϕ(ij)           1
                    =2                                        p(ij) −    n
                                                                                                            ϕ(ij)(ej − ei )   (46)
               dei                                                       2
                                                                            /m       1 − ϕ(ij)
                                 j̸=i                                                | {z }
                                                                                 numerically unstable
                                                                                    for ei ≈ ej



As above, we see that NC-t-SNE and Neg-t-SNE have terms that go to one for m → ∞. For
                                                                      −1
Neg-t-SNE with default Z̄, we used the approximation ξ(ij) ≈ n2          . Here, the corresponding term
is restricted to the interval [0.5, 1]. More generally, we see that the repulsive force in Neg-t-SNE
scales as 1/Z̄. ItsP  default value of n(n − 1)/(2m) is much larger than the typical values of the
partition function k̸=l ϕ(kl) in t-SNE or the learned Z of NC-t-SNE, which are typically in the
range [50n, 100n] (Böhm et al., 2022), leading to much smaller repulsion in default Neg-t-SNE and
in UMAP than in NC-t-SNE or t-SNE. Finally, the repulsive part of the UMAP gradient contains a
term that diverges for ei ≈ ej , leading to ϕ(ij) ≈ 1, reflecting the discussion of UMAP’s numerical
instability in Sec. 6.

C     UMAP’ S LOSS FUNCTION

In the original UMAP paper, McInnes et al. (2018) define weights µ(ij) ∈ [0, 1] on the skNN graph
and state that these shall be reproduced by the low-dimensional similarities ϕ(ij) by means of a sum
of binary cross-entropy loss functions, one for each edge ij
                        Xh                                                    i
                      −        µ(ij) log ϕ(ij) + 1 − µ(ij) log 1 − ϕ(ij) .                       (47)
                                   ij

Indeed, this loss has its minimum at µ(ij) = ϕ(ij) for all ij. However, it is of course not possible to
achieve zero loss for any real-world data using the Cauchy kernel in two dimensions. Experiments
show that using this loss function in practice leads to an excess of repulsion and consequently to very


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


poor embeddings (Böhm et al., 2022). The actual UMAP implementation has much less repulsion
due to the sampling of repulsive edges, see below.
As the weights µ(ij) are only supported on the sparse skNN graph, most of the 1 − µ(ij) terms
are equal to one. To simplify the loss function, the UMAP paper replaces all 1 − µ(ij) terms by 1,
leading to the loss function
                              Xh                                     i
                            −      µ(ij) log ϕ(ij) + log 1 − ϕ(ij) .                          (48)
                                ij


In the implementation, UMAP samples the repulsive edges, which drastically changes the
loss (Böhm et al., 2022) to the effective loss (Damrich & Hamprecht, 2021)
                        Xh                       m(di + dj )                i
                      −       µ(ij) log ϕ(ij) +              log 1 − ϕ(ij) ,      (49)
                         ij
                                                       2n
              P
where di =       j µ(ij) denotes the degree of node i and the number of negative samples m is a
hyperparameter. By default, m = 5. Since di ≈ log(k), the effective loss only has about m log(k)/n
of the repulsion in the originally stated loss function. As a result, the µ(ij) are not reproduced in the
embedding space by this loss function.
We rewrite thisPeffective loss function further to fit into our framework. The attractive prefactors
µ(ij) sum to ij µ(ij), while the repulsive prefactors add up to m times this factor. Dividing
the entire loss function by this term does not change its  P properties. But then, we can write  the
prefactors as probability distributions p(ij) = µ(ij)/ ij µ(ij) and ξ(ij) = p(i) + p(j) /2n
              P
using p(i) = j p(ij). With this, we can write the effective loss function as
                         X                           X
                       −     p(ij) log ϕ(ij) − m          ξ(ij) log 1 − ϕ(ij) ,                 (50)
                          ij                            ij

or in the expectation form as

                           −Eij∼p log ϕ(ij) − mEij∼ξ log 1 − ϕ(ij) ,                                (51)
like we do in Eq. (7).


D     N OISE DISTRIBUTIONS

Here we discuss the various noise distributions used by UMAP, NCVis, and our framework. The
main claim is that all these noise distributions are sufficiently close to uniform, even though their
exact shape depends on the implementation details.
Since our actual implementation, as well as the reference implementations of UMAP and NCVis,
considers edges ij and ji separately, we will do so from now on. Hence, there is now a total of
E := 2|skNN| edges. WePnalways assume that p(ij) = p(ji) and adding up the probabilities for both
directions yields one: i,j=1 p(ij) = 1. For a given data distribution over pairs of points ij, we
               Pn                P
define p(i) = j=1 p(ij) so that i p(i) = 1. As discussed in Supp. B of Damrich & Hamprecht
(2021), the p(i) values are approximately constant when p(ij) is uniform on the skNN graph or
proportional to the UMAP similarities.

D.1   N OISE DISTRIBUTIONS OF UMAP AND NCV IS

UMAP’s noise distribution is derived in Damrich & Hamprecht (2021) and reads in our notation
(Supp. C)
                                             p(i) + p(j)
                                     ξ(ij) =             .                                   (52)
                                                  2n
Note that UMAP uses a weighted version of the skNN graph. Still, ξ is close to uniform, see Supp.
B of Damrich & Hamprecht (2021).


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The noise distribution of NCVis is also close to being uniform and equals (Artemenkov & Panov,
2020):
                                                       p(i)
                                              ξ(ij) =        .                                    (53)
                                                         n
This is a slightly different noise distribution than in UMAP and in particular it is asymmetric. How-
ever, we argue that in practice it is equivalent to the same noise distribution as in UMAP. The noise
distribution is used in two ways in NCVis: for sampling noise samples and in the posterior class
probabilities
                                                        qθ,Z (ij)
                                   P(data|ij) =                      .                            (54)
                                                  qθ,Z (ij) + mξ(ij)
Both in the reference NCVis implementation and in ours, for the second role, the noise distribution
is explicitly approximated by the uniform one and we use the posterior probabilities
                                                      qθ,Z (ij)
                                P(data|ij) =                    1    .                           (55)
                                               qθ,Z (ij) + m 2|skNN|

Together with the symmetry of the Cauchy kernel this implies that the repulsion on the embedding
vectors ei and ej from noise sample ij and ji is the same. As a result, the expectation
                                                                     !
                                                      qθ,Z (ij)
                              Eij∼ξ log 1 −                     1                           (56)
                                               qθ,Z (ij) + m 2|skNN|

is the same for ξ(ij) = p(i)/n and for UMAP’s noise distribution
                                                 p(i) + p(j)
                                       ξ(ij) =               .                                   (57)
                                                      2n

D.2   E FFECT OF BATCHED TRAINING ON THE NOISE DISTRIBUTION

In our framework, the noise distribution is influenced by the batched training procedure (Alg. S1)
because the negative samples can come only from the current training batch.
In every epoch, we first shuffle the set of directed edges of the skNN graph and then chunk it into
batches. To emphasize, the batches consist of directed edges and not of the original data points. For
each edge in a batch, we take its head and sample m indices from the heads and tails of all edges in
the batch (excluding the already selected head) and use them as tails to form negative sample pairs.
To obtain a negative sample pair ij, the batch must contain some directed edge ik, providing the
head of the negative sample, and some pair lj or jl, providing the tail. We want to derive the
expected number of times that a directed edge ij is considered as a negative sample in a batch. For
simplicity, let us assume that the number of batches divides the number of directed edges E. As the
set of skNN edges is shuffled every epoch, the expected number of pairs ij as negative samples is
the same for all batches.
Let us consider a batch B of size b. We denote by Yrs the random variable that holds  P the num-
ber of times edge rs appears in B. We also introduce random variables Y¬rs =             t̸=r Yts and
         P
Yr¬s = t̸=s Yrt . Let p(r¬s) := p(¬sr) := p(r) − p(rs). For each occurrence of an i as head of
an edge in B, we sample m tails to create negative samples uniformly from all head and tails in B
with replacement, but we prevent sampling the identical head i as negative sample tail. If, however,
the same node i is part of the other edges in the batch, then it may be sampled and would create
a futile negative sample ii. There are m chances for creating a negative sample edge ij for every
head i and any occurrence of j in the batch. The number of heads i in the batch is Yij + Yi¬j and
the number of occurrences of j is Yij + Yji + Y¬ij + Yj¬i . Since we sample the tail of a negative
sample pair uniformly with replacement, any of the occurrences of j has probability 1/(2b−1) to be
selected. Hence, the expected number Nij of times that the ordered pair ij with i ̸= j is considered
as a negative sample in batch B is
                                                 Yij + Yji + Y¬ij + Yj¬i
                          Nij = m(Yij + Yi¬j )                           .                       (58)
                                                          2b − 1


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since a head i may not choose itself to form a negative sample, the expected number of times that ii
appears as negative sample in the batch is
                                       X          Yij − 1 + Yi¬j + Yji + Y¬ji
                          Nii = m           Yij                               .                  (59)
                                       j
                                                            2b − 1


Since the batches are sampled without replacement, the random variables Yrs are distributed accord-
ing to a multivariate hypergeometric distribution, so that

                                     E(Yrs ) = bp(rs),                                           (60)
                                   E(Y¬rs ) = bp(¬rs),                                           (61)
                                                 E−b
                                  Var(Yrs ) = b        p(rs) 1 − p(rs) ,                         (62)
                                                 E−1
                                                   E−b
                             Cov(Yrs , Y¬uv ) = −b       p(rs)p(¬uv).                            (63)
                                                   E−1

We use these expressions and analogous ones together with the symmetries p(rs) = p(sr) to com-
pute (leaving out intermediate algebra steps) the expectation of Nij over the shuffles:

                               mb          E−b               E−b
                  E(Nij ) =                    p(ij) + 2 b −       p(i)p(j) .                    (64)
                              2b − 1       E−1               E−1

Since we sample m negative samples for each positive sample and since each batch contains b
positive samples, we need to divide E(Nij ) by mb to obtain ξ(ij):

                                1         E−b               E−b
                   ξ(ij) =                    p(ij) + 2 b −       p(i)p(j) .                     (65)
                             2b − 1       E−1               E−1

Similarly,

                                 mb           b−1              E−b
                    E(Nii ) =               −     p(i) + 2 b −       p(i)2                       (66)
                                2b − 1        E−1              E−1

and hence the noise distribution value for the pair ii is

                                 1       b−1                 E−b
                    ξ(ii) =            −        p(i) + 2 b −       p(i)2 .                       (67)
                              2b − 1     E−1                 E−1

We see that the noise distribution depends on the batch size b. This is not surprising: For example,
if the batch size is equal to one, the ordered pair ij can only be sampled as a negative sample in the
single batch that consists of that pair. Indeed, for b = 1 our formula yields

                                              ξ(ij) = p(ij),                                     (68)

meaning that the data and the noise distributions coincide. Conversely, if b = E and there is only
one batch, we obtain
                                                     2E
                                          ξ(ij) =          p(i)p(j)                              (69)
                                                    2E − 1
and the noise distribution is close to uniform. For batch sizes between 1 and E the noise distribution
is in between these two extremes. For MNIST, E ≈ 1.5 · 106 , and in our experiments we used
b = 1024. This means that the prefactor of the share of the data distribution is about 0.0005 while
that of the near-uniform distribution p(i)p(j) is about 0.9995, so the resulting noise distribution is
close to uniform. Note that Thm. 1 and Cor. 2 only require the noise distribution to have full support
which is the case for any batch size greater than one.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (a) ζ = 10−3 , no annealing        (b) ζ = 10−10 , no annealing           (c) ζ = 0, no annealing


    (d) ζ = 10−3 , with annealing       (e) ζ = 10−10 , with annealing         (f) ζ = 0, with annealing

Figure S1: UMAP embeddings of the MNIST dataset, ablating numerical optimization tricks of
UMAP’s reference implementation. The learning rate annealing is crucial (bottom row) but safe-
guarding against divisions by zero in UMAP’s repulsive term Eq. (71) by adding ζ to the denomi-
nator has little effect. These experiments were run using the reference implementation, modified to
change the ζ value and to optionally switch off the learning rate annealing.


E    O PTIMIZATION TRICKS IN UMAP’ S REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATION
UMAP’s repulsive term                                                      !
                                                                1 + d2ij
                                    − log(1 − ϕ(ij)) = log                                                 (70)
                                                                  d2ij
can lead to numerical problems if the two points of the negative sample pair are very close. In
addition to the learning rate decay, discussed in Sec. 6, UMAP’s implementation uses further tricks
to prevent unstable or even crashing training.
In non-parametric UMAP’s reference implementation, the gradient on embedding position ei exerted
by a single sampled repulsive pair ij is actually
                                            1       1
                                        2 2               (ej − ei )                                       (71)
                                         dij + ζ 1 + d2ij
with ζ = 0.001 instead of ζ = 0. This corresponds to the full loss function

                                             ζ                         ζ
             −Eij∼p log(ϕ(ij)) − m 1 +            Eij∼ξ log 1 +            − ϕ(ij) .                       (72)
                                           1−ζ                       1−ζ
However, we found that ζ does not have much influence on the appearance of a UMAP embedding.
Fig. S1 shows MNIST embeddings obtained using the original UMAP implementation modified to
use different values of ζ. Neither a much smaller positive value such as ζ = 10−10 nor setting
ζ = 0 substantially changed the appearance of the embedding (even though some runs with ζ = 0
did crash). The learning rate annealing played a much bigger role in how the embedding looked like
(Fig. S1, bottom row).
The reference implementation of parametric UMAP uses automatic differentiation instead of im-
plementing the gradients manually. To avoid terms such as log(0) in the repulsive loss, it clips the
argument of the logarithm from below at the value ε = 10−4 , effectively using the loss function
                                          !                                           !
                             n      1 o                            n           1 o
          −Eij∼p log max ε,                  − mEij∼ξ log max ε, 1 −                     .      (73)
                                 1 + d2ij                                   1 + d2ij


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) UMAP, ε = 10−4 , no ann.      (b) UMAP, ε = 10−10 , no ann.


  (c) UMAP, ε = 10−4 , with ann.     (d) UMAP, ε = 10−10 , with ann.


(e) Neg-t-SNE, ε = 10−4 , no ann. (f) Neg-t-SNE, ε = 10−10 , no ann.        (g) Neg-t-SNE, ε = 0, no ann.


(h) Neg-t-SNE, ε = 10−4 , with ann.(i) Neg-t-SNE, ε = 10−10 , with ann. (j) Neg-t-SNE, ε = 0, with ann.

Figure S2: UMAP and Neg-t-SNE embeddings of the MNIST dataset using different values ε at
which we clip arguments to logarithm functions. These experiments were done using our imple-
mentation. Varying ε did not strongly influence the appearance of the embedding. But setting
ε = 0 led to crashing UMAP runs. Annealing the learning rate is important for UMAP, yet not for
Neg-t-SNE.



We employ a similar clipping in our code whenever we apply the logarithm function. Again, we
found that the exact value of ε is not important for our UMAP reimplementation, while using the
learning rate annealing is (Fig. S2, top two rows). In the extreme case of setting ε = 0, our UMAP
runs crashed. We believe that the reason is that we allow negative sample pairs to be of the form
ii, which would not send any gradient, but would lead to a zero argument to the logarithm. The
reference implementation of UMAP excludes such negative sample pairs ii.
Our Neg-t-SNE approach does not have any of these problems, as the repulsive term is upper
bounded

                                                 
                                          1                            !
                                        1+d2ij              2 + d2ij
                        − log 1 −      1
                                                   = log                  ≤ log(2)                    (74)
                                      1+d2ij
                                             +1             1 + d2ij


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and does not diverge for dij → 0. For this reason, Neg-t-SNE is not very sensitive to the value
at which we clip arguments to the logarithm and works even with ε = 0, both with and without
learning rate annealing (Fig. S2, bottom two rows).
The attractive terms in the loss functions do not pose numerical problems in practice due to the heavy
tail of the Cauchy kernel. That said, in order to keep different experiments and losses comparable,
we used clipping in both the attractive and the repulsive loss terms with ε = 10−10 for all neighbor
embedding plots computed with our framework unless otherwise stated.
A recent pull request (#856) to the parametric part of UMAP’s reference implementation proposed
another way to ameliorate the numerical instabilities. The clipping of the arguments to the loga-
rithm was replaced with a sigmoid of the logarithm of the Cauchy kernel, so that the attractive and
repulsive terms become


                      − log max ε, ϕ(ij) → − log σ log ϕ(ij)                ,                  (75)


                  − log max ε, 1 − ϕ(ij) → − log 1 − σ log ϕ(ij)               ,               (76)

where σ(x) = 1/ 1 + exp(−x) is the sigmoid        function.  This
                                                                change can seem drastic as, e.g., for

ϕ(ij) = 1 we have max ε, ϕ(ij) = 1, but σ log ϕ(ij) = 1/2. But unravelling the definitions
shows that this turns the loss function precisely into our Neg-t-SNE loss function since
                                             1                     1             ϕ(ij)
           σ log ϕ(ij) =                                    = 1 + ϕ(ij)−1 = ϕ(ij) + 1 .         (77)
                                 1 + exp − log ϕ(ij)

So, in order to overcome the numerical problems incurred by UMAP’s implicit choice of 1/d2ij as
similarity kernel, the pull request suggested a fix that turns out to be equivalent to negative sampling
using the Cauchy kernel. We encourage this change to UMAP as it makes its loss function equivalent
to our Neg-t-SNE and thus also conceptually more related to t-SNE. We also suggest to implement
it in the non-parametric case.

F    T RI M AP AND I NFO NC-t-SNE
The neighbor embedding method TriMap (Amid & Warmuth, 2019) also employs a contrastive
technique to compute the layout. TriMap considers triplets (i, j, k), where i and j are data points
that are more similar than i and k. It moves the embeddings ei and ej closer together and pushes ei
and ek further apart. While a full investigation of TriMap is beyond the scope of our work, here we
argue that it bears some similarity to InfoNC-t-SNE with m = 1.
First, we describe TriMap in more detail. Most of the triplets (i, j, k) consist of nearest neighbors
i and j and a random point k. By default, 12 nearest neighbors j are chosen for each i, using a
modified Euclidean distance. For each such pair (i, j) additional distinct points k (by default 4)
are chosen randomly from the set of all points excluding i and all the chosen j. This leads to 48
triplets (i, j, k) for each point i. Additionally, several (by default 3) triplets are formed for each i
with random j and k only ensuring that the similarity between i and j is larger than between i and
k. Thus, for each point i there are in total 51 triplets (i, j, k) leading to a grand total of 51n triplets.
These triplets are formed ahead of the layout optimization phase and kept fixed throughout. TriMap
also assigns a weight wijk to each triplet. This weight is larger for triplets in which i and j are much
more similar to each other than i and k.
In our notation, TriMap’s loss function can be written as
                  X               ϕ(ik)                   X                          ϕ(ij)
                        wijk                 = const −                    wijk                 .       (78)
                             ϕ(ij) + ϕ(ik)                                       ϕ(ij) + ϕ(ik)
               ijk∈triplets                                ijk∈triplets

This loss is very similar to the loss of InfoNC-t-SNE with m = 1:

                                                     ϕ(ij)
                                     − E log                     .                                     (79)
                                        ij∼p     ϕ(ij) + ϕ(ik)
                                        k∼U


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) TriMap default        (b) TriMap               (c) TriMap         (d) TriMap          (e) InfoNC-t-SNE
                           Eucl. kNN                no random          no weights                m=1

Figure S3: Ablating design choices of TriMap on the MNIST dataset. Simplifying TriMap leads to
an embedding similar to that of InfoNC-t-SNE with m = 1. The biggest difference results from the
omission of random triplets in panel c.

 Table S1: Quality of TriMap and InfoNC-t-SNE. Means and standard deviations over three runs.

                                                     kNN recall     Spearman correlation
                      TriMap (default)                0.098 ± 0        0.245 ± 0.005
                      TriMap (kNN)                    0.099 ± 0        0.232 ± 0.003
                      TriMap (no random)              0.101 ± 0        0.355 ± 0.004
                      TriMap (no weights)             0.099 ± 0        0.381 ± 0.004
                      InfoNC-t-SNE (m = 1)          0.085 ± 0.001      0.381 ± 0.006
                      InfoNC-t-SNE (m = 5)            0.104 ± 0        0.365 ± 0.005



The differences are: the absence of log; the presence of weights; the presence of random triplets;
nearest neighbors being based not exactly on Euclidean metric; and fixed triplets during optimiza-
tion. In the following we modify the reference TriMap implementation and ablate these differences
in order to see which ones are more or less important (Figure S3). We measure the quality of all
embeddings using two metrics (Tab. S1): as a global metric we use the Spearman correlation be-
tween high- and low-dimensional pairwise distances between 5000 randomly chosen points (Kobak
& Berens, 2019) and as a local metric we use kNN recall with k = 15 (Kobak & Berens, 2019).
First, we modified TriMap to use the 15 nearest neighbors in Euclidean metric. This did not change
the visual appearance of the MNIST embedding (Figs. S3a, b). Next, we additionally omitted the
random triplets. The resulting embedding became visually closer to the InfoNC-t-SNE embedding
(Fig. S3c). Finally, additionally setting all the weights wijk to one had only a small visual effect
(Fig. S3d). Together, these simplifications noticeably improved the global metric compared to the
default TriMap, while leaving the local metric almost unchanged (Tab. S1).
Similar to the experiments of Wang et al. (2021), our ablations made TriMap look very similar to
InfoNC-t-SNE with m = 1 (Fig. S3e), suggesting that the remaining differences between them do
not play a major role. This refers to the details of the optimization (e.g. fixed triplets vs. randomly
sampled triplets in each epoch, full-batch vs. stochastic gradient descent, momentum and adaptive
learning rates, etc.), as well as to the presence/absence of the logarithm in the loss function. Since

                                   ϕ(ij)                                 ϕ(ij)
                        d log   ϕ(ij)+ϕ(ik)           ϕ(ij) + ϕ(ik) d ϕ(ij)+ϕ(ik)
                                                    =                               ,                   (80)
                                 dθ                       ϕ(ij)           dθ

the gradients of TriMap and InfoNC-t-SNE point in the same     direction, but are differently scaled.
InfoNC-t-SNE prioritizes triplets with high ϕ(ij) + ϕ(ik) /ϕ(ij), i.e. triplets in which the em-
bedding similarity does not respect the triplet well. Note that this is conceptually different from
TriMap’s weights wijk which are based on the high-dimensional similarities. However, at least on
MNIST, this difference in gradients did not have a major effect (Figs. S3d, e).
Note that our default for InfoNC-t-SNE is m = 5 instead of m = 1. On MNIST, this setting yields
a better local score and a similar global score compared to m = 1, and much better scores than the
default TriMap (Tab. S1). The work of Ma & Collins (2018) theoretically underpins our observation
in Fig. S19 that the higher m gets, the better InfoNC-t-SNE approximates t-SNE.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G     R ELATION TO OTHER VISUALIZATION METHODS
G.1   t-SNE APPROXIMATIONS

A vanilla implementation of t-SNE has to compute the partition function Z(θ) and hence scales
quadratically with the sample size n. Therefore, nearly all modern t-SNE packages implement
approximations. Common are Barnes-Hut-t-SNE (BH-t-SNE) (Yang et al., 2013; van der Maaten,
2014) and FFT-accelerated interpolation-based t-SNE (FIt-SNE) (Linderman et al., 2019). Both
methods approximate the repulsive interaction between all pairs of points and the computation of
the partition function, achieving complexities O(kn log(n)2d ) and O(kn2d ), respectively. In fact,
all our t-SNE plots are done with the FIt-SNE implementation of openTSNE (Poličar et al., 2019).
The focus of our work is not primarily on accelerating t-SNE, but on understanding its relation to
contrastive neighbor embeddings. Different from the t-SNE approximations above, these do not
approximately compute the partition function, but either learn it (NC-t-SNE), use a fixed normal-
ization parameter (Neg-t-SNE and UMAP), or do not require it at all (InfoNC-t-SNE). They only
sample nm repulsive interactions per epoch. This cuts their complexity down to O(kmnd). In
particular, they scale linearly with the embedding dimension d and can therefore be used for more
general representation learning with d ≫ 2, unlike BH-t-SNE and FIt-SNE.

G.2   OTHER CONTRASTIVE t-SNE APPROXIMATIONS

In addition to NC-t-SNE and InfoNC-t-SNE, there are two other, recent sampling-based strategies to
approximate t-SNE, GDR-t-SNE (Draganov et al., 2022) and SCE (Yang et al., 2023). Both sample
m repulsive interactions per each attractive interaction. In order to scale these repulsive interactions
properly, an estimate of the partition function is computed.
In GDR-t-SNE, the sum of the Cauchy kernels of the mkn repulsive      interactions over each epoch are
added up to obtain an estimate of Z t-SNE (θ) · mkn/ n(n − 1) . Since both the number of repulsive
interactions and the estimate of the partition function are decreased by a factor of mk/(n − 1)
compared to the vanilla t-SNE, the overall repulsion strength is correct. In contrast, SCE (Yang et al.,
2023) initializes its estimate of the partition function with the maximum value n(n − 1) and then
updates it using a moving average after each sampled repulsive pair. Both Draganov et al. (2022)
and Yang et al. (2023) use m = 1. Their approaches are similar to NCE in that they approximately
estimate Z using the sampled noise points, while NCE treats Z as learnable parameter and performs
gradient descent on it. Note, however, that the second factor of the NCE gradient in Eq. (39) is not
present in the approaches of Draganov et al. (2022) and Yang et al. (2023).

G.3   L ARGE V IS

LargeVis (Tang et al., 2016) was, to the best of our knowledge, the first contrastive neighbor embed-
ding method. It uses NEG. Since it was quickly overshadowed by very similar UMAP, we focused
the exposition in the main paper on UMAP. Damrich & Hamprecht (2021) computed LargeVis’
effective loss function in closed form. In our notation it reads
                    LLargeVis (θ) = −Eij∼p log(ϕ(ij)) − γmEij∼ξ log(1 − ϕ(ij)).                    (81)
The are some implementation differences between LargeVis and UMAP, but in terms of the loss
function, the main difference is the γ factor in front of the repulsive term, which defaults to 7.
Therefore, our analysis of UMAP carries over to LargeVis: Its loss is essentially an instance of
NEG with inverse square kernel. The additional factor γ = 7 moves it along the attraction-repulsion
spectrum towards more repulsion, that is, towards t-SNE.

G.4   PACMAP

Pairwise Controlled Manifold Approximation Projection (PaCMAP) (Wang et al., 2021) is a recent
visualization method also based on sampling m repulsive forces per one attractive force (with m = 2
by default). It employs a large number of additional design choices, such as weak attraction between
‘mid-near’ points in addition to attraction between nearest neighbors (which are based on a modified
Euclidean distance, as in TriMap), several optimization regimes with dynamically changing loss
weights, etc. Nevertheless, the core parts of its loss can be related to (generalized) Neg-t-SNE.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The attractive loss in PaCMAP is
                                   d2 + 1                  1
                                               =1−c·                                           (82)
                                  d2 + 1 + c           d2 + 1 + c
with c = 10 for nearest neighbors (and c = 10 000 for mid-near points but that part of the loss
is switched off during the final stage of the optimization). The attractive loss for Neg-t-SNE with
uniform noise distribution and Z̄ = c|X|/m is

                                    ϕ(d)                       1
                        − log                = − log       √                .                  (83)
                                 ϕ(d) + c               (d/ c)2 + 1 + c
Thus, the differences are the logarithm and some rescaling of the distances. Note that Neg-t-SNE
with c = 10 typically produces very similar result compared to the default c = 1 (cf. Fig 1).
The repulsive loss in PaCMAP is
                                            1          1 + d2
                                                 = 1 −        .                                 (84)
                                         2 + d2        2 + d2
Again it is similar to the repulsive loss of Neg-t-SNE, but now for Z̄ = |X|/m, the default negative
sampling value also used by UMAP:
                                                                           1 + d2

                                 ϕ(d)                    1
                 − log 1 −                 = − log              = − log             .           (85)
                              ϕ(d) + 1               ϕ(d) + 1              2 + d2
Here, the difference is just in the logarithm, similar to the connection between TriMap and
InfoNC-t-SNE in Supp. F.
Empirically, PaCMAP embeddings of high-dimensional data like MNIST look similar to UMAP
embeddings, and hence to Neg-t-SNE embeddings, in agreement with our analysis.

H    Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

This section provides a quantitative evaluation of the Neg-t-SNE spectrum. For each embedding
on the spectrum, we compute two metrics. The first metric, kNN recall with k = 15 (Kobak &
Berens, 2019), measures the fraction of nearest neighbors in the embedding that are also nearest
neighbors in the reference configuration. It is therefore a measure of local quality. The second
metric is the Spearman correlation between the pairwise distances in the embedding and in the
reference configuration (Kobak & Berens, 2019). To speed up the computation, we consider all
pairwise distances between a sample of 5000 points. Since most random pairs of points are not
close to each other, this is a measure of global quality.
As reference configuration, we use three different layouts for each dataset. We compare against the
original high-dimensional data to measure how faithful Neg-t-SNE embeddings are. Additionally,
we compare to the corresponding t-SNE and UMAP embeddings to investigate for which Z̄ value
Neg-t-SNE matches t-SNE and UMAP the best.
We found that compared to the high-dimensional data, the kNN recall followed an inverse U-shape
across the spectrum (Fig. S4a). kNN recall was low for very large and for very small values of
Z̄. It peaked when Z̄ was close to t-SNE’s partition function Z t-SNE and NC-t-SNE’s learned nor-
malization parameter Z NC-t-SNE . At UMAP’s normalization constant Z̄ UMAP the kNN recall was
usually lower. This confirms our observation that the local quality of the embedding improves when
decreasing Z̄ from Z̄ UMAP to Z t-SNE in agreement with Böhm et al. (2022). The kNN recall for the
Kuzushiji-49 dataset at Z̄ = Z t-SNE was very low, compared to other datasets. We suspect that this
was due to incomplete convergence (Fig. S17, Tab. S4).
Conversely, the Spearman correlation mostly increased with Z̄ (Fig. S4b), which aligns with our
finding that higher attraction improves the global layout of the embedding.
We also computed the kNN recall and the Spearman correlation for the proper t-SNE and UMAP
embeddings (not depicted in Figs. S4a, b). The kNN recall was higher for t-SNE embeddings than
for Neg-t-SNE at Z̄ = Z t-SNE (see, e.g., Fig. S18l), likely because proper t-SNE considers the
repulsive interaction between all points. The metrics for the UMAP embeddings and the Spearman


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


correlation for t-SNE were close to the corresponding values for Neg-t-SNE at the respective Z̄
values.
When comparing Neg-t-SNE embeddings to the proper t-SNE embedding, the best fit in terms of
kNN recall (Fig. S4c) and in terms of Spearman correlation (Fig. S4d) was usually achieved when Z̄
was close to Z t-SNE , in accordance with our theory. Again, the Kuzushiji-49 dataset was an outlier,
likely due to convergence issues.
Finally, when comparing Neg-t-SNE embeddings to the UMAP embedding, the highest Spearman
correlation was achieved by Z̄ ≈ Z̄ UMAP (Fig. S4f), in agreement with our theoretical predictions.
The highest kNN recall was typically achieved at a slightly lower Z̄ (Fig. S4e).
Overall, these experiments provide empirical support for our interpretation of the Neg-t-SNE spec-
trum as implementing a trade-off between global and local structure preservation, and they confirm
the predicted locations of t-SNE- and UMAP-like embeddings on the spectrum.
We computed the kNN recall and the Spearman correlation also for the embeddings in Figs. S18
and S19, where we varied the number of noise samples m and the initialization method for
NC-t-SNE and InfoNC-t-SNE. As expected, we found that higher m improves the kNN recall,
but t-SNE proper achieved higher kNN recall still. The Spearman correlation decreased with m
when we initialized randomly and did not change much for other initialization methods. Random
initialization hurt the Spearman correlation significantly.


I   T OY DATASET

Cor. 2 predicts that the partition function of a Neg-t-SNE embedding should equal the Z̄ value.
In our real-world examples (panels i in Figs. 1, S11–S16) we observed a monotone relationship
between them, but not a perfect agreement. As discussed in Sec. 5, this is due to the shape of
the Cauchy kernel and the fact that the data distribution is zero for many pairs of points. Here,
we consider a toy example for which we observe a perfect match between Neg-t-SNE’s partition
function and the Z̄ value, confirming our Cor. 2.
As we operate with the binary skNN graph, the only possible high-dimensional similarities are zero
and one. Due to the heavy tail of the Cauchy kernel, we would like our toy example to have no
pairs of points for which the data distribution is zero. Thus, all pairs of points need to have equal
high-dimensional similarity. In two dimensions, only up to three points can be placed equidistantly
from each other. Therefore, we consider the simple case of placing three points according to the
Neg-t-SNE loss function with p ≡ 61 (there are six directed edges) for various values of Z̄. We
keep the Cauchy kernel as similarity function, which has maximum 1/(1 + 02 ) = 1. Thus, it is not
possible to match values above Z̄ = 6, and the three points end up having the same position in the
embedding. But for smaller values of Z̄, the resulting partition function is indeed exactly equal to
Z̄ (Fig. S5).
For this experiment we decreased the batch size to 6 and the learning rate to 0.01, but kept all other
hyperparameters at their default values.


J   DATASETS

We used the well-known MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) dataset for most of our experiments. We
downloaded it via the torchvision API from http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/. This
website does not give a license. But https://keras.io/api/datasets/mnist/ and
http://www.pymvpa.org/datadb/mnist.html name Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes
as copyright holders and claim MNIST to be licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0, which permits use and
adaptation. The MNIST dataset consists of 70 000 grayscale images, 28 × 28 pixels each, that show
handwritten digits.
The Kuzushiji-49 dataset (Tarin et al., 2018) was downloaded from https://github.com/
rois-codh/kmnist where it is licensed under CC-BY-4.0. It contains 270 912 grayscale im-
ages, 28 × 28 pixels each, that show 49 different cursive Japanese characters.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Relative to the high-dimensional data        (b) Relative to the high-dimensional data


         (c) Relative to t-SNE embeddings                 (d) Relative to t-SNE embeddings


         (e) Relative to UMAP embeddings                  (f) Relative to UMAP embeddings

Figure S4: Quantitative evaluation of embeddings on the Neg-t-SNE spectrum with respect to dif-
ferent reference configurations. Means and standard deviations over three random seeds are plotted.
Left column: kNN recall, a measure of local agreement. Right column: Spearman correlation,
a measure of global agreement. First row: Comparison of Neg-t-SNE embeddings to the high-
dimensional input data. Second row: Comparison of Neg-t-SNE embeddings to the correspond-
ing t-SNE embedding. Third row: Comparison of Neg-t-SNE embeddings to the corresponding
UMAP embedding.


The SimCLR experiments were performed on the CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009)
dataset, another standard machine learning resource.              We downloaded it via the
sklearn.datasets.fetch openml API from https://www.openml.org/search?
type=data&sort=runs&id=40927&status=active. Unfortunately, we were not able
to find a license for this dataset. CIFAR-10 consists of 60 000 images, 32 × 32 RGB pixels each,
depicting objects from five animal and five vehicle classes.
The transcriptomic dataset of Kanton et al. (2019) was downloaded from https://
www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-7552/, which permits free
use.    We only used the 20 272 cells in the human brain organoid cell line ‘409b2’.
The transcriptomic dataset of Wagner et al. (2018) was downloaded in its scanpy
version from https://kleintools.hms.harvard.edu/paper_websites/wagner_
zebrafish_timecourse2018/mainpage.html. The full dataset at https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE112294 is free to download and re-
produce. The dataset contains gene expressions for 63 530 cells from a developing zebrafish em-
bryo. The downloaded UMIs of both datasets were preprocessed as in (Böhm et al., 2022; Kobak


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure S5: Partition function of Neg-t-SNE embeddings as a function of Z̄ for a toy dataset with
three equidistant points. There is a perfect fit between Z̄ and the partition function until Z̄ = 6,
which is the largest partition function a set of three points with six directed edges can have under the
Cauchy kernel. Beyond this value, all three points overlap in the embedding. Mean with standard
deviation over three random seeds is plotted.


& Berens, 2019). After selecting the 1000 most variable genes, we normalized the library sizes to
the median library size in the dataset, log-transformed the normalized values with log2 (x + 1), and
finally reduced the dimensionality to 50 via PCA.
The transcriptomic dataset of the C. elegans flatworm (Packer et al., 2019; Narayan et al., 2021)
was obtained from http://cb.csail.mit.edu/cb/densvis/datasets/ with consent
of the authors who license it under CC BY-NC 2.0. It is already preprocessed to 100 principal
components.


K     I MPLEMENTATION

K.1   PACKAGES

All contrastive embeddings were computed with our PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) implementa-
tion of Neg-t-SNE, NC-t-SNE, UMAP, and InfoNC-t-SNE. Exceptions are Fig. 1 and analogous
Figs. S11 – S16. There, for panel g we used the reference implementation of NCVis (Artemenkov
& Panov, 2020) (with a fixed number of noise samples m, and not the default schedule), and for
panel h we used UMAP 0.5. The t-SNE plots were created with the openTSNE (Poličar et al., 2019)
(version 0.6.1) package. Similarly, we used the reference UMAP implementation in Fig. S1 and
openTSNE in Figs. S18 and S19. The TriMap plots in Supp. F were computed with version 1.1.4 of
the TriMap package by Amid & Warmuth (2019).
We extended these implementations of NCVis, UMAP, and t-SNE to make them accept custom
embedding initializations and unweighted skNN graphs and to log various quantities of interest. We
always used the standard Cauchy kernel for better comparability.

K.2   I NITIALIZATION , EXAGGERATION AND SkNN GRAPH

All PCAs were computed with sklearn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). We used PyKeOps (Charlier et al.,
2021) to compute the exact skNN graph and to handle the quadratic complexity of computing the
partition functions on a GPU. The same PCA initialization and skNN graph with k = 15 were
used for all embeddings. The skNN graph for MNIST and Kuzushiji-49 was computed on a 50-
dimensional PCA of the dataset.
We initialized all embeddings with a scaled version of PCA (save for Figs. S18 and S19). For
t-SNE embeddings we rescaled the initialization so that the first dimension has a standard deviation
of 0.0001 (as is default in openTSNE), for all other embeddings to a standard deviation of 1. For
TriMap, we stuck to its default of scaling the PCA down by a factor of 0.01.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We employed some version of ‘early exaggeration’ (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) for the first 250
epochs in most non-parametric plots. For t-SNE it is the default early exaggeration of openTSNE.
When varying Z̄ in non-parametric Neg-t-SNE, early exaggeration meant using Z̄ = |X|/m for the
first 250 epochs (save for Fig. S11). When varying the number of noise samples in Figs. S8, S18
and S19, we still used m = 5 for the first 250 epochs. In Figs. 2, 3, S1, and S2 as well as in all
reference NCVis or UMAP plots, we did not use early exaggeration as neither small Z̄ nor high m
made it necessary. When we used some form of early exaggeration and learning rate annealing, the
annealing to zero took place over the first 250 epochs, was then reset, and annealed again to zero for
the remaining, typically 500, epochs.


K.3    OTHER DETAILS FOR NEIGHBOR EMBEDDING EXPERIMENTS

When computing logarithms during the optimization of neighbor embeddings, we clip the arguments
to the range [10−10 , 1], save for Fig. S2, where we varied this lower bound. The lower bound is
smaller than in the reference implementation of parametric UMAP, where it is set to 10−4 .
Our defaults were a batch size of 1024, linear learning rate annealing from 1 (non-parametric) or
0.001 (parametric) to 0 (save for Figs. 2, S1, and S2), 750 epochs (save for Figs. S10 and S17) and
m = 5 noise samples (save for Figs. S8, S10, S18, and S19).
Non-parametric runs were optimized with SGD without momentum and parametric runs with the
Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015). Parametric runs used the same feed-forward neural net
architecture as the reference parametric UMAP implementation. That is, four layers with dimensions
input dimension − 100 − 100 − 100 − 2 with ReLU activations in all but the last one. We used
the vectorized, 786-dimensional version of MNIST as input to the parametric neighbor embedding
methods (and not the 50-dimensional PCA; but the skNN graph was computed in the PCA space for
consistency with non-parametric embeddings).
Like the reference NCVis implementation,
                                           we used the fractions qθ,Z (x)/(qθ,Z (x) + m) instead
of qθ,Z (x)/ qθ,Z (x) + mξ(x) . This is a mild approximation as the noise distribution is close to
uniform. But it means that the model learns a scaled data distribution (cf. Cor. 2), so that we
need to multiply the learned normalization parameter Z by n(n − 1) when comparing to t-SNE
or checking normalization of the NC-t-SNE model. Similarly, we also approximate the true noise
                           distribution for the fractions qθ (x)/(qθ (x) + Z̄m/|X|) – instead of
distribution by the uniform
qθ (x)/ qθ (x) + Z̄mξ(x) – in our Neg-t-SNE implementation.
We mentioned in Sec. 5 and showed in Fig. S8 that one can move along the attraction-repulsion
spectrum also by changing the number of noise samples m, instead of the fixed normalization con-
stant Z̄. In UMAP’s reference implementation, there is a scalar prefactor γ for the repulsive forces.
Theoretically, adjusting γ should also move along the attraction-repulsion spectrum, but setting it
higher than 1 led to convergence problems in (Böhm et al., 2022), Fig. A11. When varying our Z̄,
we did not have such issues.
For panels i in Figs. 1, S11 – S16 the Neg-t-SNE spectra were computed for Z̄ equal to Z(θt-SNE ),
Z NC-t-SNE , and n(n−1)
                   m    ·x, where x ∈ {5·10−5 , 1·10−4 , 2·10−4 , 5·10−4 , . . . , 1·102 , 2·102 , 5·102 }.


K.4    S IM CLR EXPERIMENTS

For the SimCLR experiments, we trained the model for 1000 epochs, of which we used 5 epochs
for warmup. The learning rate during warmup was linearly interpolated from 0 to the initial learn-
ing rate. After the warmup epochs, we annealed the learning rate with a cosine schedule (without
restarts) to 0 (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). We optimized the model parameters with SGD and mo-
mentum 0.9. We used the same data augmentations as in Chen et al. (2020) and their recommended
batch size of 1024. We used a ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) as the backbone and a projection head
consisting of two linear layers (512 − 1024 − 128) with a ReLU activation in-between. The loss was
applied to the L2 normalized output of the projection head, but like Chen et al. (2020) we used the
output of the ResNet as the representation for the linear evaluation. As similarity function we used
the exponential of the normalized scalar product (cosine similarity) and always kept the temperature
at 0.5, as suggested in Chen et al. (2020).


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Table S2: Run time overview for the most compute-heavy experiments

                                                       Number of runs    Time per run [min] (mean±SD)
 Neg-t-SNE for Figs. 1, S11, S13, S14, S15                  360                       39 ± 4
 Neg-t-SNE for Fig. S16                                      24                      121 ± 44
 Neg-t-SNE for Fig. S17                                       3                      3592 ± 44
 NC-t-SNE (our implementation) for Fig. S10b                  3                       786 ± 2
 SimCLR runs for Tab. 1                                      12                      721 ± 16


Table S3: Learned normalization parameter for NC-t-SNE and partition function of t-SNE in our
experiments. Mean and standard deviation is computed over three random seeds. In our setup t-SNE
is deterministic.

                                                   Z NC-t-SNE [106 ]    Z(θt-SNE ) [106 ]
                MNIST Fig. 1                            34.3 ± 0.1            8.13
                MNIST without EE Fig. S11               34.3 ± 0.1            6.25
                MNIST imbalanced Fig. S12              6.15 ± 0.06            3.12
                Human brain organoid Fig. S13          3.57 ± 0.03            1.30
                Zebrafish Fig. S14                      30.8 ± 0.1            7.98
                C. elegans Fig. S15                     36.9 ± 0.7            11.7
                Kuzushiji-49 Fig. S16                    395 ± 3              89.6



The ResNet was trained on the combined CIFAR-10 train and test sets. When evaluating the accu-
racy, we froze the backbone, trained the classifier on the train set, and evaluated its accuracy on the
test set. We used sklearn’s KNeighborsClassifier with cosine metric and k = 15 neighbors
and sklearn’s LogisticRegression classifier with the SAGA solver (Defazio et al., 2014), no
regularization penalty, a tolerance of 0.0001, and max iter=1000. Other parameters were left at
the default values.
When sampling negative samples for a given head, we excluded that head from the candidates for
negative samples. We sampled negative samples with replacement. If the desired number of negative
samples m equals twice the batch size minus 2 (m = 2b − 2, ‘full-batch repulsion’), we took the
entire batch without the current head and its tail as negative samples for that head.


K.5   C ODE AVAILABILITY

Our code is publicly available. The PyTorch implementation of contrastive neighbor embeddings
can be found at https://github.com/berenslab/contrastive-ne. Details for repro-
ducing the experiments and figures, alongside scripts and notebooks are at https://github.
com/hci-unihd/cl-tsne-umap.


K.6   S TABILITY

Whenever we reported a metric or show a graph, we ran the experiments for 3 different random
seeds and reported the mean ± the standard deviation. When the standard deviation was very small,
we omitted it from the main text and report it in Tab. S3. Save for the usually approximate skNN
graph computation, t-SNE does not depend on a random seed. As we computed the skNN exactly
with PyKeOps (Charlier et al., 2021), t-SNE is deterministic in our framework.
Panels i in Figs. 1, S11 – S16 show the standard deviation as shaded area. Again, the standard
deviations are very small and barely visible. The ratio of standard deviation to mean was never
larger than 0.006 in panels i of Figs. 1, S11 – S16. Similarly, the standard deviation in Figs. S9
and S10, shown as shaded area, is mostly smaller than the line width.


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure S6: Run times of the embedding optimization phase for the MNIST dataset using different
batch sizes, training modes, and hardware. Running on GPU is much faster than on CPU; non-
parametric runs are faster than parametric runs. As the batch size increases, the run time decreases
strongly in all settings.


K.7   C OMPUTE

We ran our neighbor embedding experiments on a machine with 56 Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6132
CPU @ 2.60GHz, 502 GB RAM and 10 NVIDIA TITAN Xp GPUs. The SimCLR experiments
were conducted on a SLURM cluster node with 8 cores of an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5220 CPU @
2.20GHz and a Nvidia V100 GPU with a RAM limit of 54 GB. Each experiment used one GPU at
most.
Our total compute is dominated by the neighbor embedding runs for Figs. 1, S11, S13–S16 and S10b
and by the SimCLR experiments. Tab. S2 lists the number of runs and the average run time. We
thus estimate the total compute time to be about 646 hours.
Our implementation relies on pure PyTorch and our experiments were conducted on GPUs. We
originally kept the batch size for all our experiments at the default of 1024, motivated by Chen
et al. (2020) and Sainburg et al. (2021), but eventually noticed that the run time of the visualization
experiments depends crucially on the batch size (Fig. S6). Increasing the batch size to 219 decreased
the run time of the embedding optimization on MNIST data (without the skNN graph computation)
from about 40 min to just above 20 s. For a batch size of at least 216 , our implementation was faster
than the reference implementations of UMAP and t-SNE (via openTSNE). The latter run only on
CPU, while our experiments ran on GPU. Nevertheless, we observed a substantial improvement in
run time for higher batch sizes also when running our PyTorch implementation on CPU and also
when training a parametric embedding. Note that the parametric setting with full batch gradient
descent (batch size 1,500,006 for MNIST’s skNN graph) exceeded our GPU’s memory. On CPU,
our implementation is just shy of the performance of UMAP when using 219 attractive pairs per
batch. Dedicated CUDA implementations (Chan et al., 2018; Eisenmann, 2019; Nolet et al., 2021)
outperform our implementation on GPU. Compared to the Numba-accelerated CPU implementa-
tion of UMAP and the CUDA-accelerated GPU implementations, our pure PyTorch implementation
arguably strikes a good speed / complexity trade-off, is easier to study and adapt by the machine
learning community, and seamlessly integrates non-parametric and parametric settings as well as all
four contrastive loss functions.
Note that the change from NC-t-SNE to Neg-t-SNE is as simple as fixing the learnable normalization
parameter to a constant, so the original NCVis code written in C++ can easily be adapted to compute
Neg-t-SNE. We have not used this for any of the experiments in our paper.



                                                  33
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Algorithm S1: Batched contrastive neighbor embedding algorithm
  input : list of directed skNN graph edges E = [i1 j1 , . . . , i|E| j|E| ]
            parameters θ            // embeddings (non-param.)/ network weights
                                         (param.)
            number of epochs T
            learning rate η
            number of noise samples m
            Cauchy kernel q // of embeddings (non-param.)/ network output
                                     (param.)
            batch size b
            loss mode mode
                                                             // default n2 /m, required for

            normalization constant Z̄
                                                                 mode = Neg-t-SNE
  output: final embeddings e1 , . . . , en
1 if mode = NC-t-SNE then
2   Z=1
3 for t = 0 to T do
    // Learning rate annealing
4   ηt = η · (1 − Tt )
5   α=0
6   while α < |E| do
7    L=0
8    for β = 1, . . . , b do
       // Treat attractive edge iα+β jα+β and noise edges iα+β jµ−
       // Sample noise edge tails but omit head of considered edge
9      j1− , . . . , jm
                      −
                        ∼ Uniform({iα+1 , jα+1 , . . . , jα+b }\{iα+β })
         // Aggregate loss based on mode
10       if mode = Neg-t-SNE
                               then
                                                                                       −
                              qθ (iα+β jα+β )        Pm                      qθ (iα+β jµ )
11         L = L − log q (i j )+Z̄m/ n − µ=1 log 1 − q (i j − )+Z̄m/
                         θ α+β α+β            (2)                        θ α+β µ           (n2 )
12       else if mode = NC-t-SNE then                                         −
                          q (iα+β jα+β )/Z         Pm               qθ (iα+β jµ  )/Z
13         L = L − log qθ (iθα+β jα+β )/Z+m     −   µ=1 log   1 − q (i      −
                                                                           j )/Z+m
                                                                       θ   α+β µ
14       else if mode = InfoNC-t-SNE then
                                      qθ (iα+β jα+β )
15         L = L − log     qθ (iα+β jα+β )+ m
                                            P                −
                                               µ=1 qθ (iα+β jµ )

16       else if mode = UMAP then
                                        Pm
17         L = L − log qθ (iα+β jα+β ) − µ=1 log 1 − qθ (iα+β jµ− )

        // Update parameters with SGD (non-param.)                             or Adam (param.)
18      θ = θ − ηt · ∇θ L
19      if mode = NC-t-SNE then
20        Z = Z − η t ∇Z L
21    α=α+b
22  Shuffle E
23 return θ


                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L    A DDITIONAL FIGURES


Figure S7: Attractive and repulsive loss terms of UMAP and Neg-t-SNE. The main difference is
that UMAP’s repulsive loss diverges at zero challenging its numerical optimization. The attractive
terms are log(1 + d2ij ) and log(2 + d2ij ) for UMAP and Neg-t-SNE, respectively, and the repulsive

ones are log (1 + d2ij )/d2ij and log (2 + d2ij )/(1 + d2ij ) , respectively.


         (a) m = 5              (b) m = 50             (c) m = 500        (d) m = 2b − 2 = 2046

Figure S8: Neg-t-SNE embeddings of the MNIST dataset for varying number of noise samples
m and using batch size b = 1024. While for NC-t-SNE and InfoNC-t-SNE more noise samples
improve the approximation to t-SNE, see Figs. S18 and S19, changing m in Neg-t-SNE moves the
result along the attraction-repulsion spectrum (Fig. 1) with more repulsion for larger m. However,
the computational complexity of Neg-t-SNE scales with m, so that moving along the spectrum via
changing Z̄ is much more efficient. For the first 250 epochs, m was set to 5, to achieve an effect
similar to early exaggeration (Supp. K).


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) InfoNC-t-SNE loss              (b) NC-t-SNE loss            (c) NC-t-SNE normalization

Figure S9: (a, b) Loss curves for the parametric and non-parametric InfoNC-t-SNE and NC-t-SNE
optimizations leading to Figs. 3b, c, e, and f. While the embedding scale differs drastically between
the non-parametric and the parametric run, the loss values are close. (c) Normalization of the model
P
   ij ϕ(ij)/Z for the parametric and non-parametric NC-t-SNE optimizations. The difference in the
embedding scale is compensated by a three orders of magnitude change in Z, so that both versions
learn approximately normalized models. These experiments used our NC-t-SNE reimplementation.


                          (a)                                          (b)

Figure S10: NC-t-SNE learns to have the same partition function (PF) as t-SNE on the MNIST
dataset. The higher the number m of noise samples (a) or the longer the optimization (b), the better
the match. Both methods used early exaggeration, which for NC-t-SNE meant to start with m = 5
noise samples for the first 250 epochs. The learned Pnormalization parameter Z converged to but
did not exactly equal NC-t-SNE’s partition function ij qθ (ij). Nevertheless, it was of the same
order of magnitude. Again, the match was better for more noise samples. Since we reinitialized the
learnable Z for NC-t-SNE after the early exaggeration phase, there were brief jumps in the partition
function and in Z at the beginning of the non-exaggerated phase.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE    (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE     (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis    (d) Z̄ = |X|/m       (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                          (f) t-SNE            (g) NCVis           (h) UMAP        (i) Partition function

Figure S11: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE embeddings of the MNIST dataset for various values of the fixed
normalization constant Z̄. As Z̄ increases, the scale of the embedding decreases, clusters become
more compact and separated before eventually starting to merge. The Neg-t-SNE spectrum produces
embeddings very similar to those of (f) t-SNE, (g) NCVis, and (h) UMAP, when Z̄ equals  the
partition function of t-SNE, the learned normalization parameter Z of NCVis, or |X|/m = n2 /m
used by UMAP, as predicted in Sec. 4–6. (i) The partition function ij (1 + d2ij )−1 tries to match
                                                                       P

Z̄ and grows with it. In contrast to Fig. 1, we did not use early exaggeration here, but initialized the
Neg-t-SNE and t-SNE with PCA rescaled so that the first dimension has standard deviation 1 and
0.0001, respectively. This makes the embeddings with small Z̄ values show cluster fragmentation,
similar to the t-SNE embedding in (f) without early exaggeration. For very low Z̄, the Neg-t-SNE
embedding in (a) shows very little structure.


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE   (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE    (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis   (d) Z̄ = |X|/m      (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                         (f) t-SNE           (g) NCVis          (h) UMAP       (i) Partition function

Figure S12: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE embeddings of an imbalanced version of the MNIST dataset for
various values of the fixed normalization constant Z̄. As Z̄ increases, the scale of the embedding
decreases, clusters become more compact and separated before eventually starting to merge. The
Neg-t-SNE spectrum produces embeddings very similar to those of (f) t-SNE, (g) NCVis, and (h)
UMAP, when Z̄ equals the      partition function of t-SNE, the learned normalization parameter Z of
NCVis, or |X|/m = n2 /m used by UMAP, as predicted in Sec. 4–6. (i) The partition function
             2 −1
P
   ij (1 + dij )    tries to match Z̄ and grows with it. Similar to early exaggeration in t-SNE we
started all Neg-t-SNE runs using Z̄ = |X|/m and only switched to the desired Z̄ for the last two
thirds of the optimization. The dataset was created by randomly removing 10 · c% of the class of
digit c, so that the class sizes linearly decrease from digit 0 to digit 9.


                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE    (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE     (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis    (d) Z̄ = |X|/m       (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                          (f) t-SNE            (g) NCVis           (h) UMAP        (i) Partition function

Figure S13: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE spectrum on the developmental single-cell RNA sequencing dataset
from Kanton et al. (2019) for various parameters Z̄. As Z̄ increases, the scale of the embedding
decreases and the continuous structure (corresponding to the developmental stage) becomes more
apparent, making higher Z̄ more suitable for visualizing continuous datasets (Böhm et al., 2022).
The spectrum produces embeddings very similar to those of (f) t-SNE and (g) NCVis when Z̄
equals the partition function of t-SNE or the learned normalization parameter of NCVis.  The UMAP
embedding in (h) closely resembles the Neg-t-SNE embedding at Z̄ = |X|/m = n2 /m. (i) The
partition function ij (1 + d2ij )−1 of the Neg-t-SNE embeddings increased with Z̄. Similar to early
                    P

exaggeration in t-SNE we started all Neg-t-SNE runs using Z̄ = |X|/m and only switched to the
desired Z̄ for the last two thirds of the optimization. The dataset contains 20 272 cells and is colored
by the duration of the development. There are ten times fewer cells collected after 10 days than after
one month.


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE    (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE    (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis     (d) Z̄ = |X|/m      (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                          (f) t-SNE           (g) NCVis            (h) UMAP        (i) Partition function

Figure S14: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE spectrum on the single-cell RNA sequencing dataset of a developing
zebrafish embryo (Wagner et al., 2018) for various parameters Z̄. As Z̄ increases, the scale of
the embedding decreases and the continuous structure (corresponding to the developmental stage)
becomes more apparent, making higher Z̄ more suitable for visualizing continuous datasets (Böhm
et al., 2022). The spectrum produces embeddings very similar to those of (f) t-SNE and (g) NCVis
when Z̄ equals the partition function of t-SNE or the learned normalization parameter of NCVis.  The
UMAP embedding in (h) closely resembles the Neg-t-SNE embedding at Z̄ = |X|/m = n2 /m.
(i) The partition function ij (1 + d2ij )−1 of the Neg-t-SNE embeddings increased with Z̄. Similar
                            P

to early exaggeration in t-SNE we started all Neg-t-SNE runs using Z̄ = |X|/m and only switched
to the desired Z̄ for the last two thirds of the optimization. The dataset contains 63 530 cells and is
colored by the hours post fertilization (hpf). There are ten times fewer cells collected after 8 hours
than after 24.


                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE   (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE   (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis   (d) Z̄ = |X|/m      (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                         (f) t-SNE          (g) NCVis          (h) UMAP        (i) Partition function

Figure S15: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE spectrum of the single-cell RNA sequencing dataset of the C. elegans
flatworm (Packer et al., 2019; Narayan et al., 2021) for various values of the fixed normalization
constant Z̄. As Z̄ increases, the scale of the embedding decreases, the scale of the embedding
decreases, and more continuous structure becomes apparent. The Neg-t-SNE spectrum produces
embeddings very similar to those of (f) t-SNE, (g) NCVis, and (h) UMAP, when Z̄ equals  the
partition function of t-SNE, the learned normalization parameter Z of NCVis, or |X|/m = n2 /m
used by UMAP, as predicted in Sec. 4–6. (i) The partition function ij (1 + d2ij )−1 tries to match
                                                                      P

Z̄ and grows with it. Similar to early exaggeration in t-SNE we started all Neg-t-SNE runs using
Z̄ = |X|/m and only switched to the desired Z̄ for the last two thirds of the optimization. The
dataset contains information on 86 024 cells of 37 types indicated by the colors. It is imbalanced
with only 25 cells of the least abundant type but 31 375 cells of unknown type (grey).


                                                41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Z̄ < Z t-SNE    (b) Z̄ = Z t-SNE     (c) Z̄ = Z NCVis      (d) Z̄ = |X|/m     (e) Z̄ > |X|/m


                          (f) t-SNE            (g) NCVis             (h) UMAP      (i) Partition function

Figure S16: (a – e) Neg-t-SNE embeddings of the Kuzushiji-49 dataset (Tarin et al., 2018) for var-
ious values of the fixed normalization constant Z̄. As Z̄ increases, the scale of the embedding
decreases, clusters become more compact and separated before eventually starting to merge. The
Neg-t-SNE spectrum produces embeddings similar to those of (f) t-SNE, (g) NCVis, and (h) UMAP,
when Z̄ equals
               the partition function of t-SNE, the learned normalization parameter P Z of NCVis, or
|X|/m = n2 /m used by UMAP, as predicted in Sec. 4–6. (i) The partition function ij (1+d2ij )−1
tries to match Z̄ and grows with it. Similar to early exaggeration in t-SNE we started all Neg-t-SNE
runs using Z̄ = |X|/m and only switched to the desired Z̄ for the last two thirds of the opti-
mization. The dataset contains 270 912 images of 49 different Japanese characters. The classes
are imbalanced with 456 to 7 000 samples per class. We see that a higher level of repulsion than
UMAP’s Z̄ = |X|/m helps to visualize the discrete structure of the dataset. The sampling based
Neg-t-SNE embedding at Z̄ = Z t-SNE has less structure than the t-SNE embedding. Fig. S17 and
Tab. S4 show that the Neg-t-SNE result improves for longer optimization.


              (a) 500 epochs      (b) 1000 epochs        (c) 5000 epochs   (d) 10000 epochs

Figure S17: Neg-t-SNE embeddings of the Kuzushiji-49 dataset (Tarin et al., 2018) for Z̄ = Z t-SNE
show more structure when optimized longer. Similar to early exaggeration in t-SNE we started
all Neg-t-SNE runs using Z̄ = |X|/m for 250 epochs and only switched to the desired Z̄ for the
remaining number of epochs indicated in the subcaptions.


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table S4: Longer run times improve the Neg-t-SNE optimization on the Kuzushiji-49 dataset (Tarin
et al.,P2018) for Z̄ = Z t-SNE . The KL divergence is computed with respect to the normalized model
qθ /( ij qθ (ij)).

       Epochs                          500            1000              5000         10000
                             6
       Partition function [10 ]   18.96 ± 0.02    13.27 ± 0.01     6.93 ± 0.01    5.75 ± 0.01
       Neg-t-SNE loss               1021 ± 2         832 ± 2         630 ± 1        599 ± 1
       KL divergence               5.52 ± 0.01     5.18 ± 0.01     4.76 ± 0.01    4.65 ± 0.00


         (a) m = 5                (b) m = 50             (c) m = 500               (d) t-SNE
        random init               random init             random init             random init


         (e) m = 5                (f) m = 50             (g) m = 500               (h) t-SNE
          PCA init                  PCA init               PCA init                 PCA init


         (i) m = 5                (j) m = 50             (k) m = 500               (l) t-SNE
             EE                       EE                      EE                       EE

Figure S18: NC-t-SNE (our implementation) on the MNIST dataset for varying number of noise
samples m and different starting conditions. Higher number of noise samples m improves the ap-
proximation quality to t-SNE (last column). The first row is initialized with isotropic Gaussian noise
and the second and the third rows with PCA (both normalized to have standard deviation of one or
0.0001 in the first dimension for NC-t-SNE or t-SNE, respectively). In the third row, the first 250
epochs used m = 5 and the latter used the given m value for NC-t-SNE. This is similar to t-SNE’s
early exaggeration that we used in panel l. NC-t-SNE seems to be less dependent on early exag-
geration than t-SNE, especially for low m values. Insets show the kNN recall and the Spearman
correlation between distances of pairs of points. Higher m increases the kNN recall, while mostly
leaving the Spearman correlation unchanged. Random initialization hurts the Spearman correlation,
but not the kNN recall.


                                                 43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) m = 5              (b) m = 50             (c) m = 500              (d) t-SNE
        random init             random init             random init            random init


         (e) m = 5              (f) m = 50            (g) m = 500              (h) t-SNE
          PCA init                PCA init              PCA init                PCA init


         (i) m = 5              (j) m = 50            (k) m = 500               (l) t-SNE
             EE                     EE                     EE                       EE

Figure S19: InfoNC-t-SNE on the MNIST dataset for varying number of noise samples m and
different starting conditions. Higher number of noise samples m improves the approximation quality
to t-SNE (last column). The first row is initialized with isotropic Gaussian noise and the second
and the third rows with PCA (both normalized to have standard deviation of one or 0.0001 in the
first dimension for InfoNC-t-SNE or t-SNE, respectively). In the third row, the first 250 epochs
used m = 5 and the latter used the given m value for InfoNC-t-SNE. This is similar to t-SNE’s
early exaggeration that we used in panel l. InfoNC-t-SNE seems to be less dependent on early
exaggeration than t-SNE, especially for low m values. Insets show the kNN recall and the Spearman
correlation between distances of pairs of points. Higher m increases the kNN recall, while mostly
leaving the Spearman correlation unchanged. Random initialization hurts the Spearman correlation,
but not the kNN recall.


                                               44
