Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NCERTAINTY-AWARE M ETA -L EARNING FOR M ULTI -
MODAL TASK D ISTRIBUTIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Meta-learning or learning to learn is a popular approach for learning new tasks
         with limited data (i.e., few-shot learning) by leveraging the commonalities among
         different tasks. However, meta-learned models can perform poorly when context
         data is limited, or when data is drawn from an out-of-distribution (OoD) task.
         Especially in safety-critical settings, this necessitates an uncertainty-aware ap-
         proach to meta-learning. In addition, the often multimodal nature of task distri-
         butions can pose unique challenges to meta-learning methods. In this work, we
         present U N L I M I TD (uncertainty-aware meta-learning for multimodal task distri-
         butions), a novel method for meta-learning that (1) makes probabilistic predictions
         on in-distribution tasks efficiently, (2) is capable of detecting OoD context data at
         test time, and (3) performs on heterogeneous, multimodal task distributions. To
         achieve this goal, we take a probabilistic perspective and train a parametric, tune-
         able distribution over tasks on the meta-dataset. We construct this distribution by
         performing Bayesian inference on a linearized neural network, leveraging Gaus-
         sian process theory. We demonstrate that U N L I M I TD’s predictions compare fa-
         vorably to, and outperform in most cases, the standard baselines, especially in the
         low-data regime. Furthermore, we show that U N L I M I TD is effective in detecting
         data from OoD tasks. Finally, we confirm that both of these findings continue to
         hold in the multimodal task-distribution setting.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Learning to learn is essential in human intelligence but is still a wide area of research in machine
learning. Meta-learning has emerged as a popular approach to enable models to perform well on new
tasks using limited data. It involves first a meta-training process, when the model learns valuable
features from a set of tasks. Then, at test time, using only few datapoints from a new, unseen task, the
model (1) adapts to this new task (i.e., performs few-shot learning with context data), and then (2)
infers by making predictions on new, unseen query inputs from the same task. A popular baseline for
meta-learning, which has attracted a large amount of attention, is Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), in which the adaptation process consists of fine-tuning the parameters
of the model via gradient descent.
However, meta-learning methods can often struggle in several ways when deployed in challenging
real-world scenarios. First, when context data is too limited to fully identify the test-time task,
accurate prediction can be challenging. As these predictions can be untrustworthy, this necessitates
the development of meta-learning methods that can express uncertainty during adaptation (Yoon
et al., 2018; Harrison et al., 2018). In addition, meta-learning models may not successfully adapt
to “unusual” tasks, i.e., when test-time context data is drawn from an out-of-distribution (OoD)
task not well represented in the training dataset (Jeong & Kim, 2020; Iwata & Kumagai, 2022).
Finally, special care has to be taken when learning tasks that have a large degree of heterogeneity.
An important example is the case of tasks with a multimodal distribution, i.e., when there are no
common features shared across all the tasks, but the tasks can be broken down into subsets (modes)
in a way that the ones from the same subset share common features (Vuorio et al., 2019).
Our contributions. We present U N L I M I TD (uncertainty-aware meta-learning for multimodal
task distributions), a novel meta-learning method that leverages probabilistic tools to address the
aforementioned issues. Specifically, U N L I M I TD models the true distribution of tasks with a learn-
able distribution constructed over a linearized neural network and uses analytic Bayesian inference
to perform uncertainty-aware adaption. We present three variants (namely, U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Data sampled                     Construct
                             from 𝑝 𝑓                            𝑝෤𝜉 𝑓
                                          Meta-training
      Data example                                                       Example of functions drawn from 𝑝෤𝜉 𝑓



Figure 1: The true task distribution p(f ) can be multimodal, i.e., containing multiple clusters of tasks
(e.g., lines and sines). Our approach U N L I M I TD fits p(f ) with a parametric, tuneable distribution
p̃ξ (f ) yielded by Bayesian linear regression on a linearized neural network.


I TD-R, and U N L I M I TD-F) that reflect a trade-off between learning a rich prior distribution over the
weights and maintaining the full expressivity of the network; we show that U N L I M I TD-F strikes a
balance between the two, making it the most appealing variant. Finally, we demonstrate that (1) our
method allows for efficient probabilistic predictions on in-distribution tasks, that compare favorably
to, and in most cases outperform, the existing baselines, (2) it is effective in detecting context data
from OoD tasks at test time, and that (3) both these findings continue to hold in the multimodal
task-distribution setting.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formalizes the problem. Section 3 presents
background information on the linearization of neural networks and Bayesian linear regression. We
detail our approach and its three variants in Section 4. We discuss related work in detail in Section 5.
Finally, we present our experimental results concerning the performance of U N L I M I TD in Section 6
and conclude in Section 7.



2    P ROBLEM STATEMENT

A task T i consists of a function fi from which data is drawn. At test time, the prediction steps
are broken down into (1) adaptation, that is identifying fi using K context datapoints (X i , Y i )
from the task, and (2) inference, that is making predictions for fi on the query inputs X∗i . Later
the predictions can be compared with the query ground-truths Y∗i to estimate the quality of the
prediction, for example in terms of mean squared error (MSE). The meta-training consists in learning
valuable features from a cluster of tasks, which is a set of similar tasks (e.g., sines with different
phases and amplitudes but same frequency), so that at test time the predictions can be accurate on
tasks from the same cluster. We take a probabilistic, functional perspective and represent a cluster
by p(f ), a theoretical distribution over the function space that describes the probability of a task
belonging to the cluster. Learning p(f ) is appealing, as it allows for performing OoD detection in
addition to making predictions. Adaptation amounts to computing the conditional distribution given
test context data, and one can obtain an uncertainty metric by evaluating the negative log-likelihood
(NLL) of the context data under p(f ).
Thus, our goal is to construct a parametric, learnable functional distribution p̃ξ (f ) that approaches
the theoretical distribution p(f ), with a structure that allows tractable conditioning and likelihood
computation, even in deep learning contexts. In practice, however, we are not given p(f ), but only a
meta-training dataset D that we assume is sampled from p(f ): D = {(X     fi , Ye i )}N , where N is the
                                                                                      i=1
                                                      i   i       i
                                                    f , Ye ) ∼ T is the entire pool of data from which
number of tasks available during training, and (X
we can draw subsets of context data (X i , Y i ). Consequently, in the meta-training phase, we aim to
optimize p̃ξ (f ) to capture properties of p(f ), using only the samples in D.
Once we have p̃ξ (f ), we can evaluate it both in terms of how it performs for few-shot learning (by
comparing the predictions with the ground truths in terms of MSE), as well as for OoD detection
(by measuring how well the NLL of context data serves to classify in-distribution tasks against OoD
tasks, measured via the AUC-ROC score).


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     BACKGROUND
3.1    BAYESIAN LINEAR REGRESSION AND G AUSSIAN P ROCESSES

Efficient Bayesian meta-learning requires a tractable inference process at test time. In general, this
is only possible analytically in a few cases. One of them is the Bayesian linear regression with
Gaussian noise and a Gaussian prior on the weights. Viewing it from a nonparametric, functional
approach, this model is equivalent to a Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2005).
Let X = (x1 , . . . , xK ) ∈ RNx ×K be a batch of K Nx -dimensional inputs, and let y =
(y1 , . . . , yK ) ∈ RNy K be a vectorized batch of Ny -dimensional outputs. In the Bayesian linear
regression model, these quantities are related according to y = ϕ(X)⊤ θ̂ + ε ∈ RNy K where
θ̂ ∈ RP are the weights of the model, and the inputs are mapped via ϕ : RNx ×K → RP ×Ny K .
Notice how this is a generalization of the usual one-dimensional linear regression (Ny = 1).
If we assume a Gaussian prior on the weights θ̂ ∼ N (µ, Σ) and a Gaussian noise ε ∼ N (0, Σε )
with Σε = σε2 I, then the model describes a multivariate Gaussian distribution on y for any X.
Equivalently, this means that this model describes a GP distribution over functions, with mean and
covariance function (or kernel)
                         µprior (xt ) = ϕ(xt )⊤ µ,
                                                                                                           (1)
                 covprior (xt1 , xt2 ) = ϕ(xt1 )⊤ Σϕ(xt2 ) + Σε := kΣ (xt1 , xt2 ) + Σε .
This GP enables tractable computation of the likelihood of any batch of data (X, Y ) given this
distribution over functions. The structure of this distribution is governed by the feature map ϕ and
the prior over the weights, specified by µ and Σ.
This distribution can also easily be conditioned to perform inference. Given a batch of data, the
posterior predictive distribution is also a GP, with an updated mean and covariance function
                                                               −1
             µpost (xt∗ ) = kΣ (xt∗ , X) (kΣ (X, X) + Σε )          Y,
                                                                                    −1
                                                                                                           (2)
    covpost (xt1 ∗ , xt2 ∗ ) = kΣ (xt1 ∗ , xt2 ∗ ) − kΣ (xt1 ∗ , X) (kΣ (X, X) + Σε )    kΣ (X, xt2 ∗ ).
Here, µpost (X∗ ) represents our model’s adapted predictions for the test data, which we can compare
to Y∗ to evaluate the quality of our predictions, for example, via mean squared error (assuming that
test data is clean, following Rasmussen & Williams (2005)). The diagonal of covpost (X∗ , X∗ ) can
be interpreted as a per-input level of confidence that captures the ambiguity in making predictions
with only a limited amount of context data.

3.2    T HE LINEARIZATION OF A NEURAL NETWORK YIELDS AN EXPRESSIVE LINEAR
       REGRESSION MODEL

As discussed, the choice of feature map ϕ plays an important role in specifying a linear regression
model. In the deep learning context, recent work has demonstrated that the linear model obtained
when linearizing a deep neural network with respect to its weights at initialization, wherein the
Jacobian of the network operates as the feature map, can well approximate the training behavior of
wide nonlinear deep neural networks (Jacot et al., 2018; Neal, 1996; Azizan et al., 2021; Lee et al.,
2017).
Let f be a neural network f : (θ, xt ) 7→ yt , where θ ∈ RP are the parameters of the model,
x ∈ RNx is an input and y ∈ RNy an output. The linearized network (w.r.t. the parameters) on θ0
is
                          f (θ, xt ) − f (θ0 , xt ) ≈ Jθ (f )(θ0 , xt )(θ − θ0 ),
where Jθ (f )(·, ·) : RP × RNx → RNy ×P is the Jacobian of the network (w.r.t. the parameters).
In the case where the model accepts a batch of K inputs X = (x1 , . . . , xK ) and returns
Y = (y1 , . . . , yK ), we generalize f into g : RP × RNx ×K → RNy ×K , with Y = g(θ, X).
Consequently, we generalize the linearization:
                             g(θ, X) − g(θ0 , X) ≈ J (θ0 , X)(θ − θ0 ),
where J (·, ·) : RP × RNx ×K → RNy K×P is a shorthand for Jθ (g)(·, ·). Note that we have
implicitly vectorized the outputs, and throughout the work, we will freely interchange the matrices
RNy ×K and the vectorized matrices RNy K .


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This linearization can be viewed as the Ny K-dimensional linear regression

                                      z = ϕθ0 (X)⊤ θ̂ ∈ RNy K ,                                       (3)
                                     Nx ×K         P ×Ny K                                       ⊤
where the feature map ϕθ0 (·) : R              → R           is the transposed Jacobian J (θ0 , ·) . The
parameters of this linear regression θ̂ = (θ − θ0 ) are the correction to the parameters chosen
as the linearization point. Equivalently, this can be seen as a kernel regression with the kernel
kθ0 (X1 , X2 ) = J (θ0 , X1 )J (θ0 , X2 )⊤ , which is commonly referred to as the Neural Tangent Ker-
nel (NTK) of the network. Note that the NTK depends on the linearization point θ0 . Building
on these ideas, Maddox et al. (2021) show that the NTK obtained via linearizing a DNN after it
has been trained on a task yields a GP that is well-suited for adaptation and fine-tuning to new,
similar tasks. Furthermore, they show that networks trained on similar tasks tend to have similar
Jacobians, suggesting that neural network linearization can yield an effective model for multi-task
contexts such as meta-learning. In this work, we leverage these insights to construct our parametric
functional distribution p̃ξ (f ) via linearizing a neural network model.

4     O UR APPROACH : U N L I M I TD
In this section, we describe our meta-learning algorithm U N L I M I TDand the construction of a para-
metric functional distribution p̃ξ (f ) that can model the true underlying distribution over tasks p(f ).
First, we focus on the single cluster case, where a Gaussian process structure on p̃ξ (f ) can effec-
tively model the true distribution of tasks, and detail how we can leverage meta-training data D
from a single cluster of tasks to train the parameters ξ of our model. Next, we will generalize our
approach to the multimodal setting, with more than one cluster of tasks. Here, we construct p̃ξ (f ) as
a mixture of GPs and develop a training approach that can automatically identify the clusters present
in the training dataset without requiring the meta-training dataset to contain any additional structure
such as cluster labels.

4.1     T RACTABLY STRUCTURING THE PRIOR PREDICTIVE DISTRIBUTION OVER FUNCTIONS
        VIA A G AUSSIAN DISTRIBUTION OVER THE WEIGHTS

In our approach, we choose p̃ξ (f ) to be the GP distribution over functions that arises from a Gaussian
prior on the weights of the linearization of a neural network (equation 3). Consider a particular task
T i and a batch of K context data (X i , Y i ). The resulting prior predictive distribution, derived from
equation 1 after evaluating on the context inputs, is Y |X i ∼ N (µY |X i , ΣY |X i ), where

               µY |X i = J (θ0 , X i )µ,     ΣY |X i = J (θ0 , X i )ΣJ (θ0 , X i )⊤ + Σε ).           (4)
In this setup, the parameters ξ of p̃ξ (f ) that we wish to optimize are the linearization point θ0 , and
the parameters of the prior over the weights (µ, Σ). Given this Gaussian prior, it is straightforward
to compute the joint NLL of the context labels Y i ,

                            1                      2
          NLL(X i , Y i ) =       Y i − µY |X i Σ−1 + log det ΣY |X i + Ny K log 2π .                  (5)
                            2                        Y |X i


The NLL (a) serves as a loss function quantifying the quality of ξ during training and (b) serves as an
uncertainty signal at test time to evaluate whether context data (X i , Y i ) is OoD. Given this model,
adaptation is tractable as we can condition this GP on the context data analytically. In addition, we
can efficiently make probabilistic predictions by evaluating the mean and covariance of the resulting
posterior predictive distribution on the query inputs, using equation 2.

4.1.1    PARAMETERIZING THE PRIOR COVARIANCE OVER THE WEIGHTS
When working with deep neural networks, the number of weights P can surpass 106 . While it
remains tractable to deal with θ0 and µ, whose memory footprint grows linearly with P , it can
quickly become intractable to make computations with (let alone store) a dense prior covariance
matrix over the weights Σ ∈ RP ×P . Thus, we must impose some structural assumptions on the
prior covariance to scale to deep neural network models.
Imposing a unit covariance. One simple way to tackle this issue would be to remove Σ from the
learnable parameters ξ, i.e. fixing it to be the identity Σ = IP . In this case, ξ = (θ0 , µ). This


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


computational benefit comes at the cost of model expressivity, as we lose a degree of freedom in
how we can optimize our learned prior distribution p̃ξ (f ). In particular, we are unable to choose a
prior over the weights of our model that captures correlations between elements of the feature map.
Learning a low-dimensional representation of the covariance. An alternative is to learn a low-
rank representation of Σ, allowing for a learnable weight-space prior covariance that can encode
correlations. Specifically, we consider a covariance of the form Σ = Q⊤ diag(s2 )Q, where Q is a
fixed projection matrix on an s-dimensional subspace of RP , while s2 is learnable. In this case, the
parameters that are learned are ξ = (θ0 , µ, s). We define S := diag(s2 ). The computation of the
covariance of the prior predictive (equation 4) could then be broken down into two steps:
                                 A := J (θ0 , X i )Q⊤


                                 J (θ0 , X i )ΣJ (θ0 , X i )⊤ = ASA⊤
which requires a memory footprint of O(P (s + Ny K)), if we include the storage of the Jacobian.
Because Ny K ≪ P in typical deep learning contexts, it suffices that s ≪ P so that it becomes
tractable to deal with this new representation of the covariance.
A trade-off between feature-map expressiveness and learning a rich prior over the weights.
Note that even if a low-dimensional representation of Σ enriches the prior distribution over the
weights, it also restrains the expressiveness of the feature map in the kernel by projecting the P -
dimensional features J (θ0 , X) on a subspace of size s ≪ P via Q. This presents a trade-off: we
can use the full feature map, but limit the weight-space prior covariance to be the identity matrix
by keeping Σ = I (case U N L I M I TD-I). Alternatively, we could learn a low-rank representation
of Σ by randomly choosing s orthogonal directions in RP , with the risk that they could limit the
expressiveness of the feature map if the directions are not relevant to the problem that is considered
(case U N L I M I TD-R). As a compromise between these two cases, we can choose the projection
matrix more intelligently and project to the most impactful subspace of the full feature map — in
this way, we can reap the benefits of a tuneable prior covariance while minimizing the useful features
that the projection drops. To select this subspace, we construct this projection map by choosing the
top s eigenvectors of the Fisher information matrix (FIM) evaluated on the training dataset D (case
U N L I M I TD-F). Recent work has shown that the FIM for deep neural networks tends to have rapid
spectral decay (Sharma et al., 2021), which suggests that keeping only a few of the top eigenvectors
of the FIM is enough to encode an expressive task-tailored prior. See Appendix A.1 for more details.

4.1.2    G ENERALIZING THE STRUCTURE TO A MIXTURE OF G AUSSIANS
When learning on multiple clusters of tasks, p(f ) can become non-unimodal, and thus cannot be
accurately described by a single GP. Instead, we can capture this multimodality by structuring p̃ξ (f )
as a mixture of Gaussian processes.
Building a more general structure. We assume that at train time, a task T i comes from any
             j=α
cluster {Cj }j=1 with equal probability. Thus, we choose to construct p̃ξ (f ) as an equal-weighted
mixture of α Gaussian processes.
For each element of the mixture, the structure is similar to the single cluster case, where the pa-
rameters of the cluster’s weight-space prior are given by (µj , Σj ). We choose to have both the
projection matrix Q and the linearization point θ0 (and hence, the feature map ϕ(·) = J (θ0 , ·))
shared across the clusters. This yields improved computational efficiency, as we can compute
the projected features once, simultaneously, for all clusters. This yields the parameters ξα =
(θ0 , Q, (µ1 , s1 ), . . . , (µα , sα )).
This can be viewed as a mixture of linear regression models, with a common feature map but sepa-
rate, independent prior distributions over the weights for each cluster. These separate distributions
are encoded using the low-dimensional representations Sj for each Σj . Notice how this is a gener-
alization of the single cluster case, for when α = 1, p̃ξ (f ) becomes a Gaussian and ξα = ξ 1 .
Prediction and likelihood computation. The NLL of a batch of inputs under this mixture model
can be computed as
        NLLmixt (X i , Y i ) = log α − log sum exp(−NLL1 (X i , Y i ), . . . , −NLLα (X i , Y i )),           (6)
   1
    In theory, it is possible to drop Q and extend the identity covariance case to the multi-cluster setting,
however, this leads to each cluster having an identical covariance function, and thus is not effective at modeling
heterogeneous behaviors among clusters.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 U N L I M I TD-I: meta-training with identity prior covariance
 1: Initialize θ0 , µ.
 2: for all epoch do
 3:     Sample n tasks {T i , (X i , Y i )}i=n
                                           i=1
 4:     for all T i , (X i , Y i ) do
 5:          N LLi ← G AUSS NLL(Y i ; Jµ, JJ ⊤ + Σε )                                       ▷ J = J (θ0 , X i )
 6:     end for                       P
 7:     Update θ0 , µ with ∇θ0 ∪µ i N LLi
 8: end for

Algorithm 2 U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F: meta-training with a learnt covariance
 1: if using random projections then
 2:     Find random projection Q
 3:     Initialize θ0 , µ, s
 4: else if using FIM-based projections then
 5:     Find intermediate θ0 , µ with U N L I M I TD-I                                            ▷ see Alg. 1
 6:     Find Q via FIMP ROJ(s); initialize s.                                                     ▷ see Alg. 3
 7: end if
 8: for all epoch do
 9:     Sample n tasks {T i , (X i , Y i )}i=n
                                           i=1
10:      for all T i , (X i , Y i ) do
11:          N LLi ← G AUSS NLL(Y i ; Jµ, JQ⊤ diag(s2 )QJ ⊤ + Σε )                          ▷ J = J (θ0 , X i )
12:      end for                           P
13:      Update θ0 , µ, s with ∇θ0 ∪µ∪s i N LLi
14: end for


where NLLj (X i , Y i ) is the NLL with respect to each individual Gaussian, as computed in equa-
tion 5, and log sum exp computes the logarithm of the sum of the exponential of the arguments,
taking care to avoid underflow issues.
To make exact predictions, we would require conditioning this mixture model. As this is not directly
tractable, we propose to first infer the cluster from which a task comes from,  by identifying the
Gaussian Gj0 that yields the highest likelihood for the context data X i , Y i . Then, we can adapt
by conditioning Gj0 with the context data and finally infer by evaluating the resulting posterior
distribution on the queried inputs X∗i .

4.2   M ETA - TRAINING THE PARAMETRIC TASK D ISTRIBUTION

The key to our meta-learning approach is to estimate the quality of p̃ξ (f ) via the NLL of context data
from training tasks, and use its gradients to update the parameters of the distribution ξ. Optimizing
this loss over tasks in the dataset draws p̃ξ (f ) closer to the empirical distribution present in the
dataset, and hence towards the true distribution p(f ).
We present three versions of U N L I M I TD, depending on the choice of structure of the prior covari-
ance over the weights (see Section 4.1.1 for more details). U N L I M I TD-I (Algorithm 1) is the meta-
training with the fixed identity prior covariance. U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F (Algorithm 2)
learn a low-dimensional representation of that prior covariance, either with random projections or
with FIM-based projections.
Computing the likelihood. In the algorithms, the function G AUSS NLL(Y i ; m, K) stands for
NLL of Y i under the Gaussian N (m, K) (see equation 5). In the mixture case, we instead use
M IXT NLL, which wraps equation 6 and calls G AUSS NLL for the individual NLL computations
(see discussion in Section 4.1.2). In this case, µ becomes {µj }j=α                    j=α
                                                                j=1 and s becomes {sj }j=1 when
applicable.
Finding the FIM-based projections. The FIM-based projection matrix aims to identify the ele-
ments of ϕ = J (θ0 , X) that are most relevant for the problem (see Section 4.1.1 and Appendix A.1).
However, this feature map evolves during training, because it is θ0 -dependent. How do we ensure
that the directions we choose for Q remain relevant during training? We leverage results from Fort
et al. (2020), stating that the NTK (the kernel associated with the Jacobian feature map, see Sec-
tion 3.2) changes significantly at the beginning of training and that its evolution slows down as


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


training goes on. This suggests that as a heuristic, we can compute the FIM-based directions af-
ter partial training, as they are unlikely to deviate much after the initial training. For this reason,
U N L I M I TD-F (Algorithm 2) first calls U N L I M I TD-I (Algorithm 1) before computing the FIM-
based Q that yields intermediate parameters θ0 and µ. Then the usual training takes place with the
learning of s in addition to θ0 and µ.

5   R ELATED WORK
Bayesian inference with linearized DNNs. Bayesian inference with neural networks is often
intractable because the posterior predictive has rarely a closed-form expression. Whereas U N L I M-
I TD linearizes the network to allow for practical Bayesian inference, existing work has used other
approximations to tractably express the posterior. For example, it has been shown that in the infinite-
width approximation, the posterior predictive of a Bayesian neural network behaves like a GP (Neal,
1996; Lee et al., 2017). This analysis can in some cases yield a good approximation to the Bayesian
posterior of a DNN (Garriga-Alonso et al., 2018). It is also common to use Laplace’s method to ap-
proximate the posterior predictive by a Gaussian distribution and allow practical use of the Bayesian
framework for neural networks. This approximation relies in particular on the computation of the
Hessian of the network: this is in general intractable, and most approaches use the so-called Gauss-
Newton approximation of the Hessian instead (Ritter et al., 2018). Recently, it has been shown that
the Laplace method using the Gauss-Newton approximation is equivalent to working with a certain
linearized version of the network and its resulting posterior GP (Immer et al., 2021).
Bayesian inference is applied in a wide range of subjects. For example, recent advances in transfer
learning have been possible thanks to Bayesian inference with linearized neural networks. Maddox
et al. (2021) have linearized pre-trained networks and performed domain adaptation by conditioning
the prior predictive with data from the new task: the posterior predictive is then used to make
predictions. Our approach leverages a similar adaption method and demonstrates how the prior
distribution can be learned in a meta-learning setup.
Meta-learning. MAML is a meta-learning algorithm that uses as adaptation a few steps of gradient
descent (Finn et al., 2017). It has the benefit of being model-agnostic (it can be used on any model
for which we can compute gradients w.r.t. the weights), whereas U N L I M I TD requires the model
to be a differentiable regressor. MAML has been further generalized to probabilistic meta-learning
models such as PLATIPUS or BaMAML (Yoon et al., 2018; Finn et al., 2018), where the simple
gradient descent step is augmented to perform approximate Bayesian inference. These approaches,
like ours, learn (during meta-training) and make use of (at test-time) a prior distribution on the
weights. In contrast, however, U N L I M I TD uses exact Bayesian inference at test-time. MAML has
also been improved for multimodal meta-learning via MMAML (Vuorio et al., 2019; Abdollahzadeh
et al., 2021). Similarly to our method, they add a step to identify the cluster from which the task
comes from (Vuorio et al., 2019). OoD detection in meta-learning has been studied by Jeong &
Kim (2020), who build upon MAML to perform OoD detection in the classification setting, to
identify unseen classes during training. Iwata & Kumagai (2022) also implemented OoD detection
for classification, by learning a Gaussian mixture model on a latent space. U N L I M I TD extends
these ideas to the regression task, aiming to identify when test data is drawn from an unfamiliar
function.
ALPaCA is a Bayesian meta-learning algorithm for neural networks, where only the last layer is
Bayesian (Harrison et al., 2018). Such framework yields an exact linear regression that uses as
feature map the activations right before the last layer. Our work is a generalization of ALPaCA, in
the sense that U N L I M I TD restricted to the last layer matches ALPaCA’s approach. More on this
link between the methods is discussed in Appendix A.2.

6   R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We wish to evaluate four key aspects of U N L I M I TD. (1) At test time, how do the probabilistic pre-
dictions compare to baselines? (2) How well does the detection of context data from OoD tasks per-
form? (3) How do these results hold in the multimodal setting? (4) Which approach performs better
between (a) the identity covariance (U N L I M I TD-I), (b) the low-dimensional covariance with ran-
dom directions (U N L I M I TD-R) and the compromise (c) using FIM-based directions (U N L I M I TD-
F) (see trade-off in Section 4.1.1)? That is, what is best between learning a rich prior distribution
over the weights, keeping a full feature map, and a compromise between the two?


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     MSE=0.4963 (K=1)                                           MSE=0.0062 (K=5)                                       MSE=0.0012 (K=10)

     2.5                                    Target              2.5                                    Target              2.5                                 Target
                                            Context data                                               Context data                                            Context data
                                            Prediction                                                 Prediction                                              Prediction
     2.0                                                        2.0                                                        2.0
                                            +/- 1.96σ                                                  +/- 1.96σ                                               +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                        1.5                                                        1.5


     1.0                                                        1.0                                                        1.0
y


                                                           y


                                                                                                                      y
     0.5                                                        0.5                                                        0.5


     0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0


    −0.5                                                       −0.5                                                       −0.5

           −4   −2          0           2      4                      −4   −2          0           2      4                      −4   −2       0           2      4
                            x                                                          x                                                       x


                     MSE=0.5476 (K=1)                                           MSE=0.0066 (K=5)                                       MSE=0.0026 (K=10)

     2.5                                    Target              2.5                                    Target              2.5                                 Target
                                            Context data                                               Context data                                            Context data
                                            Prediction                                                 Prediction                                              Prediction
     2.0                                                        2.0                                                        2.0
                                            +/- 1.96σ                                                  +/- 1.96σ                                               +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                        1.5                                                        1.5


     1.0                                                        1.0                                                        1.0
y


                                                           y


                                                                                                                      y
     0.5                                                        0.5                                                        0.5


     0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0


    −0.5                                                       −0.5                                                       −0.5

           −4   −2          0           2      4                      −4   −2          0           2      4                      −4   −2       0           2      4
                            x                                                          x                                                       x


Figure 2: Example of predictions for a varying number of context inputs K, after meta-training
with U N L I M I TD-F. Top: U N L I M I TD-F, infinite task dataset. Bottom: U N L I M I TD-F, finite task
dataset. The standard deviation is from the posterior predictive distribution. Note how the uncer-
tainty levels are coherent with the actual prediction error. Also, note how uncertainty decreases
when there is more context data. Notice how U N L I M I TD-F recovers the shape of the sine even
with a low number of context inputs. Finally, note how U N L I M I TD-F is able to reconstruct the sine
even when trained on fewer tasks (bottom). More comprehensive plots available in Figure 6.



We consider a cluster of sine tasks, one of linear tasks and one of quadratic tasks, regression prob-
lems inspired from Vuorio et al. (2019). Details on the problems can be found in Appendix A.4.
Unimodal meta-learning: The meta-learned prior accurately fits the tasks. First, we investigate
the performance of U N L I M I TD on a unimodal task distribution consisting of sinusoids of varying
amplitude and phase, using the single GP structure for p̃ξ (f ). We compare the performance between
U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F. We also compare the results between training
with an infinite amount of available sine tasks (infinite task dataset), and with a finite amount of
available tasks (finite task dataset). More training details can be found in Appendix A.5. Examples
of predictions at the test time are available in Figure 2, along with confidence levels.
In both OoD detection and quality of predictions, U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F perform better
than U N L I M I TD-I (Figure 3), and this is reflected in the quality of the learned prior p̃ξ (f ) in
each case (see Appendix A.3.1). With respect to the trade-off mentioned in Section 4.1.1, we find
that for small networks, a rich prior over the weights matters more than the full expressiveness
of the feature map, making both U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F appealing. However, after
running further experiments on a deep-learning image-domain problem, this conclusion does not
hold for deep networks (see Appendix A.3.3), where keeping an expressive feature map is important
(U N L I M I TD-I and U N L I M I TD-F are appealing in that case). Thus, U N L I M I TD-F is the variant
that we retain, for it allows similar or better performances than the other variants in all situations.
Note how U N L I M I TD-F outperforms MAML: it achieves much better generalization when decreas-
ing the number of context samples K (Figure 3). Indeed, U N L I M I TD-F trained with a finite task
dataset performs better than MAML with an infinite task dataset: it is able to capture better the
common features of the tasks with a smaller task dataset.
Multimodal meta-learning: Comparing the mixture model against a single GP. Next, we con-
sider a multimodal task distribution with training data consisting of sinusoids as well as lines with
varying slopes. Here, we compare the performance between choosing the mixture structure or the
single GP structure (see discussion in Section 4.1.2): in both cases, we use U N L I M I TD-F. More
training details can be found in Appendix A.6).
Both the OoD detection and the prediction performances are better with the mixture structure than
with the single GP structure (Figure 4), indicating that the mixture model is a useful structure for
p̃ξ (f ). This is reflected in the quality of the learned priors (see Appendix A.3.2 for qualitative results
including samples from the learned priors). Note how the single GP structure still performs better
than both MAML and MMAML for prediction, especially in the low-data regime. This demonstrates


                                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       1.0                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                               UNLIMTD-F (infinite)
     3
                                                                                                                                               UNLIMTD-F (finite)
                                                       0.9                                                          0.4                        UNLIMTD-R (infinite)
     2
                                                                                                                                               UNLIMTD-R (finite)
                                                                                                                                               UNLIMTD-I (infinite)


                                       AUC-ROC score
     1                                                 0.8                                                          0.3                        UNLIMTD-I (finite)


                                                                                                              MSE
                                                                                                                                               MAML (infinite)
y


     0                                                                                                                                         MAML (finite)
                                                       0.7                          UNLIMTD-F (infinite)            0.2
                                                                                    UNLIMTD-F (finite)
    −1
                                                                                    UNLIMTD-R (infinite)
                    In-dist                            0.6                          UNLIMTD-R (finite)              0.1
    −2
                    OoD 1                                                           UNLIMTD-I (infinite)
                    OoD 2                                                           UNLIMTD-I (finite)
    −3                                                 0.5                                                          0.0
         −4   −2   0           2   4                         2    4           6          8               10                 2    4       6          8               10
                   x                                                      K                                                          K


(a) Examples of context data                             (b) AUC for OoD detection                                        (c) MSE on predictions
from in-dist. and OoD tasks

Figure 3: Unimodal case: Performance of U N L I M I TD for OoD detection and inference, as a func-
tion of the number of context datapoints K. The training dataset consists of sinusoids, while OoD
tasks are lines and quadratic tasks. We compare different variants (U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M I TD-R
and U N L I M I TD-F), and against MAML for predictions. We also compare training with a finite
and infinite task dataset. Note how U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F have efficient OoD detection
and outperform MAML in predictions. Also, note how MAML trained with an infinite task dataset
performs worse than U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F trained on a finite task dataset.

                                                       1.0                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                             UNLIMTD-F (mixture)
     3
                                                                                                                                             UNLIMTD-F (single GP)
                                                       0.9                                                          0.4                      MMAML
     2
                                                                                                                                             MAML
                                       AUC-ROC score


     1                                                 0.8                                                          0.3


                                                                                                              MSE
y


     0
                                                       0.7                                                          0.2
    −1

                   In-dist 1                           0.6                                                          0.1
    −2
                   In-dist 2                                                      UNLIMTD-F (mixture)
                   OoD                                                            UNLIMTD-F (single GP)
    −3                                                 0.5                                                          0.0
         −4   −2   0           2   4                         2    4           6          8               10                 2    4       6          8               10
                   x                                                      K                                                          K


(a) Examples of context data                             (b) AUC for OoD detection                                        (c) MSE on predictions
from in-dist. and OoD tasks

Figure 4: Multimodal case: Performance of U N L I M I TD for OoD detection and inference, as a
function of the number of context datapoints K. The training dataset includes both sines and lines,
while OoD tasks are quadratic functions. We compare the different variants (U N L I M I TD-F with
a single GP or a mixture model), and against MAML/MMAML for predictions. Note how both
versions of U N L I M I TD-F yield better predictions than the baselines. In particular, even with a
single GP, U N L I M I TD-F outperforms the baselines.


the strength of our probabilistic approach for multimodal meta-learning: even if the probabilistic
assumptions are not optimal, the predictions are still accurate and can beat baselines.


7        C ONCLUSION

We propose U N L I M I TD, a novel meta-learning algorithm that models the underlying task distri-
bution using a parametric and tuneable distribution, leveraging Bayesian inference with linearized
neural networks. We compare three variants, and show that among these, the Fisher based param-
eterization, U N L I M I TD-F, effectively balances scalability and expressivity, even for deep learning
applications. We have demonstrated that (1) our approach makes efficient probabilistic predictions
on in-distribution tasks, that compare favorably to, and often outperform, baselines, (2) it allows for
effective detection of context data from OoD tasks and (3) that both these findings continue to hold
in the multimodal task-distribution setting.
There are several avenues for future work. One direction entails understanding how the performance
of U N L I M I TD-F is impacted if the FIM-based directions are computed too early in training and the
NTK changes significantly afterwards. One could also generalize our approach to non-Gaussian
likelihoods, making U N L I M I TD effective on classification tasks. Finally, further research can push
the limits of multimodal meta-learning, e.g. by implementing non-parametric Bayesian methods
to automatically infer an optimal number of clusters, thereby eliminating a hyperparameter of the
current approach.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Milad Abdollahzadeh, Touba Malekzadeh, and Ngai-Man Man Cheung. Revisit multimodal meta-
 learning through the lens of multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 34:14632–14644, 2021.
Navid Azizan, Sahin Lale, and Babak Hassibi. Stochastic mirror descent on overparameterized
  nonlinear models. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2021.
Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for contin-
 ual learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3762–3773.
 PMLR, 2020.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Probabilistic model-agnostic meta-learning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Stanislav Fort, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Mansheej Paul, Sepideh Kharaghani, Daniel M Roy,
  and Surya Ganguli. Deep learning versus kernel learning: an empirical study of loss landscape
  geometry and the time evolution of the neural tangent kernel. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:5850–5861, 2020.
Ning Gao, Hanna Ziesche, Ngo Anh Vien, Michael Volpp, and Gerhard Neumann. What matters for
  meta-learning vision regression tasks? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14776–14786, 2022.
Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Carl Edward Rasmussen, and Laurence Aitchison. Deep convolutional net-
  works as shallow gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05587, 2018.
James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, and Marco Pavone. Meta-learning priors for efficient online
  bayesian regression. In International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics, pp.
  318–337. Springer, 2018.
Alexander Immer, Maciej Korzepa, and Matthias Bauer. Improving predictions of bayesian neural
  nets via local linearization. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 703–711. PMLR, 2021.
Tomoharu Iwata and Atsutoshi Kumagai. Meta-learning for out-of-distribution detection via density
  estimation in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09543, 2022.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Taewon Jeong and Heeyoung Kim. Ood-maml: Meta-learning for few-shot out-of-distribution de-
  tection and classification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3907–3916,
  2020.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.
Wesley Maddox, Shuai Tang, Pablo Moreno, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Andreas Damianou. Fast
 adaptation with linearized neural networks. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, pp. 2737–2745. PMLR, 2021.
Radford M Neal. Priors for infinite networks. In Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, pp. 29–53.
  Springer, 1996.
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning
  (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning). The MIT Press, 2005. ISBN 026218253X.
Hippolyt Ritter, Aleksandar Botev, and David Barber. A scalable laplace approximation for neural
  networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018-Conference
  Track Proceedings, volume 6. International Conference on Representation Learning, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V Ugur Guney, Yann Dauphin, and Leon Bottou. Empirical analysis of
  the hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04454, 2017.
Apoorva Sharma, Navid Azizan, and Marco Pavone. Sketching curvature for efficient out-of-
  distribution detection for deep neural networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  1958–1967. PMLR, 2021.
Joel A Tropp, Alp Yurtsever, Madeleine Udell, and Volkan Cevher. Practical sketching algorithms
  for low-rank matrix approximation. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 38(4):
  1454–1485, 2017.
Risto Vuorio, Shao-Hua Sun, Hexiang Hu, and Joseph J Lim. Multimodal model-agnostic meta-
  learning via task-aware modulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Jaesik Yoon, Taesup Kim, Ousmane Dia, Sungwoong Kim, Yoshua Bengio, and Sungjin Ahn.
  Bayesian model-agnostic meta-learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     A TRACTABLE WAY OF FINDING THE PERTURBATION DIRECTIONS IN WEIGHT SPACE
        THAT IMPACT THE MOST THE PREDICTIONS OF AN ENTIRE DATASET

Deep neural networks have a large number of parameters, making the feature map ϕθ0 high-
dimensional. However, recent work has shown that only a small subspace of the weight space is
impactful. For example, to perform continual learning, Farajtabar et al. (2020) leverage the fact that
it is sufficient to update the parameters orthogonally to a few directions only to avoid catastrophic
forgetting. Sagun et al. (2017) have shown that the Hessian of a deep neural network can be summa-
rized in a few number of directions, due to rapid spectral decay. This encourages finding a method
to extract these meaningful directions of the weight space.

A.1.1    L INK WITH THE F ISHER I NFORMATION M ATRIX
We define these main directions as the ones that have the most impact on the predictions of a whole
dataset. To find them, we first find a way to quantify the influence of an infinitesimal weight pertur-
bation. Using the second-order approximation of that quantity, we then describe in the deep-learning
context a tractable way to find the directions.


Setting. We take the same setting as Section 3.2, and we describe a method to quantify the influ-
ence of a parameter perturbation θ̃ on the predictions of a dataset of tasks D. To do so, we leverage
a probabilistic interpretation of the model: we assume a Gaussian pdf over the observations for
given inputs and parameters pθ (Y |X) ∼ N (g(θ, X), Σε ), where the covariance of the noise Σε
is diagonal Σε = σε2 I (just as in Section 3.1).
Perturbation of the prediction of a batch of inputs. Before quantifying the influence of the
perturbation on the predictions of the whole task dataset, we do it for the prediction of a batch of
inputs g(θ0 , X).
We borrow the method from Sharma et al. (2021): we quantify the influence of a parameter pertur-
bation by computing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between pθ0 (Y |X) and pθ0 +θ̃ (Y |X). The
expansion is:
          δ(θ0 , X)(θ̃) := DKL (pθ0 (Y |X)∥pθ0 +θ̃ (Y |X)) ≈ θ̃ ⊤ F (θ0 , X)θ̃ + o(∥θ̃∥2 )         (7)
where F (θ0 , X) := J (θ0 , X)⊤ Σ−1                 −2          ⊤
                                  ε J (θ0 , X) = σε J (θ0 , X) J (θ0 , X) ∈ R
                                                                               P ×P
                                                                                    is the empir-
ical Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) of the batch of inputs X, computed on the parameters θ0 .
Generalization: perturbation of the prediction of a dataset. Now we can define the influence of
a parameter perturbation on the whole training dataset D, by generalizing the previous definition:
                                                        N
                                                   1 X          fi )(θ̃)
                                δ(θ0 , D)(θ̃) :=         δ(θ0 , X
                                                   N i=1


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using equation 7, this quantity verifies:
                                                  N
                                                                 !
                                               1 X
                       δ(θ0 , D)(θ̃) ≈ θ̃ ⊤                  fi ) θ̃ + o(∥θ̃∥2 )
                                                     F (θ0 , X                                            (8)
                                               N i=1

which gives a natural definition for the FIM of the whole dataset by analogy with equation 7:
                               N                       N
                            1 X           fi ) = 1
                                                      X
                                                                  fi )⊤ J (θ0 , X
                                                                                fi ) ∈ RP ×P
            F (θ0 , D) :=         F (θ0 , X               J (θ0 , X
                            N i=1               N σε2 i=1

The expansion in equation 8 shows that the FIM of the dataset is a second-order approximation de-
scribing the influence of a parameter perturbation over the entire dataset. In particular, the eigenvec-
tors of F (θ0 , D) with the highest eigenvalues are the directions that impact the most the predictions.

A.1.2     C OMPUTING THE TOP EIGENVECTORS OF THE F ISHER I NFORMATION M ATRIX OF THE
          DATASET IN A DEEP LEARNING CONTEXT

Naively computing the top eigenspace of F (θ0 , D) requires processing a P × P matrix, which is
intractable in the deep-learning context (where P can surpass 106 ). Instead, we decide to use the
method used by Sharma et al. (2021), which leverages a low-rank-approximation-based technique
(namely matrix sketching) developed by Tropp et al. (2017).


Sketching the FIM of the dataset. The key idea behind this technique is to build two small
random sketches of the FIM, (Y , W ) := S (F (θ0 , D)), that with high probability contain enough
information to reconstruct the top s eigenvectors of F (θ0 , D). The linearity of S simplifies the
sketching process by breaking down the computation into individual sketches:
                                            N                                             N
                                      1 X                   i ⊤            i
                                                                                    1 X i
      (Y , W ) := S(F (θ0 , D)) =              S J (θ 0 , X
                                                          f  )  J (θ 0 , X
                                                                         f   )  =:           (Y , W i )
                                     N σε2 i=1                                     N σε2 i=1

In particular, the sketch (Y , W ) can be updated in-place and does not require to store all the individ-
ual sketches. Given a sketch budget k + l (Sharma et al. (2021) recommends choosing k := 2s + 1
and l := 4s+3) and two random normal matrices Ω ∈ Rk×P and Ψ ∈ Rl×P , the random individual
sketches (W i , Y i ) are defined as:
                                    Y i := ((ΩJi⊤ )Ji )⊤ ∈ RP ×k


                                   W i := (ΨJi⊤ )Ji           ∈ Rl×P
                    fi ).
where Ji := J (θ0 , X


Sketch-based computation of the top eigenspace. Once the sketches are computed, the function
F IXED R ANK S YM A PPROX by Tropp et al. (2017) computes the first eigenvectors and eigenvalues
of the FIM of the dataset. Overall, the memory footprint to find the sketches and the top eigenspace
is O(P (s + Ny M )), where s is the number of queried eigenvectors and M is the size of X     fi . As
long as s ≪ P , this computation is tractable, given that Ny M ≪ P is usual deep learning contexts.
Algorithm 3 summarizes the process that yields the FIM-based projections via sketching. We drop
the scaling coefficient σε−2 as it doesn’t affect the computation, given that we only want orthogonal
eigenvectors and eigenvalues.

A.2     U N L I M I TD AS A GENERALIZATION OF ALPACA

Restraining the linearization to the last layer. Remember the linear regression of equation 3,
that we obtained by linearizing the network with all its layers. Let’s separate the parameters of the
network θ into two: the parameters of all the layers but the last one λ, and the parameters of the last
layer ρ: θ = λ ∪ ρ.
We assume that the last layer is dense with biases: we will note ρw the weight matrix and ρb the
biases of this last layer. Nψ will stand as the dimension of the activations right before the last


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Computing the FIM-based projections
Require: s (desired size of the subspace)
 1: k ← 2s + 1
 2: l ← 4s + 3
 3: Draw Ω ∈ Rk×P , Ψ ∈ Rl×P , two random normal matrices
 4: Initialize Y = 0 ∈ RP ×k , W = 0 ∈ Rl×P
 5: for all training task T i do
 6:     Ji ← J (θ0 , X fi )
 7:     Y ← Y + 1/N ((ΩJi⊤ )Ji )⊤
 8:     W ← W + 1/N (ΨJi⊤ )Ji
 9: end for



layer: in particular, ρw ∈ RNy ×Nψ and ρb ∈ RNy . P ′ will stand as the size of ρ: in our case,
P ′ = Nψ × Ny + Ny . We implicitly vectorize ρ, such that:

                                   vec ρw

                                                               ′
                             ρ=             ∈ RNψ Ny +Ny = RP
                                     ρb

We now restrain the linear regression to the last layer as follows:
                                    y = J ′ (ρ0 , ψλ (X))(ρ − ρ0 ) + ε                              (9)
where:

         • ψλ (·) : RNx ×K → RNψ ×K stands for the function that maps the inputs and the activations
           right before the last layer;
                       ′                           ′
         • J ′ (·, ·) : RP × RNψ ×K → RNy K×P stands for the jacobian of the last layer with respect
           to the parameters ρ. We can write the jacobian in closed-form due to the linearity of the
           last layer:
                                                                                   ′
                             J ′ (ρ0 , ψλ (X)) = ψλ (X)⊤ ⊗ INy INy ∈ RNy K×P


           Note that J ′ (ρ0 , ψλ (x)) does not depend on the linearization point ρ0 (could be expected,
           given the linearity of the last layer).
                           ′
         • ρ − ρ0 ∈ RP is the correction to the last parameters. We will note the correction to the
           weights as ρ̂w := ρw − ρw                                     b    b   b
                                   0 and the correction to the bias as ρ̂ := ρ − ρ0 .

Using Kronecker’s product identities, the linear regression in equation 9 can be rewritten:

                                        y = ρ̂w ψλ (X) + ρ̂b + ε                                   (10)

Also, as a side note, another way of getting this linear regression (equation 10) is to rewrite the
initial linearization of Section 3.2, but with respect to ρ only:

               f (λ ∪ ρ, xt ) − f (λ ∪ ρ0 , xt )   = ρw ψλ (x) + ρb − (ρw           b
                                                                        0 ψλ (x) + ρ0 )
                                                        w     w            b    b
                                                   = (ρ − ρ0 )ψλ (x) + (ρ − ρ0 )
                                                   = ρ̂w ψλ (x) + ρ̂b
Doing it this way has the benefit to show that the linearization is exact when restricted to the last
layer. For non-linear neural networks, the linearization is always an approximation.


Adapting U N L I M I TD to the last layer. Just like what we did in the general case, we use the GP
theory to make Bayesian inference on this linear regression. The new parameters of the GP p̃ξ (f )
are now ξ = (λ, µ, Σ), where µ and Σ are the parameters of the Gaussian prior over ρ̂. Note how
ρ0 have disappeared from ξ: contrary to the general case, the linearization point is not optimized, as
it does not impact the computation. Also note that λ has replaced ρ0 , as it parameterizes the feature
map.


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               14
                                                                                      UNLIMTD-I (infinite)              2                 UNLIMTD-F (infinite)
                              UNLIMTD-F (infinite)
        2.5                                                                           UNLIMTD-I (finite)                                  UNLIMTD-F (finite)
                              UNLIMTD-F (finite)               12
                              UNLIMTD-R (infinite)                                                                                        UNLIMTD-R (infinite)
        2.0                                                                                                                               UNLIMTD-R (finite)
                              UNLIMTD-R (finite)                                                                        1
                                                               10
                              UNLIMTD-I (infinite)
        1.5
                              UNLIMTD-I (finite)


                                                     k(0, x)
                                                                8


                                                                                                             k(0, x)
mean

        1.0                                                                                                             0

                                                                6
        0.5
                                                                                                                       −1
                                                                4
        0.0

       −0.5                                                     2
                                                                                                                       −2

              −4     −2   0   2           4                          −4     −2    0   2           4                         −4   −2   0   2           4
                          x                                                       x                                                   x


(a) Mean E(f ) (U N L I M I TD-I,                    (b) Covariance cov(f (0), f (x))                        (c) Covariance cov(f (0), f (x))
U N L I M I TD-R, U N L I M I TD-F)                  (U N L I M I TD-I)                                      (U N L I M I TD-R, U N L I M I TD-F)

Figure 5: Mean (5a) and covariance (5b, 5c) functions of p̃ξ (f ) after different meta-trainings on
the sine cluster (U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F, with a finite or infinite dataset).
Note the scale, and how U N L I M I TD-I has a less accurate covariance function that U N L I M I TD-R
and U N L I M I TD-F.


Comparison with ALPaCA. In the ALPaCA setting, the linear regression is:
                                                                    ya = ρ̂w ψλ (X) + ε                                                               (11)
                     w
Note that ρ̂ still plays the same role in the linear regression, but is not any correction anymore.
Substracting 11 - 10 yields:
                                                                          y − ya = ρ̂b
U N L I M I TD restricted to the last layer is closely related to ALPaCA, in that they both perform a
linear regression with the same kernel: the only difference lies in the additional bias term that is not
considered in ALPaCA. Thus, we can think of U N L I M I TD as a generalization of ALPaCA to all
the layers of the network.

A.3           A DDITIONAL RESULTS

A.3.1              A DDITIONAL RESULTS ( SINGLE - CLUSTER CASE )
Quality of the priors. To qualitatively analyze the prior after meta-training on the sines, we plot
the mean functions and the covariance functions of the resulting GP, that is p̃ξ (f ) (Figure 5). All the
trainings yield a similar mean for p̃ξ (f ) (that is a cosine with amplitude 1.5 and offset 1) (Figure 5a),
which is close to the theoretical mean of p(f ) (a cosine with amplitude 2.5 and offset 1). The
covariance function of U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F (Figure 5c) resembles what we would
expect for p(f ) (e.g. periodicity, negative correlation between 0 and π, etc.), but it is not the case for
U N L I M I TD-I (Figure 5b). This empirical analysis confirms the quantitative comparison in terms
of OoD detection and prediction performance carried in Section 6.


Examples of predictions. Figure 6 summarizes the predictions of the model meta-trained on sines,
for a varying number of context inputs K, breaking down all the different cases of training.

A.3.2              A DDITIONAL RESULTS ( MULTI - CLUSTER CASE )
Quality of the priors. Figure 7 and Figure 8 show the mean and covariance functions of the GP
(when training with a single GP), and the mean and covariance functions of the GPs composing the
mixture(when training with a mixture of GPs). We note that in the case of the mixture, both of the
Gaussians composing the mixture have correctly captured the common features shared by each of
the clusters (respectively the linear and the sine cluster): e.g. the mean of the line cluster is the zero-
function, which matches Figure 7b, the correlation between x = 1 and the other inputs is correctly
rendered for linear tasks (Figure 8b), etc.
When learning with a single GP, the learnt mean and covariance do not match any of the two clusters.
For example, the mean has an intermediate offset between the offset of the sine cluster and the line
cluster. This empirical analysis comforts the conclusions of Section 6: the mixture model yields
better results than the single GP case.


                                                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3.3    U N L I M I TD YIELDS EFFECTIVE PREDICTIONS ON LARGE - SCALE VISION PROBLEMS
We consider a regression-vision meta-learning problem from Gao et al. (2022), Shapenet1D, aiming
to predict object orientations in space. In this problem, each task consists of a different object of
which we want to predict the orientation. For each task, the context data consists of some images of
the same object, but with different orientations; the query inputs are other images of the same object,
with unknown orientations. Details on the problems and the datasets can be found in appendix A.4.
We train a deep learning model on Shapenet1D, and we compare the performances on the test set be-
tween U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F (Figure 9). More training and test details
can be found in the Appendix A.7.
Both U N L I M I TD-I and U N L I M I TD-F yield better performances than MAML, achieving low angle
errors. U N L I M I TD-R however gives poor results, worse than that of MAML.
In terms of the trade-off of Section 4.1.1, our conclusion from small networks does not scale up to
deep models. Here, the loss of valuable features is perceptible (that is what happens with U N L I M-
I TD-R, when the randomness of the directions may drop such features), and not learning a rich prior
over the weights is not burdensome (U N L I M I TD-I). However, U N L I M I TD-F plays a role of com-
promise, by learning the prior covariance while keeping the few important features of the jacobian,
as it gives comparable results to U N L I M I TD-I.

A.4     D ETAILS ON THE REGRESSION PROBLEMS

A.4.1    S IMPLE REGRESSION PROBLEMS
Our simple regression problems are inspired by Vuorio et al. (2019)’s work. They consists of three
clusters of different types of tasks, and varying offset. The first cluster consists of sines with constant
frequency and offset, but with a varying amplitude and phase:
                           {x 7→ A sin(x + φ) + 1|A ∈ [0.1, 5], φ ∈ [0, π]}
The second cluster consists of lines with a varying slope and no offset:
                                         {x 7→ ax|a ∈ [−1, 1]}
The last cluster consists of quadratic functions, with a varying quadratic coefficient and phase, and
with a constant offset:
                          x 7→ a(x − φ)2 + 0.5|a ∈ [−0.2, 0.2], φ ∈ [−2, 2]


In all these clusters, we add an artificial Gaussian noise on the context observations N (0, 0.05).
The query datapoints remain noiseless, to remain coherent with the assumption from Section 3.1
borrowed from Rasmussen & Williams (2005).

A.4.2    V ISION PROBLEM
We consider the meta-learning vision, regression problem recently created by Gao et al. (2022)
(namely Shapenet1D), that consists in estimating objects orientation from images. The objects have
a vertical angular degree of freedom, and Figure 10 shows an example of such objects in different
positions.
We use the same training and test datasets as Gao et al. (2022), with no kind of augmentation
(in particular, no artificial noise on the ground-truth angles). In particular, we use the same intra-
category (IC) evaluation dataset (that is, objects from the same categories as the objects used for
training) and cross-category (CC) evaluation dataset (that is, objects from different categories as the
ones used for training).

A.5     T RAINING AND TEST DETAILS FOR THE SINGLE CLUSTER CASE

A.5.1    T RAINING DETAILS OF U N L I M I TD ( SINGLE CLUSTER CASE )
The model is a neural network with 2 hidden layers, 40 neurons each, with a ReLU non-linearity. In
our single-cluster experiment, the cluster is the sine cluster (see Appendix A.4).
In the case where there are an infinite number of available sine tasks during training (ie N = +∞),
the training is performed with n = 24 tasks per epoch, and at each epoch the context inputs are


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


randomly drawn from [−5, 5] (which means that M = +∞). In the case where we restrict the
available tasks to a finite number, we randomly choose N = 10 tasks and M = 50 context datapoints
per task before training (they are shared among all the “finite” trainings) and perform the trainings
with n = 6 tasks per epoch.
For all the trainings, the number of context inputs seen during training is K = 10.
For all trainings, we train U N L I M I TD on 60, 000 epochs. When dealing with the U N L I M I TD-F
case, we allow half of the epochs (30, 000) to the training before finding the intermediate θ0 and µ
(see Algorithm 2), and the other half after.
In the U N L I M I TD-F case with infinite available tasks, a finite number of tasks is needed to compute
the FIM: thus we build an artificial finite dataset of N = 100 and M = P (arbitrary, but chosen so
                         fi )⊤ gets a chance to be full-rank ie contain as much information as possible),
             fi )J (θ0 , X
that J (θ0 , X
that is used only for that computation.
In the U N L I M I TD-F and the U N L I M I TD-R cases, the subspace size is s = 10.
For all trainings, the meta-optimizer is Adam with an initial learning rate of 0.001. The noise
σε = 0.05, equal to the noise added to the context data. We compute the NLL using Rasmussen &
Williams (2005)’s implementation.

A.5.2    T RAINING DETAILS OF MAML ( SINGLE CLUSTER CASE )
We train MAML baselines to compare our results with that of MAML. A large part of these hyper-
parameters is directly inspired from Finn et al. (2017)’s work.
The model is a neural network with 2 hidden layers, 40 neurons each, with a ReLU non-linearity. In
our single-cluster experiment, the cluster is the sine cluster (see Appendix A.4).
In the case where there are an infinite number of available sine tasks during training (ie N = +∞),
the training is performed with n = 24 tasks per epoch, and at each epoch the context and query
inputs are randomly drawn from [−5, 5]. In the case where we restrict the available tasks to a finite
number, we randomly choose N = 10 tasks and M = 50 datapoints per task (used for both context
and query batches) before training (they are shared among all the “finite” trainings) and perform the
trainings with n = 6 tasks per epoch.
For all trainings, the number of context datapoints is K = 10, and the number of query datapoints
is L = 10. We meta-train for 70, 000 epochs.
For all trainings, the meta-optimizer is Adam with an initial learning rate of 0.001. The inner
learning-rate is kept constant, at 0.001. The number of inner updates is 5 during training, and 10 at
test time.

A.5.3    T EST DETAILS ( SINGLE - CLUSTER CASE )
For the OoD detection evaluation, we plot the AUC as a function of the number of the context inputs
K. The AUC is computed using the NLL of the context inputs wrt to p̃ξ (f ) (our uncertainty metric).
The true-positives are the OoD tasks (lines and quadratic tasks) flagged as such; the false-positives
are the in-distribution tasks (sines) flagged as OoD.
For the predictions, we plot the average and ci95 of the MSE on 1,000 tasks (100 queried inputs
each). In the U N L I M I TD-R case, we also compute the average and ci95 on 5 different random
projections trainings.

A.6     T RAINING AND TEST DETAILS FOR THE MULTI CLUSTER CASE

A.6.1    T RAINING DETAILS OF U N L I M I TD ( MULTI - CLUSTER CASE )
The model is a neural network with 2 hidden layers, 40 neurons each, with a ReLU non-linearity.
In our multi-cluster experiment, α = 2: the clusters consist of the sine cluster and the linear cluster
(see Appendix A.4).
For all the trainings, the training is performed with n = 24 tasks per epoch (with an infinite number
of available sine tasks and linear tasks during training ie N = +∞), and at each epoch the context
inputs are randomly drawn from [−5, 5] (which means that M = +∞). In accordance with our


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


equal probability assumption from Section 4.1.2, at each epoch n/2 = 12 tasks come from the sine
cluster and n/2 = 12 tasks come from the linear cluster.
For all trainings, the number of context inputs seen during training is K = 10.
For all trainings, we train U N L I M I TD algorithm on 60, 000 epochs: because we deal with the U N -
L I M I TD-F case, we allow half of the epochs (30, 000) to the training before finding the intermediate
θ0 and {µj }j=α
              j=1 (see Algorithm 2), and the other half after.

In the U N L I M I TD-F case, a finite number of tasks is needed to compute the FIM: thus we build an
                                                                                                  fi )⊤
                                                                                      fi )J (θ0 , X
artificial finite dataset of N = 100 and M = P (arbitrary, but chosen so that J (θ0 , X
gets a chance to be full-rank ie contain as much information as possible), that is used only for that
computation.
For all trainings, the subspace size is s = 10.
For all trainings, the meta-optimizer is Adam with an initial learning rate of 0.001. The noise
σε = 0.05, equal to the noise added to the context data. We compute the NLL using Rasmussen &
Williams (2005)’s implementation.
When training with M IXT, we make sure to initialize s1 and s2 randomly with N (0, 0.5I), so that
the meta-learning can effectively differentiate the two clusters. Also, in the M IXT case, the mean
µ is unique before computing the FIM. Once we have found the projection directions, we initialize
(µ1 , µ2 ) with the intermediate µ, thus yielding two Gaussians.

A.6.2    T RAINING DETAILS OF MAML ( MULTI - CLUSTER CASE )

We reimplement and train a MAML baseline to compare our results with that of MAML. A large
part of these hyperparameters is directly inspired from Finn et al. (2017)’s work.
The model is a neural network with 2 hidden layers, 40 neurons each, with a ReLU non-linearity.
In our multi-cluster experiment, α = 2: the clusters consist of the sine cluster and the linear cluster
(see Appendix A.4).
The training is performed with n = 24 tasks per epoch (with an infinite number of available sine and
linear tasks during training ie N = +∞) and at each epoch the context and query inputs are ran-
domly drawn from [−5, 5]. In accordance with our equal probability assumption from Section 4.1.2,
at each epoch n/2 = 12 tasks come from the sine cluster and n/2 = 12 tasks come from the linear
cluster.
For all trainings, the number of context datapoints is K = 10, and the number of query datapoints
is L = 10. We meta-train for 70, 000 epochs.
For all trainings, the meta-optimizer is Adam with an initial learning rate of 0.001. The inner
learning-rate is kept constant, at 0.001. The number of inner updates is 5 during training, and 10 at
test time.

A.6.3    T RAINING DETAILS OF MMAML ( MULTI - CLUSTER CASE )

We train a MMAML by using Vuorio et al. (2019)’s code, using the best setting mentionned in their
paper (FiLM). We adapt their code to train it on our sine and linear clusters: we add an offset to
their sine cluster (via their parameter bias), change the phase from sin(x − φ) to sin(x + φ) and
specify via the arguments the slope range ([−1, 1]) and the y-intercept range ([0, 0], because it does
not vary in our case) of the line tasks. We also change the number of context inputs that we set to
K = 10, to remain coherent with the rest of the trainings. The rest of the hyperparameters are kept
identical to the command specified in the repository of MMAML. Finally, at test time we make the
query ground-truths noiseless, to remain coherent with the rest of the test conditions.

A.6.4    T EST DETAILS ( MULTI - CLUSTER CASE )

For the OoD detection evaluation, we plot the AUC as a function of the number of the context inputs
K. The AUC is computed using the NLL of the context inputs wrt to p̃ξ (f ) (our uncertainty metric).
The true-positives are the OoD tasks (quadratic tasks) flagged as such; the false-positives are the
in-distribution tasks (lines and sines) flagged as OoD.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the predictions, we plot the average and ci95 of the MSE on 1,000 tasks (100 queried inputs
each): half of them are sines and half of them are lines.

A.7     T RAINING AND TEST DETAILS FOR THE VISION PROBLEM

The model is a deep neural network, identical to the one used by Gao et al. (2022) except for the
last layer: instead of doing a one-dimensional regression (where the output stands for an angle
prediction), we perform a two-dimensional regression (where the output stands for a cosine and sine
prediction). This choice is motivated by the fact that the Gaussian noise assumed in Section 3.1
cannot capture the complexity of an angle error (e.g. predicting 361◦ should yield a low error when
compared to the ground-truth angle 0◦ ), but better renders the MSE that can be applied on cosine
and sine.

A.7.1    T RAINING DETAILS OF U N L I M I TD ( VISION CASE )
For all the trainings, there are n = 10 tasks per epoch and K = 15 context inputs per task. When
dealing with the U N L I M I TD-F case, we allow half of the epochs (5, 000) to the training before
finding the intermediate θ0 and µ (see Algorithm 2), and the other half after.
In the U N L I M I TD-F and U N L I M I TD-R cases, the subspace size is s = 100.
For all the trainings, the meta-optimizer is Adam with an initial learning rate of 0.001. The noise is
σε = 0.01. We compute the NLL using Rasmussen & Williams (2005)’s implementation.

A.7.2    T RAINING DETAILS OF MAML ( VISION CASE )
We train a MAML baseline to compare our results with that of MAML. A large part of these hyper-
parameters is directly inspired from Gao et al. (2022).
The training is performed with n = 10 tasks per epoch. The number of context datapoints is K = 15,
and the number of query datapoints is L = 10. We meta-train for 50, 000 epochs.
For all trainings, the meta-optimizer is Adam with an initial learning rate of 0.0005. The inner
learning-rate is kept constant, at 0.002. The number of inner updates is 5 during training, and 20 a
test time.

A.7.3    T EST DETAILS ( VISION PROBLEM )
At test time, we wrap our model with the arctan function to convert the predictions angle predic-
tions. Then, we compare the angle predictions with the ground-truth angles. To do so, we use the
following error from Gao et al. (2022) to compare two angles:
                               E(β, β ∗ ) = min{Eβ + ,β ∗ , Eβ,β ∗ , Eβ − ,β ∗ }
where Eβ ± ,β ∗ = |y ± 360 − y ∗ | and Eβ,β ∗ = |y − y ∗ |.
When plotting the performance (Figure 9), we plot the average and ci95 on 100 tasks (15 queried in-
puts each). For U N L I M I TD-R, the average and ci95 are computed on 5 different random projection
trainings.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        MSE=1.6813 (K=1)                                               MSE=0.6061 (K=1)                                              MSE=0.4963 (K=1)

     2.5                                        Target              2.5                                       Target              2.5                                       Target
                                                Context data                                                  Context data                                                  Context data
                                                Prediction                                                    Prediction                                                    Prediction
     2.0                                                            2.0                                                           2.0
                                                +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                            1.5                                                           1.5


     1.0                                                            1.0                                                           1.0
y


                                                               y


                                                                                                                             y
     0.5                                                            0.5                                                           0.5


     0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0


    −0.5                                                           −0.5                                                          −0.5

             −4    −2          0            2      4                         −4   −2          0           2      4                        −4    −2          0           2      4
                               x                                                              x                                                             x


                        MSE=0.0293 (K=5)                                               MSE=0.0117 (K=5)                                              MSE=0.0062 (K=5)

     2.5                                        Target              2.5                                       Target              2.5                                       Target
                                                Context data                                                  Context data                                                  Context data
                                                Prediction                                                    Prediction                                                    Prediction
     2.0                                                            2.0                                                           2.0
                                                +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                            1.5                                                           1.5


     1.0                                                            1.0                                                           1.0
y


                                                               y


                                                                                                                             y
     0.5                                                            0.5                                                           0.5


     0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0


    −0.5                                                           −0.5                                                          −0.5

             −4    −2          0            2      4                         −4   −2          0           2      4                        −4    −2          0           2      4
                               x                                                              x                                                             x


                    MSE=0.0025 (K=10)                                              MSE=0.0008 (K=10)                                             MSE=0.0012 (K=10)

     2.5                                        Target              2.5                                       Target              2.5                                       Target
                                                Context data                                                  Context data                                                  Context data
                                                Prediction                                                    Prediction                                                    Prediction
     2.0                                                            2.0                                                           2.0
                                                +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                            1.5                                                           1.5


     1.0                                                            1.0                                                           1.0
y


                                                               y


                                                                                                                             y
     0.5                                                            0.5                                                           0.5


     0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0


    −0.5                                                           −0.5                                                          −0.5

             −4    −2          0            2      4                         −4   −2          0           2      4                        −4    −2          0           2      4
                               x                                                              x                                                             x


           (a) U N L I M I TD-I (inf)                                     (b) U N L I M I TD-R (inf)                                    (c) U N L I M I TD-F (inf)
                        MSE=1.6691 (K=1)                                               MSE=0.7912 (K=1)                                              MSE=0.5476 (K=1)

     2.5                                                            2.5                                       Target              2.5                                       Target
                                                                                                              Context data                                                  Context data
                                                                                                              Prediction                                                    Prediction
     2.0                                                            2.0                                                           2.0
                                                                                                              +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                            1.5                                                           1.5


     1.0                                                            1.0                                                           1.0
y


                                                               y


                                                                                                                             y


     0.5                                                            0.5                                                           0.5

                             Target
     0.0                     Context data                           0.0                                                           0.0
                             Prediction
    −0.5                     +/- 1.96σ                             −0.5                                                          −0.5

             −4    −2          0            2      4                         −4   −2          0           2      4                        −4    −2          0           2      4
                               x                                                              x                                                             x


                        MSE=0.3406 (K=5)                                               MSE=0.0047 (K=5)                                              MSE=0.0066 (K=5)

     2.5                                        Target              2.5                                       Target              2.5                                       Target
                                                Context data                                                  Context data                                                  Context data
                                                Prediction                                                    Prediction                                                    Prediction
     2.0                                                            2.0                                                           2.0
                                                +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                            1.5                                                           1.5


     1.0                                                            1.0                                                           1.0
y


                                                               y


                                                                                                                             y


     0.5                                                            0.5                                                           0.5


     0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0


    −0.5                                                           −0.5                                                          −0.5

             −4    −2          0            2      4                         −4   −2          0           2      4                        −4    −2          0           2      4
                               x                                                              x                                                             x


                    MSE=0.0039 (K=10)                                              MSE=0.0016 (K=10)                                             MSE=0.0026 (K=10)

     2.5                                        Target              2.5                                       Target              2.5                                       Target
                                                Context data                                                  Context data                                                  Context data
                                                Prediction                                                    Prediction                                                    Prediction
     2.0                                                            2.0                                                           2.0
                                                +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ                                                     +/- 1.96σ

     1.5                                                            1.5                                                           1.5


     1.0                                                            1.0                                                           1.0
y


                                                               y


                                                                                                                             y


     0.5                                                            0.5                                                           0.5


     0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0


    −0.5                                                           −0.5                                                          −0.5

             −4    −2          0            2      4                         −4   −2          0           2      4                        −4    −2          0           2      4
                               x                                                              x                                                             x


           (d) U N L I M I TD-I (fin)                                     (e) U N L I M I TD-R (fin)                                    (f) U N L I M I TD-F (fin)

Figure 6: Example of predictions for a varying number of context inputs K, after different meta-
trainings on the sine cluster (U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M I TD-R and U N L I M I TD-F, in the infinite and
finite case). Standard deviation is from the posterior predictive distribution. Note how U N L I M I TD-
R and U N L I M I TD-F perform better than U N L I M I TD-I when it comes to reconstructing the sine
with a smaller amount of context inputs.


                                                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           3.0                                                                                         3.0                                                                                        3.0
                                                      UNLIMTD-F (single GP)                                                         UNLIMTD-F (mixture): gaussian 1                                                   UNLIMTD-F (mixture): gaussian 2
           2.5                                                                                         2.5                                                                                        2.5

           2.0                                                                                         2.0                                                                                        2.0

           1.5                                                                                         1.5                                                                                        1.5
mean


                                                                                            mean


                                                                                                                                                                                       mean
           1.0                                                                                         1.0                                                                                        1.0

           0.5                                                                                         0.5                                                                                        0.5

           0.0                                                                                         0.0                                                                                        0.0

          −0.5                                                                                        −0.5                                                                                       −0.5

          −1.0                                                                                        −1.0                                                                                       −1.0
                  −4         −2              0              2      4                                              −4      −2        0          2             4                                          −4   −2    0             2           4
                                             x                                                                                      x                                                                              x


(a) Mean function E(f ) of the                                                            (b) Mean function E(f ) of                                                                   (c) Mean function E(f ) of
GP (U N L I M I TD-F with a single                                                        the first GP of the mixture                                                                  the second GP of the mixture
GP).                                                                                      (U N L I M I TD-F with a mixture                                                             (U N L I M I TD-F with a mixture
                                                                                          of GPs).                                                                                     of GPs).

Figure 7: Mean functions of the GP (when learning with a GP) / the GPs composing the mixture
(when learning a mixture of GPs), after training on both the sine and line cluster with U N L I M I TD-
F. Note how the mean of the single GP is intermediate between the ones of the mixture.


                                                                                                                                    UNLIMTD-F (mixture): gaussian 1                                                UNLIMTD-F (mixture): gaussian 2
           2                                                                                           2                                                                                          2



           1                                                                                           1                                                                                          1
k(0, x)


                                                                                            k(1, x)


                                                                                                                                                                                       k(0, x)
           0                                                                                           0                                                                                          0



          −1                                                                                          −1                                                                                         −1



          −2                                                                                          −2                                                                                         −2
                 UNLIMTD-F (single GP)

                 −4         −2               0          2          4                                             −4       −2    0              2            4                                           −4   −2   0             2            4
                                             x                                                                                  x                                                                                 x


(a)       Covariance    function                                                          (b)     Covariance       function                                                            (c)     Covariance       function
cov(f (0), f (x)) of the GP                                                               cov(f (1), f (x)) of the first                                                               cov(f (0), f (x)) of the second
(U N L I M I TD-F with a single                                                           GP of the mixture (U N L I M I TD-                                                           GP of the mixture (U N L I M I TD-
GP).                                                                                      F with a mixture of GPs)                                                                     F with a mixture of GPs)

Figure 8: Covariance functions of the GP (when learning with a GP) / the GPs composing the
mixture (when learning a mixture of GPs), after training on both the sine and line cluster with
U N L I M I TD-F. Note how the covariance of the single GP is not accurate for any of the two clusters.


                                     Task #1                                                Task #2
                                                                                                                                                                              40

                                                                                                                                                                              35

                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                           Angle error (◦ )


                                                                                                                                                                              25
                       Angle: 130°               Angle: 26°                   Angle: 4°                      Angle: 78°
                                         …                                                            …
                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                   Context data                                           Context data

                                                                                                                                                                              15

                                                                                                                                                                              10   UNLIMTD-I
                                                                                                                                                                                   UNLIMTD-R
                                                 Angle: ?                                                    Angle: ?                                                              UNLIMTD-F
                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                   MAML
                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                  Query inputs                                             Query inputs                                                                            2              4      6   8    10           12         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                             K


Figure 9: Left: Examples of vision tasks. Right: angle error as a function of the number of context
datapoints K, after different meta-trainings on Shapenet1D (U N L I M I TD-I, U N L I M I TD-R and
U N L I M I TD-F vs MAML). Note how U N L I M I TD-I and U N L I M I TD-F make better predictions
than MAML. Also note that contrary to the small network case, U N L I M I TD-R performs worse
than MAML and than the two other variants.


                                                                                                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (a) Angle: 4°          (c) Angle: 78°          (e) Angle: 202°        (g) Angle: 261°


     (b) Angle: 26°         (d) Angle: 130°         (f) Angle: 243°        (h) Angle: 285°

Figure 10: Examples of images and ground-truth angles from the Shapenet1D dataset (Gao et al.,
2022)


                                              21
